## Dl6v-3COgCo

SPEAKER_02:
All right, hello and welcome to ACT-INF live stream number 42.0.

It's April 16th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome.

And we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

And Sid, thanks a ton for joining.

Really looking forward to this conversation.

If you want to learn more about Active Lab activities, check out activeinference.org.

Okay, we're here in Active Lab stream number 42.0, and we are starting to learn and discuss this paper, Robot Navigation as Hierarchical Active Inference.

in the journal neural networks october 2021 it's by ozon katal tim verbellen tun van de male bart dote and adam saffron and some of whom we're looking forward to speaking with in the upcoming weeks and this video is an introduction for some of the ideas and just some background and context and uh rapidly assembled fun and memes

that we'll go through.

So it's just an introduction of a discussion and we hope that if you're watching live or later that you can still contribute to this.

And we're gonna go over the main aims and claims of the paper

then the abstract and roadmap, and then walk through some cool keywords and context, which will be great to hear Sud's perspective from working with robotics, which is an area that certainly I've never actually been involved in.

So going through some of the more applied work that we're going to see with robotics, and also some of the more formal aspects from active inference, and then this third vector that maybe we both share, which is some of the biological basis of navigation.

So...

We're going to just go into the introductions first.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I'll pass to Sid.

So Sid, I'll walk through your slides, but yes, let's hear it.


SPEAKER_00:
SIDDHARTHA SRINIVASAHADARAMANI, Yeah, let's go to slide nine.

And before I even address myself, I would say that we need to address the elephant in the room, that this is livestream number 42, which is one of my favorite numbers and the favorite number for a lot of people.

because it's the answer to life, universe, and everything.

So this is the first time that I am coming to an Active Inference live stream.

And I'm actively inferring the whole idea of Active Inference itself.

I'm very new to the field.

So yeah, I'm very excited to learn a lot of things.

And yeah, just as we are on this slide right now, 42 has a lot of other references that you can check out on that Wikipedia link.

Okay, moving to the next slide.

I usually document the many things that I've been up to at this particular link.

And in the next slide, I highlight the few places where I have had the fortune to be at.

So I formally have studied computer science and design, and I've meandered by accident and by intention

in a lot of different places that you can see here.

So I studied computer science at a university in India which practices a lot of hands-on experience, and that's where I got my start in robotics and a lot of other things.

Then studied further through various participatory workshops and internships at space organizations, media labs, and then spent two years at financial services to understand how money works.

and was introduced to robotics mostly through open source software in the bottom most thing that you see here.

That's the Google Summer of Code program.

And I would go into more detail about how that robotic journey even started.

These days, I'm very much interested in how coordination happens and

how we can think about security of countries and communities in general, and more importantly, all the emerging aspects of society, that's technology, economics, culture, and policy.

So I know that active inference is a study of autonomous behavior, and we are moving into this era where decentralized and autonomous organizations are...

gaining a lot of popularity as well as mainstream acceptance increasingly.

So it's very interesting to see where this new field of study that's active inference, that is a field that is invented in our lifetime.

It's very rare to see that you get to explore a field that is so recent and has a long history through connections to other fields.

So it's definitely an evolving area which can help explore other evolving areas.

And that's what I find very fascinating about applying active inference in the way that it's applied in this paper as well.

So I'll try to explain the history of robotics in a way through the lens of my experience with it.

So one of the first things that I did when I started studying.

So as you can see, I started studying in 2012.

and immediately jumped into all the robotics labs that I could get my hands on in university.

One of the first tasks that was very appealing to me was multi-robot teams.

How do teams operate?

Teams have been a constant fascination for me throughout life, like human teams, teams of biological organizations and organisms such as ants and bees.

And then teams of robots.

And we derive a lot of inspiration as well as a lot of biomimicry kinds of techniques in multi-robot exploration as well.

So the specific topic that we were studying is in the next slide, which is multi-robot terrain exploration.

So if we go to slide 13, these were the different techniques we were studying, just like ants leave pheromone trails and different signals for other members of their colony.

We tried to model these kinds of similar techniques, like recency.

How recent was it that a robot that was covering a particular terrain that hasn't been explored before, how recently was that covered?

You can imagine this as a grid, a two-dimensional grid.

You see the green squares, those are the multi-robot teams.

The green square represents a robot.

and they are trying to explore and map out this entire area as a team.

And the assumption is that they can communicate amongst themselves, and in certain cases, they cannot.

So the red squares represent obstacles, and you will see a similar obstacle map in this paper in which they use a warehouse, but we were using similarly configured different obstacle maps, both in a simulated environment as well as a physical environment.

So we explored different approaches back then, which is things like just representing them as an automata, like giving them very simple deterministic rules, which they can follow.

And those could be imagined as simply as Conway's Game of Life, like the glider pattern or similar patterns that you might know.

And then we moved on to more animal-inspired or bio-inspired techniques, which is a technique like recency, in which the robot leaves pheromone trails in each square, and each square has like a countdown timer.

How recently was it visited by any other robot?

So this can be understood as ants leaving trails which decay over time.

And this gives other ants an idea of how to map that surrounding region effectively.

And then there were very simple approaches which were more suited for the digital world, such as simply node counting, that how many robots have visited this node before.

So every time you visit any square, you just increase its count, visit count by one.

So that helps the robots in understanding, okay, this area has been visited five times and the surrounding squares have only been visited two times.

So I should maybe explore the unexplored regions first.

So these were different techniques that were used.

And we moved on, published a few papers and were also inspired by military organization techniques.

the typical OODA loop or the Observe, Orient, Decide, and Act, which is kind of applied active inference in a way.

So we did explore that, like clustering approaches and different ways of conquering the whole map.

So this was an exploration and exploitation problem that I had the opportunity to study in second and third year.

So of my undergraduate computer science.

And then I went on to like fancier things, thanks to the Google Summer of Code program.

So this was a project with the Italian Mars Society, which reports to the European Space Agency.

And here it was more about autonomous navigation, working with a human.

So this was a robot and a human team working together.

And the next slide shows how it actually happened.

So if we go to the next slide and play the video, we will see that it is meant for an astronaut who is safe in a Martian habitat.

And the robot is a rover, which is exploring the Martian terrain outside in a more dangerous environment.

So every movement of the rover comes from the astronaut's movements, which are mapped from an omnidirectional treadmill that the astronaut is walking on.

And similarly, there is feedback received from the rover's camera, which feeds into the astronaut's virtual reality headset.

So do note that this was back in 2015 when headsets were clunky, when things moved very slowly, but Kinect was all the rage, like mapping body movements, mapping robot movements in unexplored territory using 3D cameras, which is a technique that this paper also uses using RGB and depth cameras.

So those were the techniques which still are very popularly used even today.

So this was my introduction to understanding how different robot and human teams can work and how telerobotics and telepresence can work.

So my responsibility in this project was to do the entire networking architecture and ensure that there's no latency or there's no feedback in which a robot can enter a dangerous state just because the astronaut did not receive the information on time.

So this is how we began and the operating system that we used in that particular experiment is on slide 16.

So whenever the video is done, we can move to the next slide.

So in slide 16, you see a husky robot.

So these are open source robots that are very popularly used with the robot operating system.

And we'll keep coming back to this particular framework of ROS.

So ROS became extremely popular.

It gained its reputation from the earliest DARPA challenges in which a very popular car just crossed through an entire desert terrain navigating autonomously.

So ROS was an open source robotics library which was built out of that.

And you see many different sensors and actuators on this particular rover.

So you see a lot of symbols which will be repeated in this particular paper as well.

So the task of a localization technique is to gather all these sensor inputs, fuse all those inputs.

So the sensors can be understood as IMU or like measurement units, inertial measurement units, such as like accelerometers and speed and all those measurement metrics.

Then you have camera, which is similarly RGB.

That's red, green, blue colors of the visible spectrum.

And then you have 3D sensing in the sense of the Kinect sensor that you see on that particular robot.

And you would see a similar setup in this paper as well.

They use a TurtleBot2Y robot, which we will get into, which is also using ROS, and it uses the same concept as we used in that particular paper.

So all these different attributes such as GPS, 3D sensing, odometry, camera, and IMU are inputs to the robot localization technique.

And all of this together is meant to estimate the three-dimensional surroundings of a particular robot.

And all these techniques do not use active inference.

They used probabilistic methods, which we will slightly refer in the paper.

So it's very promising to see that if we are inspired so much from biological ways of navigation, we should rather use a technique which organisms have evolved to be so effective at over so many years.

And as humans, wayfinding was considered a survival skill for a long, long time before we entered the era of Google Maps and we just totally lost the...

technique of finding our way around rural, urban, and natural settings.

So wayfinding and navigation and localization and mapping was a technique which is very familiar to anyone in their 70s or 80s.

If you ask them, how would you find your way around a city block or the jungle?

They will have their own ways of navigating that.

So they will either use natural cues like wind direction, the way the sun is setting, the map that they have already covered, asking people around.

So these kinds of techniques are built in our human brain and it's very natural for animals to use that as well in urban as well as their own natural environments.

So this paper goes into these many big questions, which is in the next slide, slide number 17.

So over to Daniel, where he illustrates all these wonderful connections.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks for the...

innovation on the live stream format a lot of fascinating background and it sets us up really well to discuss some of the big questions of this paper and some of the big questions in general so

One big question, just the kind of thing that would bring somebody to want to even read this 2021 paper or future work is how do biological, like evolved and human created, mathematical, statistical and robotic, so several different kinds of human created entities, how do biological and human created entities engage in actionable, tractable, adaptive navigation in complex, conditional and changing landscapes?

And that's a question that one could ask about everything from the organismal level to the colony level.

arguably also an organism, but in a little different way, and all manner of biological systems.

And then here is a really nice slide from this Bill Ant Robotics project where they did a direct side-to-side of the harvester ant's anatomy and also their robot's anatomy.

And that's kind of like a bridge that takes us into a different space first with the walking around the warehouse and does it stay standing when it gets pushed?

And can it localize when somebody turns off the light in the room?

and these sort of basic, though still relatively advanced, but also relatively basic tasks and settings.

And then off on the right side here are some of the visions and representations that people use for when those low level activities are such that

If a robot can resist being pushed over, then how does that have complex feedbacks with society?

So it was just something that you also impressed upon, like the very holistic nature of this area and also just how to keep a lot on the table talking about it.

So that's what will be fun to talk about.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I think before we enter into the paper itself, I would want to understand from you what has been your learning from observing ant behavior and studying their actions in such an environment, like in natural as well as artificial environments.


SPEAKER_02:
I can hopefully accurately relay an anecdote from my PhD advisor, Professor Deborah Gordon, and she would often talk about how there would be at a conference or some type of competition, and this is something I've observed, but to a lesser, smaller extent,

is there'll be a presentation of an algorithm or a robotics implementation of so-called swarm algorithm or ant colony algorithm ant colony optimization we see it on the pure optimization computer only but also a lot of bio-inspired robotics design and

One common feature of these algorithms is that there's some underlying map that's shared.

Like when you mentioned the grid counting, of course, there has to be a mesh network so that the robots kind of have basically either telepathy or some kind of common signal, even if it's asynchronous or something like that.

But there has to be some sort of updating of the grid in their mind.

being in the field and also drawing upon what we know about what we know about ants, the nestmate, when it's deciding to forage or not, it doesn't know how many seeds the colony has, how many seeds are out there, what the right decision would be.

So it must use stochastic interactions that it receives locally and cognitive constraints to make its decision.

And then once it's out there, there's no telepathy amongst the ants.

There's no queen control.

There's no forager groups that all like tell each other orders and all of that.

So that navigation is also multi-sensory and related to their cognitive constraints, but also their finesse in a certain niche and a harvester ant is not gonna forage well in the Arctic.

And so understanding how it's that interplay between the nestmate and the colony and the variability of the environment

It's a really rich area and it's easy to bring in other modalities that humans can use like long range communication and understanding how those novel affordances for decentralized systems design do or don't relate to some of the ways that biological systems work.

That's a really fascinating area.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And the reason I think that this paper is relevant, first of all, because it's based on active inference, which is like the study of how the human brain would react in certain scenarios.

But more broadly, how a biological organism or an organized colony would react in those kinds of situations.

And just like you said, the map may not be shared in certain cases.

The map, the team might be decentralized.

Communication might be unavailable.

These are extremely realistic situations, even for groups of robots today.

So you can imagine these as robots who are exploring the fallout of a nuclear situation, like when a nuclear plant needs to undergo maintenance and humans cannot enter that area.

So you cannot assume 100% communication when the robot is mapping out that area.

So this is one of the important reasons why some amount of cognition and some amount of active inference of the terrain is extremely important.

And our infrastructure in robotics as well as communication is only now getting there.

Like with the new standards introduced in 5G and 6G networks,

we will start getting into like scenarios where robots become parts of our daily lives and they already have.

So I'm based in Singapore and it's very common to see cleaner robots and teams of like helper robots moving around like in university campuses as well as airports and shopping centers.

So these robots have covered the entire terrain already so they use like very

basic approaches of obstacle avoidance and trying to clean the entire area and complete their objectives.

And there is very little stochastic action going on there because most of those tasks can be completed in a hard-coded map that is shared among those robot teams in a very specific highly connected environment.

But when we start moving into more urban environments where this cannot be guaranteed, we definitely need approaches like the one described in this paper.

So yeah, with all that context, we can jump into the aims and claims of this paper.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So just to read some of the aims and claims, which we're going to revisit a bunch.

The paper is Robot Navigation as Hierarchical Active Inference.

And some of their main claims were that they are going to first propose a hierarchical generative model casting navigation as minimizing expected variational free energy.

So that is what brings all of these areas of navigation robotics

under the umbrella or drawing an edge to active inference framework.

We show how perception, localization, mapping, and navigation naturally emerge from optimizing this hierarchical generative model under active inference.

So that's sort of the theory and background and some of the formalisms that we'll go through.

Then they implement the system in Silico on a real world robot platform, navigating a warehouse environment using camera sensor input only.

And then they also have this third angle, not just the theoretical and the robotic implementation of that, but the biological.

And they relate their work to various findings and hypotheses in biology about navigation in the rodent and primate brain.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Do you want to read that?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, go ahead.

Wonderful claims.

Before we jump into the claims, I was very fascinated by the list of authors of the paper.

So I'll just zoom into that a bit if that's visible on the slide.

So you see that three of those authors are located in Belgium.

And the last author really fascinated me because they come from a center of psychedelic and consciousness research, which happens to be one of my favorite facilities in the entire world focusing on these kinds of topics.

So I would also like to ask you that, how do these kinds of multidisciplinary research show through in this particular paper?

So obviously, we have teams of engineers and researchers from Belgium, but we also have an author from a very different field.

And how do you think that contributed in this paper?


SPEAKER_02:
That'll be something great to ask them when they visit.

But I think at the general level, we see several factors, including like, of course, a shared interest common framework in active inference.

Also, I'm sure some... We'll have to find out in this specific case.

But it's a great question, and it's an important question.

Okay, so...

I'll read the abstract first half, or the first three.

Localization and mapping has been a long-standing area of research, both in neuroscience to understand how mammals navigate their environment, as well as in robotics to enable autonomous mobile robots.

In this paper, we treat navigation as inferring actions that minimize expected variational free energy under a hierarchical generative model.

We find that familiar concepts like perception, path integration, localization, mapping naturally emerge from this active inference formulation.

Moreover, we show that this model is consistent with models of hippocampal functions and can be implemented in Silico on a real-world robot.

Our experiments illustrate that a robot equipped with our hierarchical model is able to generate topologically consistent maps and correct navigation behavior is inferred when a goal location is provided to the system.


SPEAKER_00:
That's a lot to get into.

The paper makes a very simple claim.

If we broadly look at the paper, it makes a very simple claim that active inference works and it's able to consistently reproduce maps which are representative of the physical world map.

This literally goes into the map is not the terrain kind of discussion that we have been having in Active Inference live streams.

In this case, they are able to consistently reproduce a particular kind of map that is a warehouse kind of a setting, and they compare it with many different approaches.

there's many different tasks that you can see here so the highlighted tasks tell you that there's perception which is understanding the entire environment then combining all the paths that can be taken from point a to point b and then localization which is understanding your own position as a robot in that particular environment

and then mapping as you are doing all of these things simultaneously localizing your position and state as well as mapping the entire region while you're doing that and all of these are naturally emerging from like formulating it as like active inference which is minimizing expected variational free energy

So yeah, just before we go into more detail, do you want to explain to robotics researchers who might visit this livestream about why they should care about variational free energy and probably these new words that might be very important for them?


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

Thanks for that.

very clear summary.

And definitely we hope that this kind of a presentation, at least in the .zero and also in the group discussions, it's like a two-way street.

So people are gonna have different amounts of familiarity with some of the robotics, as well as with the active inference.

So to anyone who's anywhere in that space,

I think there's a lot to be said for just taking a first principles approach.

That's sort of a simplicity and elegance route.

There's value to be found in transdisciplinary approaches like localization and mapping and cognitive affects and emotion.

Some of the psychological frameworks that we've been discussing in other live streams or other papers.

There's value in not just simplicity, but in finding connections like complexity and patterns across systems.

And I think also for something that is clearly so nascent in its development to be able to, as Sid is describing, have some functional closure of maps and cast this problem of like,

where is one and how should one act and what is the bigger space map look like and all of those things which as discussed in the real world have all these other challenges like the communication of those maps and everything however just at the individual wayfinding route drawing on first principles from biology and being a part of a conversation that's clearly already functional but also has a lot of potential is probably a good thing to at least listen to

Okay, so how do they do that?

Here's the roadmap.

In the beginning, they introduce the problem and some of the background, just like we've done in these last minutes.

They then discuss some biological perspectives on navigation.

They then formulate in sections three and four, the hierarchical active inference model for navigation.

It's gonna be a two-layer model, and we're gonna go into it a lot, and there'll be colors that are consistently associated with the levels.

They then discuss the experiments, which is the implementation, the M-robot embodiment of the robot, and then they have some discussion.


SPEAKER_00:
Before we enter into each of these specific topics, I would share what I had shared with Daniel a week ago when we started approaching this paper.

This paper is exceptionally well-written, even if you're not from any of these fields.

So just looking at the language that's used, it's very easy to follow for the most part.

And they make references to topics which people will be familiar with.

So they explain active inference, free energy, and all these different concepts of SLAM.

and very technical terms in an extremely simple language, which is why I think it's a great paper to start with if you are new to either of these fields, robotics or active inference.


SPEAKER_02:
Very true, because I know I was looking up a lot of robot citations, watching videos and learning a lot because it's just totally not my area.

And I can imagine somebody

with a different background would have a different experience.

So it's, I agree, an awesome written paper and it exists for anyone who wants to go into more detail and check out the citation networks if you're in the future.

They listed several keywords, active inference, robot navigation, deep learning, SLAM, simultaneous localization and mapping, and then RATSLAM, which is a biologically inspired version of SLAM.

So let's just go to your active inference meme.

If you'd like to give a real-time meme reading, please feel free to.


SPEAKER_00:
The meme explains itself.

This is essentially teaching robots as if you're teaching a child.

I think that is essentially what all kinds of learning techniques come down to.

And there was another meme of a toddler reading neural networks for babies, which is not in this presentation.

But that meme essentially meant that a neural network is learning how neural networks work.

And so this meme is inspired by that, that in order to...

solve a particular purpose you need to infer actively which means you need to firstly be active and that's the first condition and the second condition is that you need to be constantly inferring like your own assumptions about the environment about the observations that have transpired in the last few time steps and then

continue to do both these steps in a loop.

And in that combination of those two loops, you are able to solve that purpose.

So the meme is inspired from Rick and Morty in which the only sole purpose of that robot is to pass butter.

And in this case, that sole purpose of just implementing active inference in a robot is all that's needed to solve that particular task.

And that is intended for the claim of the paper.

So that is why Active Inference as a whole, I think, is all-encompassing when it comes to doing all the steps that we covered in the last seconds.


SPEAKER_02:
i'll only comment on what you said because it's so true that as a holistic and composable model it'd be possible to bring in different sensor modalities different communication connectivities different actuator possibilities and active inference could grow in terms of how it's being used so this is like a relative to some other possible algorithms which would have to be composed in a bit of an ad hoc or

in principled way this is a way to explore just that that you infer actively could be for the robot in condition a or the robot in condition b depending on the generative model and the markov blanket and the external states in the world itself in the context so um let's just go straight into the meme analysis of this second video meme you have prepared


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, meme analysis is something new that might be unique for this livestream, at least in this animated format.

And as you can see in this particular meme, and in the previous meme, that a robot has to forget all their existing slam techniques that robots have popularly used.

So we go into many different techniques that are cited in the paper.

So one of those techniques is obviously rat slam, which we will go into

next but probabilistic robotics is like this popular book this classical book which was used by robots of the last decade or two and it describes many different approaches of how SLAM can be implemented and all techniques that we see in conventional robots today

whether it's like a robot that's cleaning your house or a robot that's serving you food in one of those experimental restaurants, all of them use probabilistic robotics techniques.

And this meme in particular goes into firstly the mission of this entire participatory lab, which is act, infer, and serve.

And once you do that, once you do all these three things as a robot, you're able to successfully navigate your way around these very confusing terrains, which might be complex and dynamic.

And on the top, you have a diagram which describes how deep learning methods typically work and how this paper implements one of those techniques with an active inference flavor on top of it.

how active inference and deep learning like how this like combination of these two fields has come through in this paper


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

First, I'll interpret the meme and then describe the deep learning, but then we'll get into more details as we actually walk through the paper.

So I see the Act In First serve of Act In Flab, which is open to anybody who wants to participate.

And then it's a little bit like the experiment where people are passing basketballs to each other, and then something unexpected crosses the screen, and many people will not report seeing that other thing crossing the screen.

But there's a lot of analogies to other

cognitive context.

So it's like, we're focused in the lab, but then also we have to be aware of the unknowns and the unexpected and the anomalies within the anomaly space.

And then that's how we get to four, which is like the tetrahedra, which is bigger than just us, anyone.

So how to be doing that nestmate thing

that we can juggle and three numbers in our head at once or seven numbers in our head at once or can only grab two things at once or even fewer.

So how do we actually use these limitations that we have and be part of still a bigger navigation?

So it's nice meme.

Basically, this paper is going to present a method that uses some model structures from active inference, but also uses some more

mainstream deep learning and machine learning techniques.

And those methods we'll talk about more like the specifics of how they're combined, but it contains both things that are like machine learning, neural network type approaches, as well as that being structured in an active inference way.

And that active inference structure, when it's just with simple matrices, can be looked at like in the model stream one or in active inference, a step-by-step guide.

That's the very simple matrix multiplication, very austere kernel of the active inference structuring.

And then here, because some of the data includes like video data and it's being implemented on modern hardware, it does have like a deep learning, machine learning aspects and modules to it.

Okay, so here's SLAM.

Finally, finally, the keywords.

So researching it, I found this paper, Are We Ready for Service Robots?

and presenting a dataset for SLAM.

And on the bottom right, it's showing some different scenes as well as how they change.

And the paper concludes that with respect to this challenge of simultaneous localization and mapping,

that various factors can often confuse a robot and so one can imagine this is just like an algorithm that has a blind spot or some sort of area of poor performance for any number of reasons and that's exactly how these authors begin the paper with being able to robustly explore and navigate an environment has been a long-standing challenge in robotics so the paper just begins with

What we've been talking about, which is that this is like a perennial and a cross-system problem, but also in hashtag 2022, it's far from solved in real-world settings.

What else would you add?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, I especially like the title of the paper, which describes why we are doing all of this.

The title is Are We Ready for Service Robots?,

And in the previous meme, we saw the third pillar of the trifecta after act and infer is serve.

So all the robots that we are building and most of the applications that we focus on are meant to serve.

They have service as an objective function.

And that is what makes this task challenging, because if you are replacing human actions by a robot, you have to forget all the assumptions we make when dealing with human teams, because human teams are dynamic and they

learn on the fly and obviously they might not be as effective as a robot who might be better evolved to or better suited through its architecture to consider depth and different kinds of attributes in a changing environment but that group organization poses a lot of challenges to traditional SLAM techniques such as changing even one thing in that environment

can greatly modify what map the robot had made.

And you can imagine this as there's a map, and you had localized your position with reference to particular objects in the map, and then you move those objects.

So the robot's world just shifted all around it, literally.

And that simple change might be very obvious for humans to detect, but for a robot which is using those reference points to localize itself in the world and construct the map out of it, that is a big challenge in traditional SLAM approaches.

So yeah, many people who have tried to train a robot before it cleans their house by like driving the robot around in different rooms is very familiar with this particular problem that when you move a chair in between the robot just completely forgets its entire sense of its surroundings.

So, so yeah, that's why I really like this reference.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, and that's going to come into play with the internally maintained hierarchical generative model that the robot has on board, and that may offer it some resilience against these kinds of changes.

So that's why we're going this route at all.

And one adjacent work that's discussed in the paper is rat slam.

So I will play the video, Sid, if you want to maybe describe or contextualize rat slam.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so RATSLAM was this bio-inspired technique which really solved SLAM in a very simple manner, which is that it could perform as effectively as other SLAM techniques which relied on expensive equipment and replaced it with a simple camera which has imperfect information.

So the video goes into it in a lot more detail, and we'll cover it in the next slide as well.

But essentially, it's a hippocampal model, which means that it models like a rat's brain and is able to map the world and localize the robot that way.

So I think the video is very self-explanatory, and the next video will explain it even more about how the map is constructed.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, let's look at that one.

Okay, go for it.

So what is happening in this second video?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so the second video is one instance of RADSLAM, which is Open RADSLAM.

So this was a code base that was released both for C++ as well as the ROS operating, the robot operating system.

And here you see this one particular robot called the IRAT robot mapping out an Australian environment, which is an urban environment that you see on the top right.

And you see the robot making specific circles around certain loops and making both exploration decisions along the boundaries as well.

So this is very similar to how a rat or a biological organism would explore a particular territory.

So all of this is being done with a single camera, and that is the main achievement of this particular piece of work.

So through this paper, you see that the inputs on the top right are mapped into the images that you see on the bottom right.

And those simple images are what's being used to map out the terrains.

So to the human eye, that particular input is extremely blurry and not high fidelity enough to map out a terrain effectively.

But as this paper explores, it can very effectively do that, even when we degrade the image quality by a lot.

So that is why RATSLAM became very popular as a cited reference in this paper, because it's one of those bio-inspired techniques which comes very close to active inference techniques that this paper goes into.

So yeah, that's what this video covers, and it explores different kinds of terrains, as you can see.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So the paper...

In the introduction, introduces the relevance of this necessity of the deep navigational functions that humans and other organisms have, but also that robots we would want to design having.

That's the main theme here.

If we learn from biology and bring action into robotic slam, we may be able to have a way to approach these questions.

and then they say okay well how are we going to bring action into slam because this is sort of the inactivist insight that having the perfect map in one's head is like the knowing but then the knowing how to act is not always trivial even with the most high resolution map like one could know exactly every molecule of the car and still not know how it would fail in an environmental situation

And that's what an activist and an activism gets at, which is like, what if somebody doesn't have the digital twin model of where things are in their body, but actually the representation, if there even is one, is more about how the body should move or how one should act.

So that's called the pragmatic turn or the inactivist term.

And in the terms of cognitive science, that's the 4E cognition.

So even though that is about the richness of usually human cognition embedded in culture, extended, et cetera, et cetera, it's interesting to, again, see that come into play with this discussion of robotics.

Like what if there are cultural practices around movement in a space?

How could that or be integrated into a robotics model?

So there's a lot that goes with this discussion

taking serious of action selection as a real primary imperative, not just the hypothetical mapping.

So they say, well, let's use active inference as a process theory of the brain that casts action as perception as two sides of the same coin.

Not sure if it was action and perception, but still maybe it stands both ways.

And a process theory is just like a way that it gets done.

So how do organisms get it done or...

taking one step removed in the instrumental direction how will we model organisms getting it done and then people can debate about what organisms actually do but this is like us actionably mapping that territory

In section two, they introduce some neural correlates of navigation, which we're going to discuss in the next slide.

And in section three, they bring the question of navigation in terms of active inference.

And so that's when they go from this hierarchical Bayesian generative model of localization, and on one hand, connect it to the active inference framework, and on the other, to this prior work on machine learning in robotics.

And that was also related to their previous paper.

So the authors, of course, have previous work and there's related work too.


SPEAKER_00:
In the introduction, they raised two very important points before they start to go into the actual techniques they have implemented.

They say that humans easily explore and map their surroundings without much extra thought or considerations.

Intuitively, we build a logically consistent map.

without needing accurate distance measurements.

And we find it natural to think about navigation in terms of sequences of moves towards locations.

And when we are considering moving to that new location, humans typically do not consider lower level tasks such as opening doors or lifting feet.

In this paper, they go into lower level tasks as well, because those kinds of assumptions cannot be made for robots.

And they also mention an interesting point, which is that the working of the human mapping and localization hasn't been thoroughly understood.

But the best models we have so far are present for rodent navigation, which is where RATSLAM and other techniques come from.

So this predicates the work that goes on into this paper and how they model this as a multi-agent active inference task.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

So the H slash E system is the hippocampal slash entorhinal system.

And homologous brain regions are here shown for the mouse, the rodent, the macaque, which is a type of primate, and the human.

and these brains are sort of aligned

and shown so that one can see how these regions are evolutionarily related to one another and then on the bottom are some examples of histology or tissue stainings showing like kind of a cross section and a little bit more detail at the cellular level because as one might imagine this has been studied and there's many many copious numbers of like review papers and so it's like a whole thing how people have studied this like many others but

Here is a citation that they provided in the paper, I believe.

which was a Buzaki paper about memory navigation and the theta rhythm in the hippocampal entorhinal system.

So suffice to say that the function of this coupling of brain regions has been modeled in some very fascinating and rich ways and trying to understand how the same brain regions in different functional ways can

be integrating different aspects of selfness and memory navigation wayfinding some of the complexities of how these different functions are related to each other anything to add on that and then we'll look at how that has been addressed in the active inference framework


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, the only thing I would add is one particular image that I'll paste in this particular slide, which is look at the similarity between the tasks done by the hippocampus and the intrarenal system and the similar set of sensors on this particular robot.

So we use extremely similar architectures to center ourselves in the world, which is we use sensors in the form of sensory organs and obviously ears and eyes and all these are sensors.

But all of that is computed in that particular region of the brain, which is considered the robot localization module in this particular robot.

So yeah, that's what that analogy I find interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

And that's with the action states and the sense states, like just like the sensors and the actuators, we could have two of the same kind or 50 of the same kind or 50 different kinds.

And that's like the kind of multi-sensor fusion that's also interesting to think about.

And they write in the paper,

will ground the following discussion of the hippocampal entorhinal system in terms of its role in generalized search and navigation and the citation here is to this kaplan and friston paper we're not going to go over this model right now but people could pause look at the graphical model go to the citation and we'll hear about it more from the authors how did they build on prior work

All I'll add here, unless if you want to ask somebody who's totally chill, would be they use a Bayesian graphical framework.

And we're going to see a lot of Bayesian graphical frameworks.

The nodes, the circles represent statistical variables of different kinds.

And then the edges reflect the sparsity of influence of connections amongst those variables.

So like two variables that influence each other have arrows pointing between each other.

And this is a Bayesian graph way that is sometimes used to represent

models graphically.

And that's kind of playing on graphical in two senses, like it's visual, it's graphical, like a picture, but also it's a graph, like a network.

So it's something that is a representation of models at the intersection of those two senses of graphical.

And we use them a lot in active inference.

And in this paper, they made active inference models for navigation and search, and they overlaid it on some of the plausible neuroanatomy of

the brain and some of the functions that those regions of the brain have been modeled or seen as performing great okay

the paper also on the biological section explores the grid cells and we saw the grid cells also in rat slam the grid cells are in the entorhinal cortex so it's in the he system

they represent a largely triangular or hexagonal tiling of space organized according to egocentric reference frames now it's hexagonal in the flat plane but what shape is it in higher dimensions and they write that the regularity of these repeating grids provides a basis for path integration via estimating distances and location in terms of the direction and frequency with which this metric grid metric tiling is traversed

And this was pretty interesting to hear how they framed it.

In physical domains, it has been observed that the spacing of grating representations varies as a function of the space being tiled, e.g.

smaller and more fine-grained if an agent is situated within an enclosure or larger and more coarse-grained if it is situated in an open space.

The granularity of tilings appears to be influenced by brainstem locomotor nuclei, potentially reflecting an inductive bias for greater speed being more likely in larger spaces, as well as by exteroceptive stimulus such as optic flow.

So it makes me think about driving at 70 miles per hour, and it's like one still has this extended sense.

of mobility and well I could make a left turn out over that space and time scale and that's as natural feeling to somebody who's familiar with driving in a certain context as like I'm running at this speed and I could make a certain turn at a certain speed and then the optic flow reminds me of a great experiment with honeybees where they had them forage but they had to go in and out through this long section where there was an alternating stripe pattern

And so when the stripes were thick, like let's just say a meter of dark and then a meter of light, then they would forage a certain distance and they would be able to do the waggle dance and communicate it to their nest mates.

But then when that was replaced with a very fast alternating stripes, it increased what's known as optic flow, which is just the simple rate of change, like the frame differencing across the retina and the bees were foraging a shorter distance.

because it was like their estimates of optic flow were higher and i think that speaks to also a point that stephen has raised in the chat which is the information geometry versus information geography and that could be connected to a lot of different other areas so that's just something to think about with how is the actual space represented how is the perceptual space represented and the grid cells are something that people have modeled as

being at the intersection there from a cognitive perspective and from a tissue perspective.

Anything to add?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So yeah, Stephen has raised a great point about the geography.

And I think in humans and organisms like ants and bees, it's more about survival.

And that is why they attach a different kind of grid sizing for different kinds of terrains.

And yeah, your description of driving

in an open wide road is extremely accurate, and so is the bees one.

And I think it comes down to minimizing error or being more specific in constrained environments.

So if their actions are as wide and as

broad ranging as an open environment that might be harmful for their objective function, which is not only reaching from point A to point B in that

small environment, but also survival, like just banging into an obstacle if they are not being very specific about their grid size.

So I think, yeah, it comes down to optic flow as well as I think these survival functions, which are like hidden states in the models of all these agents.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

The

move from the biological towards the formal by writing speculatively if hippocampal pattern completion is inherently predictive or generative in a bayesian framework

then this could help to scaffold the development of more sophisticated predictive abilities for the rest of the brain.

So I think this is a very deep area that'll be fun to explore in the conversations, but it's almost like you can bootstrap more complexity off of something that is already providing a more complex and oscillating signal.

So I think the richness of self and the place-basedness and learnability there is quite interesting to explore.

And they also note that there's ample evidence that spatial awareness is at the core of the mammal brain with explicit representation for pose, heading, and location.

So what I wanted to explore here in the discussions was...

Location is the core of the mammal brain or cognitive functions in general or in insects too or something.

No, it's olfaction.

No, it's emotion.

No, it's this.

So where do some of these core functions fit?

And then they close the section by just writing

taking it from the introduction with the robotics to the biological in section two.

And then they say, in the remainder of this paper, we will further build on these insights using a process theory of the brain deeply rooted in predictive processing, active inference.

So you'll note that other than our additional context, like we haven't gotten into active in the paper, but that's when they cross the Rubicon.

And from here on out, we're going to be talking about the active inference formalization.

Anything else to add, Sid?


SPEAKER_00:
I really liked how you framed that particular importance that different kinds of organisms and robots have to be assigned when we are dealing with their objective functions, which is, is location the most important state for them, or are other senses more important?

And if you're thinking about self-driving cars, and evidently Tesla is very particular on not using LiDAR and laser depth sensing technologies, it's trying to just use RGB depth

cameras and trying to navigate the world.

And I think the same is true for Comma, which is another open source self-driving toolkit.

So these kinds of toolkits that exist for navigation in the physical world, they just rely on location and vision as their only source of input and not other senses.

So yeah, it's interesting how you can modify the importance of these different attributes to achieve different tasks.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So into section three.

Navigation as hierarchical active inference.

Okay, so this is where active inference gets applied in the theory level, and then it gets applied in another way when it becomes simulated, and then in another way when it becomes enacted, etc.

So, we cast the SLAM problem in terms of a hierarchical Bayesian generative model.

The agent reasons on two different nested levels.

So there's going to be the use of a higher and lower to describe these two different ones, but one could use different spatial metaphors like inner or outer or however else.

On a higher level, but this is going to be consistent with the coloring and which one is placed above or below.

On a higher level for long-term navigation and on a lower level for short-term perception.

On the higher level, the agent is capable of reasoning in terms of sequences of location it wants to visit without having to worry about the intricacies of how to control its actuators to get there.

on the lower level the agent can reason and plan in terms of observation sequences without needing to think too far ahead short-term action selection plans based upon ongoing input we will distinguish between the higher level and the lower level actuation by calling them moves m and actions a for the two higher and lower levels and the sensor readings like the visual input but other sensors could be added too at the lower level are called observations and that's modeled with an o

And that reminded me of the relationship between strategy and tactics in chess.

Whereas in strategy, there are more heuristics like control the center or

the knight on the rim is grim because it has reduced mobility.

That doesn't actually suggest how to do it or what kind of a direct or oblique strategy would actually be realized in which way.

It's just sort of like general ideas.

And then there's the tactical and the rollout and all of that in the specifics of the situation, which cannot be really thought too far in advance because even just two or three in advance, the branching is so complex

that it's not really useful all the time although some brute force approaches have used that to great success and it may work in certain cases but it's not a general strategy just to roll out tactics further and further and then hope that strategy just falls out of rollouts of tactics so i'm sure you'll have some thought on that but how do you think that frames this as a multi-scale statistical problem and then it's going to be approached from this bayesian active inference way


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think it perfectly models it.

You added strategy and tactics.

I would only add objectives as the third element to that.

Objectives, strategy, and tactics are these different levels of tasks that people want to achieve.

And this is not only true for the tasks that you refer to like chess or other applications, but also like when we go about in our own life, like our higher level task can not just be going to the post office, but achieving some objective as a result of that, which is

I am going to the post office because I might have received an admission letter from a university.

And that has a higher level task on top of it, which is this has broader implications to my career or life in general.

So one person's or one robot strategy can be another robot's tactics.

And the way you define moves and actions is totally different.

arbitrary and dependent on how reliable your sensors are.

So I think the levels are the place where we draw the line between lower, higher, or inner and outer levels are dependent on the sensors, which is the ground truth that we can reliably measure in that particular moment.


SPEAKER_02:
The only thing I'll add there is that also, just like you said, where one robot strategies and others tactics, this nesting of Bayesian generative models can be

three layers it can be four layers Etc so there's arbitrary design of these graphs and we've seen like in metacognitive papers like active live stream number 25 on metacognition as mental action it actually is like action and perception all the way up all the way down so just because a layer isn't modeled we have an interface for the unknown through the blankets that we do specify

Okay, so let's look at it specifically.

All right, on the left is figure one.

It is the prototypical generative model of an active inference agent.

As we discussed a little before, the nodes in the graphical model represent random variables where the gray color is indicating the observed variables.

So the observations are observed

in gray and then the actions are also observed so one could complicate this assumption but we're assuming that like if the robot is hitting the gas that it knows that it's actually doing that motion an observation at the current time step o sub t is generated by the hidden state s so it has the white node so it is a not directly observed but it's like a parameter in a model the generative model of the robot

which in turn is generated by the previous hidden state and action at time step t minus one.

So it's like, here's S in the past, and it's marching forward, and then it's influenced by its prior states, as well as by how actions influence states, if at all.

And future states and observations depend on future actions, which are determined or not completely determined, but have a statistical relationship with the policy pi.

And policy, pi, is sequences of actions.

If one has a policy depth of one, then the action at the next time step and the policy are the same inference.

But when we have a horizon of planning that's deeper than one, it means that policies are actually sequences of action.

And that's part of the complexity of cybernetics and so on.

and on the right I have a little bit cut this generative model into a grid so the now time step is the action that we took in the past the hidden state inference at that time unobserved and the real-time observation and then the left to right is the past

time step, the now time step, the next time step, and then just deep future time steps, whatever the horizon of planning is.

And this is a discrete time model.

There's also continuous time active inference models, and they can be used together, but it's not in this paper.

And at the top is policy selection.

And there's a lot of cognitive apparatus that might connect to this pie, but that's also not modeled here.

Action selection is these A's.

those are just your actions through time i moved e2 e4 and then nf3 and then the hidden states are whatever the hidden states are that are being tracked as being influenced or related to policy selections via action and then hidden states emit observations and that's what makes it a partially observed markov process and then because it's a um

policy variable that's being modeled here, it's a partially observed Markov decision process because it's not just the Markov process inference, it's also having action as a parameter that's planning as inference.

Anything to add on one?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think adding the grid really helps simplify the different steps that the agent has to take and how it's composable with different policies that might connect from different objectives.

So yeah, the observed and unobserved are, I think, the more important key pieces here, which, again, can have different probabilities because

As you go through deeper layers, you can consider the previous layer's unobserved state to be your current layer's observed state.

It depends on how much probability you assign to the strength of that particular observation.


SPEAKER_02:
i just want to add one last thing which is the observations in the future are unobserved so just to note that there's a difference between the past and the future and one could also imagine that maybe there's a forgetting or something like that but that's a very key difference is that the same type of variable like actions are unobserved in the future we can't say well we'll make these three moves it's like but what if another chess piece blocks that specific move well that would be dumb of them to do but would it

So that's part of the complexity of strategy.

So figure two is where they go from this single layer

model this is kind of the kernel of the model and they're going to introduce a slightly more complicated graphical model this is going to specifically cast navigation as a hierarchical generative model for active inference and so the lower level is this again more tactical more local visual perception on the bottom filled in observations that's the real-time camera data

coming in is one way to think about it.

But another way to think about it is actually by looking at the arrow direction, it's being generated using some underlying states.

And then the actions at that lower level are also being observed in the past.

And at the lower level highlighted in blue, the model is entertaining beliefs about hidden states S and the agents pose P. So here's the S and the P, like each time step, there's a hidden state and the pose.

hidden states are giving rise to the observations o and then the hidden state and pose are influenced by the previous state that's the arrow coming horizontally pose and action or the higher level model in the case of the initial states and so here is like at each time step so here we're like in this blue block with a t um uh like at the faster model time step

and then at the slower level there's an injection from this like slower click that shoots something in and then that influences the rest of this blue block and then it's carried forward and there's another injection like a slower time scale at that more strategic level and at the higher level highlighted in red the agent reasons about locations

The next location is determined by executing the move on M. So here's the more slower updating movements, like where one is in that map.

And then this is the more fine grained action selection.

What do you see in this figure?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so it's a continuation of the previous figure.

And the speed differences are what's interesting here.

The higher level being just a two-step process, whereas the lower figure

has more actions involved.

So yeah, you see that observations exist in both these layers, but there's more depth of unobserved states in that particular lower layer.


SPEAKER_02:
I hope that now by

filling in some formalisms related to this that we can put a little detail because there's a lot that could be said about this and I hope that we've been at least consistent in our descriptions but we'll look forward to hearing from the authors on it so um they write in active inference the agent will infer beliefs over these hidden states based upon experience

looking back into the past observations those are the observations from the past that the computer has access to as well as infer future actions through a process of minimizing variational free energy this is where they're going to introduce this free energy minimization as kind of like a model metric that helps do parameter selection parameter optimization on this type of graph

So we have some graphical structure, believe it or not, and it could look different, that does strategy and tactics.

It's like the skeleton.

But then the real challenge is to have the video data come in and to have the movement data actually modeled and to make that happen on limited hardware and so on.

and so what they do is first describe that in terms of equations and then they're going to talk a little bit later about like how the equations get adapted into using neural networks and actual cameras and sensors but this is just going to be still at the equation level going from this graphical intuition about how to do strategy and tactics and how to have them modify each other into an analytical way of framing it

So P is the joint model of O, S, A, pi.

That's the observations, the video camera data, the states, hidden states at this layer.

and the actions and the policy different aspects of the past present and future are modeled as sparsely connected so one could believe it or not that those are sparsely connected so-called in reality but in this model there's actually quite sparse connectivity amongst variables even though if

If it's new to you, it might look like a circuit board or something, but relationship to the all versus all that it could be connected, this is a quite sparse connectivity, like this bottom left one doesn't influence this top right one, for example.

Factorization is a way that that sparsity of the variables can be converted into a factorized equation.

So we have this joint distribution, which is like the ultimate panopticon distribution, but because there's sparsity of connectivity, different parts of the model can be like partitioned out differently.

So it's like this big joint model that gets separated into separate parts.

And each of those one can interpret as being like the distribution of that.

So like there's the distribution of policies, over two policies or over continuous policies.

Then there's the distribution of action states that are taken depending on the policy.

So like given that I intended to move A and then B, did I actually take A?

Then there's the state underlying distribution in green.

hidden state, so that's not directly observed.

The blue is the distribution of observations conditioned on hidden states.

That's like a Bayesian hidden Markov model.

And then there's this relatively more complex and combinatoric term that is asking, well, how do states depend on past states and actions?

And then how do actions actually depend on policy decisions?

And how do the observations in the future depend on the hidden states in the future?

So it's taking this joint model and breaking it down into a few different pieces that, as we'll see, can be simplified.

And that makes this problem tractable in a way that just the all by all non-factorized, non-factorizable model is much more difficult to fit.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, absolutely.

And this goes into the practical implementation of how such a thing can be done.

And the interesting factor in this formula for me is the combinatoric term, which takes in the previous states and multiplies it with the current state.

And this is one of the ways active inference can be modeled.

And I think in previous live streams, there might be different implementations of the same framework, where OS, A, and pi are used in many different formulae and arrangements.


SPEAKER_02:
Great point, yes.

Though there are some differences in notation across papers,

there is hopefully more coherence than not.

So knowing this framework helps one understand active inference domain, different domain models.

Okay, so how is free energy going to be used to fit this model

both on the sort of perception as inference side, so that's the part of the model on the bottom that's more like a, what is my pose given the visual input and what action should I take in the short term, and this deeper, more navigational layer in the red, how are those going to be reconciled and parameterized, which includes action selection and policy selection, how's that going to be parameterized using a single criterion?

So they use the variational free energy, and it's calculated up to the current step T. So variational free energy, as contrasted, which we'll get to with expected free energy, variational free energy is like the parts that are observable are easier to calculate over, one can imagine.

So that's the variational free energy.

And the expected free energy is going to have continuity with the variational free energy, but it's going to introduce this

complexity of calculating expected free energies about unobserved observations and actions but they're similar but it goes like from first variational free energy is looking back and that's the more perceptual component and then there's a deeper expected component once a time horizon is considered so

can go into this more with the authors but briefly in the first line f this variational free energy is being defined as the expectation that's the fancy e of the difference between

the q distribution which is the variational distribution that's under the control of the experimenter of the robot and that's like a simplified distribution family so just like fitting a linear model can be done even if the data are super non-linear and you're totally misled fitting a linear model can be quite fast or fitting just a parabolic model can be quite fast so if you constrain what model family you're willing to use for q

though there are still some quite expressive families that are also tractable, then you can try to minimize the expectation of the difference between the distribution that you're controlling and this distribution that you'd like to know that's gonna help you go a long way towards doing policy selection.

This expectation can be rewritten using a KL divergence.

And that can also be rephrased as a difference between

a KL divergence and another expectation.

We can go more into this with the authors, and I think that will be great to hear their explanation.

But for now, I just want to leave it at that level of detail.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I agree.

And I mean, the broader point that I see from this particular framing is like representing it in terms of divergence and evidence.

And this is how not only they use it for their experimental setting, but this is how the actual free energy model will be implemented in a real life situation as well.

in which the first term, which is in their control, may not be in their control when the robot is in a dynamic environment like that.

So in this particular paper, in a warehouse environment, this kind of a framing makes perfect sense.

But when the setting might be different, the framing might also need to reflect that.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

And also there's that complexity minus accuracy interpretation.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
So here's where they move from the variational free energy F to the expected free energy G. So they write, crucially, in active inference, the agent will not only optimize its generative model by minimizing F for past observations...

In addition, the agent will also select actions that it believes will minimize its future surprise.

However, future observations are not yet available.

The free energy F cannot be computed and the expected free energy G is used instead to compare the effect of various policies or actions in relation to the goal of reaching the preferred state.

So wouldn't it be simple if we could just infer how the map looked in the past and then make decisions based upon how the map looked in the past,

but that opens up to all these basically failures of function in changing environments.

G in formalism three is a sum across over a given time horizon T. So the expected free energy G of pi and T policy in time for a given certain policy pi and time step T in the future is defined as

And this is going to be another set of formalisms, but we can just pull back and remind ourselves of that sentence from the introduction.

Active inference is a process theory of the brain that casts action as perception as two sides of the same coin.

so variational free energy which is more perceptual like because it's looking in past observed states and then g which is going to introduce the uncertainty of action in an uncertain future how an f how are f and g similar or different how are they being cast as two sides of the same coin how through the present are those two processes being reconciled because time step five from now is going to be like now

then so how will we have continuity in dealing with certain moments like now but then there's things that we're uncertain about in the past and the present and the future and they're all very quite different kinds and they have different relationships to past actions and that's like the blockchain angle you can't change the past

You can change your interpretation of the past, but then there's a different kind of variability or openness in inferences about the future.

So these are great questions to learn about and think about.

How are FNG similar and different?

What is variational free energy?

What is expected free energy?

What is free energy of the expected future, which Baron Millage et al have introduced?

And what other kinds of representations

of this nexus are relevant to think about because these cited papers and shown equations do not exhaust the richness of that setting, but it's awesome how they pulled back to just this.

It's a function G of what you do.

and what horizon you're considering it over tau and then implicitly how you think about all of that and how you think about that so they both pulled out to a level that i think will provide a lot more discussion but also we have to get specific in order for that robot to be in the warehouse


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And the only fascinating observation for me, obviously there's a lot in this slide because this is the entire model.

This is the crux of the entire calculation where you have

variational free energy and the expected free energy.

And you see the similarity between both these formulae where divergence and log evidence is mentioned and then complexity and accuracy are terms of that formula.

And eventually it comes down to risk and ambiguity in the expected free energy formula when all the probabilities are given a certain policy and on a particular time horizon, which is represented by tau.

So these terms like divergence complexity risk are like in one bucket and log evidence accuracy and ambiguity are like in the same similar category in those two formulae.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

I think we will, as we expect the unexpected, we'll start to actually accelerate through because the goal of the dot zero is really to set a lot of that context because that is what brings one to the trailhead, so to speak, for a lot of the details that they're going to present.

And of course, the accuracy of their experiments and the implications and everything like that.

So we're just going to sort of continue on knowing that that

getting there is getting quite a far way with this paper and then we're going to go slightly faster through many other aspects of the paper just to like give it a first pass so um here in formalism five they are casting p of pi the distribution of policies as a softmax sigma of the free energy on policy and this temperature parameter gamma

This is casting planning as an inference problem, which allows one to go from like the relative free energies of different policies to a decision on those policies.

And when there's high temperature, it's like the pie chart is made, but one is still just picking from the different policies as if they had relatively more equal pies.

Whereas when the temperature's low, like absolute zero, then one is selecting the best policy, like more than it should be expected in a way.

And so that gamma reflects the confidence that the agent has in current beliefs over policies.

So when there's a lot of confidence, then the best expected policy is selected always.

When there's low confidence, then it's not taken into account as much.

And that's, of course, a fun to think about in the context of like expecting the unexpected.

I think I can.

I think I can.

And then it says on the bottom right, no one had the heart to tell him he was going the wrong way.

So one can think they can and be acting consistent with their model and going the wrong way relative to what?

So there's a lot, again, there that connects like the math to some broader questions that we all have.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, totally agree.

And the meme really brings the point home.

So yeah, let's go to the next one.


SPEAKER_02:
And in 37, live stream number 37, people can read about this dual interpretation of preferences and expectations and about how they co-realize each other.

So section 3.2, they move to the hierarchical generative model for navigation.

And here it's the same higher and lower model with blue at the lower timescale, red at the higher level.

And it's gonna be basically as we spent more time on previously, but just applied to this multi-scale navigation problem where it was being approached a little bit more abstractly before.

So in formalism six,

they're going to have their big joint model be all the things that one would want to know in this whole nested model.

That's why previously when we saw the

P distribution, there was only four variables because it was considered at just a more simple kernel layer.

And this is writing it out for the whole nested model where there's actions and moves.

So moves across these two layers being jointly considered.

And then it's going to be like this multiplication between the lower level distribution and the higher level distribution because it can be factorized across these two levels because they're sparsely connected because of how it was designed.

So that simplification takes like sort of an all by all model and just simplifies

at this level that corresponds graphically to the sparse connectivity allows those two to kind of twist a little bit independently from each other, yet also containing a common basis in this joint distribution.

Anything to add?


SPEAKER_00:
No, I think this will be clarified further in the next slide, which goes into global policy selection.


SPEAKER_02:
So in the higher level red, the global policy is omitted.

Every move is treated independent of each other.

This hierarchical arrangement allows the system to reason about its environment further ahead, both temporally and spatially.

And so then they take this joint distribution and it gets broken down into these three terms.

From formalism 7, we can see the generative model decomposes into terms for both the lower level dynamics, blue, i.e.

how actions influence the next state in pose.

So we broke the blue out from the red, and then there's this other term, which we can talk about, from the joint distribution.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this is where it comes to expressing in terms of G, which was the expected free energy.

And we see those terms repeat here.

And I think this is the most important formula of this paper in which the global policy selection happens at the higher level.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
okay so as we saw before with a simpler version first there was a decomposition on p there's a factorization on a p distribution we saw this like with a simpler p here they then got turned into an f and a g here we have a more full featured p it is also going to be

turned into an F, which is the variational free energy, and then a G. So this is F of the hierarchical model.

They write, now that we fully specified our generative model, that was P, the factorized joint distribution, we again turn the variational F and then later the expected G free energy that will be minimized in active inference.

So it's a variational distribution queue that they're fitting and they take the same approach as they took earlier with the single layer model and they reach this hierarchical free energy that can be rewritten by the bottom row as the decomposition of the free energy of the lower model and of the higher model.

So I think it'll be great to hear the authors, like how did they reach this and what do they think it means?

But I think the awesome question to think about here is how do we think about free energy minimization in multi-agent and multi-scale systems?

How do free energy decompositions work?

And what if nine do really well, then one doesn't?

How does that group outcome work?

get traded off against, well, everybody's doing a little bit worse, but isn't that better than one person doing a lot worse?

Well, it depends by how much you mean by a lot and a little and the situation and so on.

So how does all of that going to be amenable to these kinds of seemingly cut and dry decompositions?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that is an excellent question.

And another question that I would add to this is how many terms can you decompose this into as you think about more and more models?

So here we have a lower level and a higher level, but can there be multiple levels for different kinds of scenarios?


SPEAKER_02:
awesome okay so they are now going to pick up on that bottom line there's a low and a high decomposition of the hierarchical variational free energy and they write this falls apart into a term for the lower level and the higher level of the hierarchy which we can further unpack for the higher level we get and then they provide a expansion of that f high and f low

And these have the same complexity and accuracy interpretation as we saw with the previous F, except that this complexity minus accuracy can be understood as being about only the higher level.

And this complexity minus accuracy on lower level can be interpreted as being about only the lower level.

So it's like been a separation of consideration between these levels.

But again, they're coming from a common joint distribution.

so that is just like a example of taking the analogous logic and path that was followed on the single level model then using this composable framework making the nest degenerative model and then being able to apply the same kinds of techniques to reach the same kinds of conclusions but now in this different context


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, totally agree.

Yeah, splitting it into like these very specific terms and differentiating the forest from the trees where high is the forest and the lower level are the trees is very, very helpful.

And it also shows how they are related and not related.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So now they're going to make that F to G move.

When considering future time steps tau, the variational free energy becomes an expected free energy, which again unfolds to a term for each level in the hierarchy.

So they're going to do that F high and F low type decomposition, but it's going to be about G, the expected free energy.

And so here's the low on the right and the high on the left.

And so here there's that same risk plus ambiguity

but now it's being applied to the decomposition between the high and the low and so similarly to equation four this unpacks in a risk term to reach a prior goal location and an ambiguity term intuitively this means the agent selects a route to its goal location with the lowest ambiguity hence if the agent operates in a completely static environment without uncertainty this basically becomes equivalent to shortest path planning

So that was really interesting to hear about, again, in the context of what you described, like well mapped, well connected, real time updating, highly controlled settings.

The future is more like F than it is like G because it's like you can just trust in the future that you'll get a snapshot update and you'll be able to make the perfect move because you'll be able to do shortest path planning and traditional optimization techniques because you'll have no ambiguity about

the future, basically in the short term.

And then that gets more complex when there actually is different kinds and different patterns of ambiguity in the future.

So it's just like such a cool way to hear about it now.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, couldn't have said it better.

Similar thoughts on this particular framing.


SPEAKER_02:
that was section three in section four there now we still haven't seen active applied yet we haven't seen any action perception loops it's been like very analytical to this point so now in section four they're going to actually bring that generative model

into active inference.

So they write, now we've established our generative model and the variational free energy optimization objectives.

We present how to instantiate such a model in Silico for navigation on a real robot with camera input.

So it's kind of interesting because in Silico often means like we only simulated it, but here it means we implemented it on a Silicon processor.

yeah in a uh in a real embedded situation and so um the observations are the raw pixels from the camera sensor and the actions consist of the command specifying the linear and angular velocity so that is just taking that generative model structure that we described kind of abstractly like the we just talked about the observed observations but is that a one pixel camera

Is it a 4K video?

Is it LiDAR?

This is where they are going to connect it to the specifics of what they actually do in the robot.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, the only thing I'll add is, again, this picture, because it's such a helpful picture in framing the pixels and the sensors that are being captured in their case as well.

So they are taking just this camera inputs, which is R, G, and B values for this particular paper, as well as the IMU units and the odometry units, which is velocity.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So in section 4.1, they highlight the visual perceptive aspects of their model.

We're not going to describe it here.

We'll hear about it soon.

But 4.1 focuses on that visual perceptive aspect. 4.2...

which we're also not gonna focus on here, takes it a little bit out from the visual perception.

How is the tree recognized given the retina?

And this is like the path integration around those trees.

So this is a path integration approach.

And then they also bring up some points about how this has some similarities on the biological side.

and also they introduced this topological map component of the higher generative higher level generative model the red model um do anything to add especially maybe about that topological basis of the higher model


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so this is where it's attaching it to the physical world.

This is where the lower levels and higher levels get connected through these particular formulations.

So this is a question I will have for the authors as well.

How is this CAN-CN network represented?

And why did they choose this particular framing of connecting the two levels?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, they write, the posterior distribution, that's the one that we control, is represented by a continuous attractor network, a CAN, a 3D cube that wraps around the edges with these different dimensions.

So that might enforce some type of closure on the network, which we also saw happening with the rat slam, but that'll be a good thing to ask.

Okay, so then in section 4.3, they highlight the localization and mapping.

These are being simultaneously inferred, so it's a SLAM.

And this is the localization and mapping features, which are another level kind of above or different than just path integration.

and they relate that to the higher level model.

So they provide some other formalisms and maybe this gets at what we were discussing.

Due to odometry integration drift.

So inaccuracy about how many footsteps you took.

Like that's the kind of the reason why people apparently walk in a circle when they're lost in a feature list landscape, because they have like a little bit of a different step length.

And so they have drift in their heading.

Matching experiences will not have exactly the same associated pose.

These displacement errors are distributed throughout the graph by use of graph relaxation, shifting the stored pose according to equation 16.

This enforces the map to be topologically consistent even after loop closures, which is often challenging in metric slam systems.

So that definitely gets at Stephen's information geography or information geometry versus information topology.

Because if we enforce a rigid geometry, then tiny differences might drive us wild.

But if we enforce topological closure, then even if a road like became 30% longer,

we'd still be able to navigate from city one to city two, and it wouldn't be so bothersome.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and including drift is one of the fundamental things all robotics experiments have to do because everything that we formulate via math never seems to work out well in actual physical sensors and actuators.

There's always that drift term that needs to be added, and I like how they have handled the drift here.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

In section 4.4, they discuss and highlight the navigation features.

And here we'll talk more.

I just want to raise these questions because they make up like three of the perspectives that are really getting integrated and recombined here.

And you spoke to it right there.

How do mathematical entities navigate?

like bayesian graph models and generative models how do biological entities navigate and how do robotic entities navigate and what are their similarities and differences and different opportunities and challenges and how will we generalize and make the right kinds of connections across different systems within these domains and across and among these domains so that's an awesome complexity question i hope a lot of people can

enter into these questions and provide their thought and be involved in this.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I mean, this could be a whole section on navigating navigation, which is an interesting topic for complexity.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Okay, Section 5, and this will be, I think, just fascinating to hear their hands-on experience about these experiments, which we're not going to go into too much detail in, but in Section 5, they describe their setup and implementation.

So...

This is a teleoperation of a mobile robot in a lab with a warehouse style.

And they describe some details about like what kind of robot they used, what kind of camera was used and how many data points existed.

And then they talk a little bit about their implementation of how that generative model became basically implemented using machine learning as a LSTM network.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is the most fun part of the paper for many robotics researchers because this is like the standard robotic toolkit that's used in almost all robotics labs around the world.

Turtlebot has become like this raspberry pie of robots in which every lab has one and anyone can replicate this kind of an experiment easily.

And it's interesting that they have access to all these sensors that they talk about, such as LiDAR and millimeter wave radar.

But they only use the minimal set of sensors they need, which is the RGB data.

And that is what they use to collect data points.

And they are sampling it at an interval which is very close to human perception, like 100 milliseconds.

It gets close to biological level perception.

Like the frame rate that we have for our sensory organs.

So that is very interesting.

And the implementation is even more interesting, which we have to definitely ask the authors about how they use this setup.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Great.

In figure three, they show on the right side a picture of the bot, turtle bot.

So there it is.

And then on the left side, we see some still images of the lab warehouse seen at different points.

So here, point one on the map is corresponding to what was seen as approaching this wall and doing a U-turn.

and um so this is the path that was taken as it was kind of uh circulating these warehouse shelves basically um yeah and also i really appreciate how like you described um the the commonality of these techniques um because those i just didn't know that this was such a common hardware and it'd be awesome to see like what it will look like when people start to deploy it in different settings


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and it's important because they use ROS.

First of all, Turtlebot uses the robot operating system.

If this is the first time people are looking at a Turtlebot, by just looking at the image, you can tell that it's a Roomba with a shelf on top of it with many different sensors.

So honestly, that's all there is.

So the movement is done by the vacuum cleaner on the bottom, the cleaning robot module on the bottom of the robot, and then the rest of the rack.

The rack is full of sensors where you see the cameras attached.

So earlier, there used to be Kinect cameras attached, and you can attach any sorts of additional units on top of it.

And then there's a processing unit there which takes in all those inputs and does all the calculations on board.

So yeah, reproducibility in robotics research is extremely rare.

And using a technique like this definitely helps for other labs to reproduce these kinds of results.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks for that.

And I'd be really curious to learn more also about the edge computing implications.

Is that a mini PC?

What exactly is needed here?

What if the model were 100 times simpler?

What if it were 100 times more complex?

So in section 5.3,

they discuss the results and they ask three research questions and those are addressed in the following sections.

So they ask, does that lower level model learn accurate representations for inference and prediction by minimizing free energy?

So does the lower level work?

Two, can these representations be used in the hierarchical model

for generating topological maps of the environment?

Because although we kind of didn't discuss it in detail, that is that topological closure that's impressed upon at the higher level, but not at the lower level.

So can the lower level work?

And then can it be used as a useful interface with this totally different in type topologically closed higher level model?

And then the holistic question is, does the system infer sensible moves and actions by minimizing expected free energy to engage in navigation?

Like, okay, given that the two components are interfacing, does the whole thing do free energy minimization in a way that ends up doing so-called sensible moves?

that is maybe what um a person would do if they said just patrol that warehouse just walk around without any too specific of a goal but just make sure that you walk everywhere pretty much that's pretty sensible they didn't spend any time over here they didn't just go up and down one shelf so that's sensible even though there's not quite a heuristic for that but i think that's really a fascinating question what is sensible behavior


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And I think they go into how they quantify sensible behavior by comparing it with other approaches in the results.

So it will be interesting to ask the authors about that.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Okay.

Table one just goes into some details about their neural network parameterization.

We'll hear about it from the authors.

So how did neural networks come into play?

What was the process of fitting that?

Okay.

Figure four.

All right, figure four is the sequences of the ground truth observations, first row.

So that's the video data coming in on the top.

That's like, just looks like regular video data.

Reconstructed observations, second row.

That's the generative model of visual input.

And that's kind of like thinking about this in terms like a core screening, but this brings the visual input into the robot's terms.

Corresponding to latent space samples, third row.

So this is like potentially an internal representation, like a layer of a neural network.

And so it's just showing that these perhaps very similar or different scenes can be differentiated via their position in like a higher dimensional latent space, or it's lower dimensional in the video, but it's higher dimensional than just like the X and the Y.

robot is turning towards the left in the sequence as can be seen from both the sequence of observation as well as the shift towards higher theta values in the pose cube and that's the pose cube activation on the bottom row so this is what it looks like at that lower model to go from video data to hidden state estimation the kind of coarse graining generative model of the video

to this latent state internal representation to the pose estimation that's going to come into play at the higher level of the model.

They're kind of overlaying time steps as columns during this execution of a turn and showing how different layers of that lower model are updating.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And I think this is a time series like you described.

Left to right indicates like 10 seconds, for example, 10 seconds of a turn of a robot.

And that was an interesting comment on the higher level dimension for a robot is lower level fidelity for us with those pixels.

So yeah, the way we represent things and the way it's represented in a robot can have very different terminologies.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and higher, lower, inner, outer, more, less, it's always in relationship.

And so those can sometimes get swept under the rug.

It's a high dimensional representation that we did of this.

What do you have to ask in 42.0?

How high?

Pixels.


SPEAKER_00:
It's just a few pixels.


SPEAKER_02:
In Figure 5, they show the generated experience map left and a comparison map extracted from localization with RTAB map.

I show the citation here, but I would love to hear your interpretation of what do they mean by the experience map is topological while the RTAB map is metric?

What are being shown differently here, here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so yeah, they're comparing the figure that they obtained on the left with the data obtained from a similar technique.

So the way these robotics experiments work is they use different localization techniques and they are using RTAB

which is another technique on the right.

And yeah, the second point is very interesting.

And I think that is Stephen's question as well, which is how is the information geography represented?

So the experience map, which is on the left, it briefly describes how the environment is topologically constructed.

Yeah, closed.

And the RTAP map is accurate to physical world metric units, which is measurements.

So topology just means how everything is oriented.

It doesn't need to be physically precise.

As a real world, it's like wisdom versus knowledge.

So topology is more

more of an idea that if you follow this kind of a map, you will find your way and you won't get lost.

Whereas metric is like precise mapping of the physical environment and mapping it to scale, like one is to 20 or one is to 100 or whatever that scale may be.


SPEAKER_02:
i really like that knowledge and wisdom and then here's um why there's always the minimum of two and why we respect both because the topological maps may be totally non-comparable in their geometry for two different entities mapping the same space and so if we are both trying to get the geometry of the geography that's where it's possible to have the most objective agreement on the knowledge side

allegorically here and then the topological side can be so much simpler and so much more personalized and local and can actually help in those wayfinding and the changing situations and maybe there's analogy or there's resonance or there's small isomorphisms with different wisdoms but

one has gone down that path and has basically given up making the image on the right that other people will just see and recognize as well yeah that totally lines up with what i see so it's quite a nice point yeah okay figure six uh is some more outputs of the model so they uh

Right, imaginary policies.

Imaginary policies.

So there's several images of different things happening.

There's the current state.

which is the video input at that time step.

And then there's imagined short-term goals.

I want it to look like this.

I want the frame differencing at that time step to be super small.

I want to be really unsurprised about looking like this at that short time step.

In this turn, you can kind of see that piece on the left that's getting brought more into view.

As I turn my head left, I don't want to be surprised.

I want it to feel normal.

And then in the long-term goal, there's a lot more like blurriness because it's not super important whether the handle is here or here because it's just an uncertain future.

And so these are imagined policies that can be considered at past, present and future time steps.

And that's kind of what the partial observability of the hidden Markov model structure or motif

brings into this picture this is why it's good to have a generative model rather than just a recognition or an input a signal processing model that's like where the whole generative bayesian concept and predictive processing from the biological side come into play

And also in the future, it trails off.

These are the same time series.

And further and further in the future, it gets blurry and blurrier until it's like, I just want to be in a horizontal plane in the future.

Basically.

Standing.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Figure D is very interesting in this particular picture where they have three different policies and you see very different results as a result of those policies.

This is robotics 101 behavior where you program the robot to always go left, always go right, or always go straight.

And you start with these particular policies and then understand that these simple changes in behavior have such vast differences in the results.

So yeah, the sentence you just highlighted is...

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
So here the three policies are basically the two different turns are going straight.

And so they say when calculating G low and evaluating the distribution on policies, this results in a probability close to one to take the policy go left.

Like look at how on the bottom row, that's the go left policy.

It stays sharp in the future.

But then the policies that diverge increasingly from the goals at different timescales, with respect to those goals, it becomes really unclear.

So it's like, I want $100.

So I'm saving $1 per day.

Then at day 71, I expect $71.

Wow, it's exactly $71.

That's like this bottom time one.

And this is like, I'm losing money every day.

I'm getting less and less clear on...

on how it's going to end up at 100 at this future time step.

So maybe that's not a good policy, not because my expected value is dropping, but because it's unclear how I'm going to get to 100.

And that's something that can be neutrally said without even taking a judgment on the amount at any given time step.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah.

I think that analogy really drives the point home that you need to choose your policies according to the goals.

And I think all those goals were part of their formulation of the expected free energy.

So I think it's important to ask this to the authors, like how were these goals as well as policies chosen?

And can this be generalized for different kinds of environments?


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So figure seven, they write different goals for the long-term path of figure five.

So just here's the figure five again with the topological closure of the higher model.

The lower level dynamics model will take the corresponding states as preferred state goals sequentially.

So this is where we see the connections between the models becoming enacted.

So let's just say that one is...

coming around this edge, and there's two options.

They can continue straight or they can go right, or they can go in reverse, but we're considering forward motion only.

So there's two alternate policy.

It's not the infinite space decision-making that humans are sometimes confronted with, but here it's a robotics motion decision about continuing straight, ostensibly to explore this final rightmost shelf sequence, or taking the right turn now.

So go straight or turn right.

Now, what would sensible behavior be?

If one had recently or repeatedly visited the closer shelf, then to be more exploratory, it would make sense to like go straight so that this last shelf could be explored.

So that's the kind of decision that we would want that robot to be able to incorporate when it's able to be making that decision.

And so that could be thought of as having a long-term goal to be expecting oneself to be on the far right shelf here, the bottom one.

And then in the moment, which one of these actions, turn right or go straight, is going to be preferred with respect to how one acts now.

And so then that's what it means to say the lower level dynamics model will take the corresponding states from the higher long-term path as the preferred state goals.

So then one could be like, well, I'd prefer to see myself just right here.

Already one has chosen a branch.

But that is helping you reduce your uncertainty about being found here later.

So that, although I really look forward to also hearing everyone else's like unpacking of like, what is the robot doing or thinking in that pivot moment?

That's like kind of how I read the way that the long-term planning goals become imposed upon the lower level action selections.

Yeah, I agree.

Okay.

What did you see or want to talk about with the contrast with other slam approaches?


SPEAKER_00:
Let me see.

So yeah, this paragraph describes different SLAM approaches.

And you see the same group of authors mentioned from probabilistic robotics, where Sebastian Thrun and the co-authors are mentioned.

And those were engineered approaches, which also used different kinds of Bayesian approaches.

like statistics and then there were more bio-inspired approaches such as the rat slam group which is the 2013 paper and then yeah they rely on post scan and this experience map which they compare it with

And recently, deep learning has obviously been used on Visual SLAM, like you see in the bottom of this paragraph.

And yeah, the underlined section is important.

Do you want to cover that?

The active inference allow for a holistic treatment.


SPEAKER_02:
I think that's where they bring it home, which is they say, well, yes, people have used this recognition variational autoencoder model.

And yes, there's been this topological approach to rat slam navigation closer and et cetera.

But then those are often, again, composed in an ad hoc way.

And so active inference is providing a possible way to approach it in a more principled and more integrative first principles way.

Okay.

Conclusion.

Let's hear it from the authors.

People can draw their own conclusions, but I'll just highlight the last sentence that we think this research direction might offer new insights, both on how navigation works in the mammal brain

well as how to scale active inference to real world applications so it's like those were the three vectors we brought in with the biological mathematical and the robotics and then from that nexus it's kind of like it feeds back out because now from the brain they might be learning about the math and the robotics and then the others uh in a similar fashion


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and as the authors conclude the paper, they also bring up some open questions such as can these techniques be used for lifelong learning, which is a relatively new field of machine learning in which states change all the time and you do not need to retrain your model, but you just need to retrain specific parts of your model to continuously learn throughout the lifetime of that application.

So they suggest something like a sleep cycle.

That means that whenever the robot is charging, that is when it can update its model of the entire environment and share that and do that active inference approach to achieve lifelong learning.

So I'll be very interested in knowing this from the authors.

What are the weaknesses in this approach and how can this be solved to scale for real-world applications?


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

And how about just describe what this last video is showing?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so this video is just for people who are coming from the Active Inference Lab but want to see like a robot actually move.

We have been talking about robots moving.

So if we play the video, it's just an introduction to TurtleBot and how people use it in an experimental setting.

So yeah, the first few seconds of the video will describe all there is.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Well, we leave a blank slide for the discussion sections.

This was an awesome and memorable discussion.

And it's just the opening of the 42 when we'll continue on in a participatory group setting in the coming two weeks.

And hopefully have any of the authors join or anyone else who would like to join in.

I'll let you give a penultimate thought, but just really appreciated the care that you brought to these slides and to this stream.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and thanks to Stephen and everyone else who asked questions.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, okay.

So do you have anything else you want to add?

Otherwise, we can just thank the listeners and head out.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, this was my first active inference appearance in the sequence of hopefully a lot of appearances in the future.

And this clarified a lot of concepts for me as well and connected it to one of the fields that I was very intimately connected with almost a decade back.

So yeah, happy to see connections being reforged.

And yeah.

Yeah, looking forward to meet with the authors.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Thanks a lot, Sid.

Thanks, everybody.

And see you next week.

Bye.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

## UUQIVqcI-yw

SPEAKER_01:
some questions that we had from the dot zero, but also new questions arising.

So we'll just start with an introduction and saying hello, and then it'll be awesome to hear the author's initial contextualization.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California, and as explored a little bit in the dot zero with Sid, there's a few places that we were super curious about ranging from how does one go from a phenomena that they want to model like navigation to the analytical

equations and how is that related to active inference and the free energy principle?

And then how do we go from that analytical formulation to the actual gigabyte of video data and the real-time sensing and action?

So a lot of exciting topics and I'll pass to Blip.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, I'm blue.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico.

And this paper was kind of way over my head.

For a lot of reasons.

It's just so far out of what I normally do.

But I have some questions related to the hierarchical modeling and how that is kind of used and how that can be related or cannot be related to maybe biological systems that model in a hierarchical way similarly.

And I'll pass it off to Adam, I guess, if you want to start or introduce yourself and you guys can take it away.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Adam.

I'm a systems neuroscientist who's currently a research fellow at the Johns Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research.

I've been collaborating with Tim and Ozen and others on trying to understand the natures of navigation.

and the ways in which the hippocampal and entorhinal system might be relevant, and the ways in which this could be used as a means of understanding thought more generally.

And it's been awesome and slightly intimidating, except Tim is awesome, so that's made it less intimidating.


SPEAKER_02:
So that brings it to me.

I'm Tim.

I'm a computer scientist and roboticist at Ghent University.

We haven't subscribed to the Active Infants formalism to try to make our robots slightly more intelligent.

This paper was, I think, one of our

major accomplishments last year.

It was a collaboration with Adam where we basically look at the problem of navigation from different angles ranging from active inference modeling to an actual implementation on a real robot.

and at the same time looking at how could this work in in an actual brain or or whatever the relations uh and the synergy is there so it's really exciting uh to to have this paper out but also this was just as getting started i'd say it was it was basically our first um

artifact that we published we have another one together with adam in the works and and yeah i'm pretty sure that we will continue this endeavor for for quite some time longer so we're all just only just getting started so uh that being said probably a lot of the questions are also still questions for us so we'll see uh to what extent we can give give an answer uh as of today already


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, we can start with this sort of triad that is highlighted in the paper.

And Adam, you said it as understanding the basis of navigation.

And we have these three legs to the stool, kind of three threads that intertwine in the paper with analytical formulation of navigation, which is what Blue mentioned with a hierarchical generative model, and the implementation in robotic and in biological systems.

So maybe a first question is, how has this...

intersection of modeling navigation with robotics and biology been conceptualized and what brought you to apply active inference in this way and what does it add we should go first


SPEAKER_02:
So maybe my perspective here is that we basically got started from a robotics perspective, like looking at the navigation problem and looking at the ways that it's being solved right now and implemented right now.

And at the same time, we already had quite some experience with Active Inference, but more like

on yeah simple problems let's say our first um our first experiments were more on this kind of mountain car environment or a simulated car racer but it was always our goal to kind of try to scale it up to um yeah to real world robots and so

we got started by drawing and seeing parallels between current implementations out there that seem to match with how we would look at it from an active inference perspective and kind of work our way from both ways so on the one hand try to get some implementation running and on the other hand seeing how we could formalize it and actually make the math work in the active inference framework

and what we found out was that actually the the best matching implementation from a robotics perspective was actually one that was quite bio-inspired so it was basically the the red slam model from milford at all

where they had these heavy inspiration from grid cells, place cells, and these things.

And yeah, of course, it was not really a surprise given the fact how active internet is also grounded in neuroscience.

And so that's where we reached out to Adam to basically show off like, OK, this is our trajectory.

This is our plan.

This is our current implementation and how we think the math could work.

And then Adam, with his infinite knowledge of how the

It could work in the brain.

He gave like all kind of pointers like, OK, but this is interesting because what you implemented here is actually looking a lot like this kind of system.

And what you're doing here is actually very much like these kind of things.

And then we just said, OK, let's let's begin this further.

And we basically started on carving out

ping-ponging like, okay, if this is how it's done in the brain, then maybe we can make something more similar in the mouth or in the implementation, vice versa.

And the paper is basically a first step where we had, like,

the three bits kind of in place, but we know where the open issues are.

But it actually has something working on and sensible on all three levels, I'd say.

And that's where we are at at this moment.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you, Adam.

Anything you add to that?


SPEAKER_05:
I guess what I would add is I'm increasingly compelled by the idea that robotics as a touchstone and basis for understanding different aspects of mind is like it might be the most powerful kind of grounded empiricism we can do.

And I think it's both because it's like the, like a lot of times, like that Feynman quote of like, what I cannot build, I cannot understand is like mentioned, but this is actually building systems that, yeah, this is that, that, that have to work.

And, um, and these problems like in going through them and looking at the different solutions, like the kind of understanding you get, I think is really, uh, unique.

Um, but also I think it's particularly apps because of what our minds, other than control cybernetic control systems for bodies that have to move through the world.

And so this idea that like the way roboticists are approaching it, like it's.

And that is.

the exact problem that nature had to solve, that natural selection had to solve.

Now the question is, was it the same?

It might be in some cases, because you'd expect within bounds nature to be a fairly clever blind designer in terms of what it might discover.

And so just going back and forth between the robotics perspective

and how it might work in biology, and then the abstract algorithmic implementations of them for the robots, and seeing how those can mutually inform each other.

For me, this is how I basically want all my thinking about the mind to be from now on.

I feel like this is the most powerful way of thinking on it, that back and forth.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's enter in the biological door or blue.

Do you have a question?

Okay.

So Adam, what, even though of course it's a deep area and there's writing in the paper and citations and so on, what is so interesting about the structuring of the grid cells through space and time?

And what can we learn from that about effective ways of navigating?


SPEAKER_04:
So in latent SLAM, we have these pose cells.


SPEAKER_05:
And actually, I think it's probably better for Tim to talk about that, like the exact ways in which these cells function within the robotic system.

I think that actually brings more clarity than

um, the more mysterious, like, so there's lots of ideas have been going around in like computational neuroscience of like what the grid cells might do.

But I actually think the greatest clarity comes from like, well, how would the analogs work in the robotic system?

So I'm going to kick that to Tim.

Uh, what do you think Tim?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So I, I think that's in, in our current implementation, the, the parallel with grid cells is kind of, um,

hardwired in the implementation.

It's kind of, by design, you have something that looks, if you squint your eyes a lot, it looks a bit like a grid cell.

I wouldn't say that we actually have grid cells in here.

Because to me, the grid cell is basically, it should be an abstract, it should be giving you a way of

modeling movement in an abstract space, basically.

And in the case of navigation, the space by accident maps to the real world.

And the grid selectivation is just a peculiar way of encoding where you are in the space without just giving you the XY coordinates, basically, but the more kind of

uh higher dimensional more robust representation of where are you on in this on this grid and how do you if if i now move how does how does your um location in in in this reference frame or this grid uh change and so in our in our implementation we basically just said okay we know that we are in a roughly flat uh surfaced world so

the main coordinates that we need to track and integrate over are the X, X, Y position and the head direction.

These are basically the main things.

And I mean, we use this thing called the continuous attractor network to kind of

represent these three coordinates and we basically we inject the knowledge that if you move forward then you will also move forward to within this attractor network location and

Roughly, this corresponds to doing kind of path integration.

And I'm pretty sure that grid cells are giving you similar functionality in the brain.

But I would not say that our current implementation actually

I think the parallel is more with place cells, because there we do learn representations from visual sensory inputs that kind of give you an estimate of this is a particular location.

And if you see a similar pattern, then

it is likely that you are visiting the same location again and if at the same time you happen to have a very similar x y uh and head direction as in your uh as in your previous time you you kind of saw something similar like that

then you have pretty good evidence that you are actually in the same spot.

And then this is what you then call loop closure, and then you kind of reorient yourself as if you were at the same location.

So that's kind of how I would think of grid cells and place cells in our current work.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Blue, do you have any questions?

Yes, please, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'm curious as to the role, if any, or how the system may change.

If you included proprio reception, which is like,

the sense of where your body is in space.

And so like this is partially modeled through the visual system at place cells, grid cells, et cetera, but it's, it's not always right.

So it includes other senses like balance and you know, where's my hand and these kinds of things.

And I'm just curious if your model includes that in any way or only or, or not, or how it may change if it did give it, give it kind of like a more embodied


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so basically, in our case, the proprioception is limited to basically the velocity commands that you issue to the robot.

It also observes these again.

So it assumes that it knows which command it's sending, and then these are also kind of

fed back to the model as kind of a sensor so if you say drive forward or turn left or turn right with these kind of angular velocities this information is also sent into the model and this is then what we call the action so everywhere in the especially in the low level model you see the action pop-up this is basically you can you can see this as kind of a proprioception thing

And so everything kind of predicts what will happen given what I sensed that I was doing, basically.

And we do it both for the visual sensor, like what would I see if I'm turning left or right or go forward.

but also for tracking the pose and doing the pattern integration.

Like if I move forward and my heading was a zero angle, then I will probably just move forward in the x direction of the cam.


SPEAKER_01:
And that introduction of counterfactuals and anticipation, what would happen if I did this?

is very interesting area and also it speaks to the composability and the flexibility of the active inference model.

Like Sid highlighted that only the visual data were being used here with RGB values of video, but there are other kinds of sensors

that could be used as another sense state and that would kind of increase the dimensionality of the model maybe it is a value add maybe it's not but it doesn't require um rewriting it's like more like plugging in a different hard drive than it is like having a different computer um so you mentioned a higher dimensional robust representation of location and that's definitely one of the

advantages and and aspects of the model that'll be important to explore more like in the dot zero we explored this paper are we ready for service robots that showed how sometimes even trivial changes to environments can result in the robot getting lost because it has referenced to something like a chair that's no longer at the same location so how does this model

provide a higher dimensional robust representation of location.

And how did you go from thinking about that to the actual way that the generative model is framed?

Yeah, so...


SPEAKER_02:
To get back at the problems that you mentioned on the service robot.

So basically, the major problem in Robotics Slam is that indeed, if your environment changes slightly a bit, then

the same location doesn't look the same anymore in whatever sensor modality you're using and that can be problematic especially if you if you want to model the environment as like a metric system where you basically define this is my origin so this is zero zero in the coordinate system and now i will

for every obstacle or thing that I approach, I will log my estimation of the XY coordinates.

And then suddenly when your chair moves, of course, yeah, everything breaks.

But here in this system, we actually get rid of being grounded in a metric space.

The only thing that matters is that

this location looks very similar to something i i visited before it also seems likely given the the pet integrated trajectory i i assume i was following so this might be the same spot and if you think that or if the chair moved in in that place yeah that's fine then you just say okay maybe it's a different spot it doesn't really matter

um at some point you will have a kind of a queue that is stable right so and that's actually what we also do as as humans if you want to navigate you just look for the the the cues that you are that you know that are pretty stable if you visit a a new town you will look for the church tower because you know it will not move you will not orient yourself based on the color of the cars that are parked uh somewhere so

I think by using the active inference principle as a starting point,

you can get rid of a lot of these problems because your agent will automatically look for these stable queues.

And if suddenly the environment changes, we'll just accept this and just model it as like, okay, I think I'm revisiting this same trajectory, but now it looks different.

So maybe I just have to model it as such as this is kind of a trajectory that can change often.

And maybe this implies that if you plan the next time, you'd rather prefer a different trajectory where you know that everything is stable.

So this is the same as reducing your ambiguity.

So I think that getting rid of

everything should be structured in this x y location in a metric space and else i don't know what's going on just by getting rid of that and and and just assume anything can happen anything can change and if it does not change i i prefer it i like it better uh this helps a lot uh to circumvent a lot of the traditional problems i've seen


SPEAKER_01:
Adam, anything to add on that?


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, so one of the things that we've been working on is, like in this paper, it's trying to say, OK, so to what degree are the principles of what we understand about the natures of the hippocampal and entorhinal system being reflected in this simultaneous localization and mapping problem in latent SLAM?

And some of the other work we're doing is also going in the reverse direction of what can these principles of these slam principles use for autonomous navigation?

What can they tell us about the brain functioning as a cybernetic system?

And so one idea in general is that

each of these operations, in addition to having this fundamental significance of the basics of being able to move through the world, this task that any active inferential system that's going to survive and do what it needs to do has to handle, but to what extent

were these same principles repurposed for sophisticated inference more generally?

And to what degree is sophisticated inference structured according to SLAM principles?

And so if you're talking about these loop closure events, like finding this highly familiar state and where you think you know where you are by this

Convergence of like your trajectory information and your pose well this question would be like this is a model potentially for the feeling of insight or discovering of like causal accounts.

Is this.

And is this actually a source of inter-individual differences, which would be fairly fundamental?

How familiar do you think things are or not?

How much do you update on encountering these highly familiar situations?

And so me personally, what I've been wondering is, to what extent, of all the details, to what degree

So re-representing the biological details in terms of the kinds of descriptions that Tim is giving here.

And also, though, thinking of cognition more generally as navigation.

And so thinking of each of these things, what are the analogs at the level of thought as a kind of navigation through generalized space?


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, there's been navigation through.


SPEAKER_01:
A lot of interesting work on exploration, exploitation in mind and space, Hills et al.

2015, and on thinking about planning and the evolution of planning as being related to spatial as well as cognitive foraging.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's interesting to think about cognition as navigation.

I think about the feeling that I have when I'm searching for a thought, a word, a name of a person.

It literally feels like you're scrolling through a filing cabinet, physically looking for this piece of information in your brain.

And I know that different neurons store different pieces of information, like the Jennifer Aniston neuron and these kinds of things.

So I wonder what, can you just elaborate maybe a little bit more on that, Adam, about like cognition as navigation?

Is it like literally navigating to find the right neuron that goes ding, ding, ding, ding, ding?

Like that's the one I wanted.


SPEAKER_05:
So like to some degree it could be in that like, it's like two ways I might think of it as one of like you were talking before and you were like bringing up like memory palaces.

And I think that would be one example of thought is navigation, which is with this art of memory in terms of it can be part of the way we access and organize the information we work with when we're thinking is through a kind of spatialization often.

And actually, to the extent that we show really great virtuosity with memory, it's through an explicit process of spatializing and navigating through domain.

And that gives us the best purchase we have

you know, remembering these building, constructing and accessing these complex structures.

But in terms of like what you're describing with like something kind of like, you know, Jennifer Anderson or like neurons are like kind of finding, the thing that's coming to mind there is like foraging theory.

And so what you might be foraging for, like when you're like looking for like something that fits is a certain amount of like familiarity,

Or like some amount of like, you know, it could take different forms, like, you know, some sort of, uh, you know, maybe, maybe it's a entire receptive code and it's like, like a visceral feeling of like compelling this, or maybe it's like a more of like a proprioceptive code.

And it's like tension in the body.

I don't know what it might be, but this, like, there's some sort of read you're having on.

are you finding what you're looking for?

And so then the idea would be like, you're foraging for it.

And so you might spend a little bit of time in some area of conceptual space, and you're kind of moving around in there, like trying out different permutations.

And then you're like, nah, I'm not finding it.

And then you might do like a different tack, and then move to another area of semantic or conceptual space.

And you're searching around there.

And so like,

In forging theory, these would be called, I believe, levy flights.

And so there's something called the marginal value theorem, which is if you're trying to be an optimal forager, you're trying to balance exploration and exploitation.

And so you don't want to spend too long in a given patch if it's not having what you want, but you don't want to leave a patch prematurely if it's a good patch to be exploited.

And so the idea is if you're looking for

searching for a name or something that fits, it might take the form of this kind of generalized foraging.

But instead of you locomoting through spaces, you're actually spending different amounts of time in semantic spaces and then shifting based on whether you think you're actually, it's like a juicy patch.

And so with the marginal value theorem, it says if your current rate of foraging drops below the historical return, then you should go.

And so there might be different inductive biases in the brain that would represent this.

For example, the hippocampal system, this might look like, for instance, the way my plan is, you might get this prediction error drops below a certain amount or goes past a certain amount.

And then the hippocampal system ramps up with a lot of her current activity.

It's called a ripple.

And then it resets itself and retiles the space.

stimulates cortex and a new set of operative policies and specializations might occur.

And so this would be an example of a mechanism, like hippocampal system might have a built-in mechanism for these attentional shifts and these imaginative shifts when you're doing foraging.

It might be reflected also in other ways, like dopamine.

So there's some thoughts on my thinking.

Nathaniel Dahl will talk about one way of interpreting a ponency between phasic and tonic dopamine.

would be the tonic would tell you what's your average return, basically.

And there seems to be a kind of functional, I don't know if it's not quite antagonism, but the more your tonic is high, the less impactful any phasic event is.

And so it would be kind of like if you're foraging what would occasion a shift or not, you might actually see this playing out in the way neuromodulators work.

I don't know if that helps at all, but the idea is that this is the sort of thinking in terms of forging or navigation through generalized spaces as basically being.

So I guess there's a kind of a priori reason you would expect it to be generally good, which is, well, doesn't everything

most of the things we encounter do indeed exist in spaces and then most things the way we understand them is by like spatializing them let's like we graph them we we do like multi-dimensional scaling we do different things to try to like it's just like a way we understand things but it also seems like this was probably both evolutionarily and developmentally like this was the original challenge that had to be solved where the systems were paying their weight and that this would then involve like a repurposing and a redeploying for

more abstract domains.

So like there's some other like, I think it's Burgess has done some good work, right finding like, for instance, like, we might create like a morphos space.

And we're like looking like, like, they'll create like these generative, like birds with like different like neck lengths, and you're trying to do like categories over like what the different kinds of birds are.

And there's like, there's evidence that the way we do the categorization is we'll create

a spatial ization of this task structure.

And there's some evidence that the capital system is we're navigating through that in dealing with these categories.

Anyway, so that's, that was a lot of rambling, but like, I don't know if that got it with any of that land or Yeah, lots of Atlanta is very cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
one note that will i'm sure be exploring going forward optimal foraging theory is often put in the context of utility which is just the pragmatic component in active inference in terms of policy selection so optimal active inference foraging is like when the epistemic and the pragmatic gain are being considered so that's quite interesting and then also there's

as you brought up individual and collective navigation.

So one case is sort of the sovereign robot, no Wi-Fi, onboard computation, alone in the warehouse.

But then in the case of, for example, an ant colony where there's stigmergy and modification of the environment,

that might be possible or even facilitated by different onboard cognition and different outsourced or offloaded, which brings us to extended cognitive discussions.

But let's return to this question about going from

this resiliency of navigation that a biologist knows exists, a roboticist might want to see, how did you then go to that third space and actually have a hierarchical model?

So here in figure two or wherever else you suggest, what is happening here and how did this

graphical structure come to be as opposed to potentially like other graphical structures that could have been used?


SPEAKER_02:
OK, so basically.

Let me first maybe explain what all the variables mean in this in this figure.

So.

Going from the bottom.

At the bottom we have the O's, OTs, which are basically observations.

So these are like the visual inputs, what the robot sees, basically.

And then we have two latent variables, S and P, where S is basically an estimation of all the latent factors that give rise to the observation.

So it's kind of a latent space that confines all possible visual observations.

And p, on the other hand, is the latent variable that has a representation of your pose, which is then basically, in this case, your xy position and head direction.

And then we have one more, which is the aid action.

And so that's what I hinted at previously.

This is basically your proprioception.

You know what you have been doing.

So therefore, up until the past, the 80s are also shaded.

So it means that you basically have access to what you have been doing.

It's like the low level action, like move forward to this velocity or turn left or turn right.

But then for the future, this becomes an unobserved thing and you basically want to infer potential actions you should be doing in the future.

And then

For the future, a number of actions can be just summarized as pi, which is then the policy.

So the policy is no more than a sequence of future actions that you want to do or that you intend to do.

And then we move up a level in the hierarchy.

and there we have two more variables one is the location l and this is then basically kind of a more coarse grained

yeah look representation of location where am i but it's not really uh it's not necessarily tied to a metric space it's just like identifying this is a location and then we have uh also an action space at this level but this is the more uh we call this moves or m

And the move is basically kind of moving from one location to another.

So locations can just be more coarse grains like what you define as like a separate location in your environment.

Whereas at the lower level, the states, if you move from one state to the other, it's basically just saying, okay, what would be the next frame of my camera sensor be like?

And so it's also crucial to know that these two levels operate on different kind of timescales.

So the lowest level timescale is basically a very fine scale.

fine-grained action perception loop.

I send the motor commands to the robot and I read out my camera and this can go to, I think we implemented it at like 10 hertz, so 10 times per second to get a new camera frame and we updated the motor command.

Whereas location is just like moving from one location to another can take you maybe 10 or more time steps at the lower level.

And then, of course, one of the crucial bits is then, how do you identify a location?

And so basically how it comes to be is that if you basically observe your space through the camera images, we infer this abstract state space S, and then we look at what is the surprise of being in this state versus what I predicted.

And if this surpasses like a certain threshold, so yeah,

pretty complex to explain, but I'll do my best.

So every time, every time step, you get basically a new camera image and you can calculate like what is what is the divergence between what I was thinking about the state previously and how does it how did it shift?

with my new observation is then basically your kind of the bayesian surprise that you had from seeing this observation and every time step we accumulate like this number and once we suppose a certain threshold which is kind of a hyper parameter we just fix it that's something that seems to work so if you suppose this threshold you basically say okay this is now distinct enough from n time steps before so it must be something new it must be a new kind of

location in my map and then you add this thing as a distinct location in your map and you add like a link from the previous location to this one and you start and then you continue further on building the map and this is how you then kind of create this more coarse grained map of your environment and

you can then reason like how should i move from this location to another and you then can you can basically use your your previously visited locations and moves to kind of have a model of how can i move in this space but at the more coarse grade level moving from one location to another and it also means that

by using this surprise on inferred latent space that we infer from visual input, it means that not every edge has the same distance in real space necessarily.

So if the robot is traversing a white hallway where the walls are perfectly white and everything is the same,

Then it will take a long time for this threshold to be reached.

And it will only at larger distances make a new node.

Because everything looks the same anyway.

So there's no extra information that I need to put in the map.

But if you then suddenly see a door, for example, then you suddenly reach your threshold and you add a new location in your map.

And so it's basically the locations in the map are basically defined on

what is the information I got by looking at this thing, rather than how much meters did I traverse in this time.

And that makes it a really interesting way of representing maps, because it's more like how much information is there in this particular location, rather than which xy position is here.

Does it make sense?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And it feels to map onto the distinction between like Kronos and Kairos.

Like in this analogy here, Kronos is the chronometer, it's the watch time, it's the geometry, it's the XY grid, it's one meter.

And then Kairos is like the timeliness of action and the time it takes to complete an action.

And then something being like boring, that's going through a low information hallway.

in the cognitive forging.

It's like, are we there yet?

Driving through this featureless landscape where the salience is low because my predictions are basically being met almost too well.

And there's a lot of other

ways to go with it.

Adam, anything to add?

And also, again, I'm just kind of curious, like, what is the space of the possible graphical structures?

Do you think that this is the only or the sort of grandfather graphical model for hierarchical navigation?

Like, how do we go from imagining this tactics and strategy multi-level model to a graphical model that we believe will be consistent with active inference and amenable to message passing?


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe to add on this last question, I think Kristen has a paper on deep temporal hierarchical models where he basically lays out more generic.

If you're looking at the ultimate generic hierarchical model, you'll find it there where it's basically just an aggregation of states that give rise to observations that go from one state to another

given an action, and then you can add the level on top and level on top and you can keep on adding levels.

And that's kind of the prototypical

hierarchical model, I would say.

And what we see here is kind of particular instantiation where we took some domain knowledge like, OK, for navigation, what would be sensible levels to think about and what would these latent states then what should they represent?

And then, of course, you easily end up like, OK,

At the lowest level, I need to have some state that represents my camera images.

And at the higher level, I want to have some locations in the map.

How do they then relate?

Okay, I probably also want this spot integration.

So maybe I need to have a special first-class citizens here in the form of my posts.

And that's how you basically build up the model from first looking at this prototypical hierarchical model, then looking at, yeah, but in my case, what do I think is sensible?

What could these things mean?

And then try to figure out like, okay, at this stage, we kind of converge on the one hand from top down, like does the math work out to bottom up?

Does this match with my implementation?

And then at some point we converge to this basically.


SPEAKER_01:
So the high road and the low road, they do lead to Rome after all.

Exactly.

Adam, what would you add in there?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, first of all, I love that metaphor just now.

Another thing I would add is, so like, you know, on my end, like, I'm trying to use this as like abstractions for understanding, you know, aspects of like brain functioning.

So let's say we're talking about these, you know, this top level

This is one way of interpreting like, you know, hippocampal place cells.

And these, whether you create a new note or not, based on what threshold of familiarity or surprise, this would potentially be like an example, I think, of an extremely powerful source of individual differences.

Like maybe you could think of this in terms of like Piagetian like assimilation or accommodation.

But you could see like if your thresholds are too low or too high, you could end up representing a domain in ways with that are either like you can get false.

You can get things that are like excessively granular or insufficiently granular to represent the domain.

And you can get different types of errors associated with it.

And so this, for instance, could define

Even things like more like some people will talk like autism to schizophrenia spectrums and to some, there could be like kind of underlying predispositions for this.

And it might actually be, I think that's an oversimplification, but you could think of these thresholds as some cognitive spectrums might just fall out of them as you get different types of minds.

If you have like a more granular, like an overly inclusive or an underly inclusive category structure.

but some other things like just trying on this would be like, if we're talking about this, um, you know, lower level, and if we're thinking of like these, um, like enter rhino grid cells as well, not quite being while the posts here aren't quite grid cells, but the, this idea of like this, um, mapping of your, um,

what your body position is and where you're oriented.

And then having this conjoined with what's in your visual field, and then using these sources of information to mutually constrain each other and using where you are in space.

And these all being necessary, like for instance, this seems to be fundamentally what was needed to get the robots to work.

And we have not so dissimilar sensors and effectors.

And so one thought is, I think it's Guillaume Dubas has, I just messed up his name, but he has this interesting paper on the default mode system, it's called Dark Control, and thinking of it as doing tree search.

But to loop it around,

dispose information it's possible that somewhat like the posterior nodes of the dmn are actually helping to encode this information um like if you go like to the parietal portions that actually might be where is my body where is it reflected and then if you're going like to these midline portions of it um you know what's in my visual field or what am i imagining

And then if you want to go for this future part, that might be the anterior portions.

So like the DMN or the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex maybe coupling with the anterior hippocampus.

But basically, it would seem that the stream, these core aspects of the model might be ways of functionally understanding the core aspects of an agent architecture used for

mental simulation.

There seems to be a striking amount of convergence between the things that people like Tim are identifying as just like, what's necessary?

How do we solve the problem?

And the features of neuronal organization that would be these defaults or canonical processes that you're seeing as really just fundamental.

We call it the default focus.

It's active all the time.

What's it doing?

Maybe part of what it's doing is it's allowing us to do this kind of navigation through space and time.

Yeah, those are some thoughts.


SPEAKER_01:
Navigation through space and time in the sort of territory sense would be clock time and metric space.

What is your X, Y, Z, T?

And then navigation through mental space and time

might have some resonances or analogies, but it's not a piece of grid paper.

So what is it and how does it become realized through ecology, evolution, and development?

So awesome points.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
Real quickly, in terms of the time issue, it seems like there's these multiple ways that time comes in.

It's like one sense of like the sense of time

as you might be doing accumulation based on the frequency with which you're having meaningful informational events.

Like Bud Craig calls it these global emotional moments.

And Anil and others have some, I think with Murray Shanahan, have some interesting models of the sense of time in terms of the amount of information flux through your sensors.

But then there's another kind of time that might actually involve

Over spatial ization of a trajectory and you might be using something like path integration in terms of like how you're doing some types of duration estimation.

Not necessarily just like accumulating like like a sense of accumulation, but some of it might be like where am I in navigating through a timeline.

And I think you'll see this reflected in the way people talk.

And we could dismiss this and say, oh, that's just mere metaphor.

No, I think that metaphor is how we're actually constructing some sense of time, which actually gives us forms of control that we would not have otherwise were we not able to actually extend our minds metaphorically in that way and then be able to basically navigate through spatialized time to keep track of some longer time sequences if we want to plan with respect to them.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, great to see you all.

I was curious in terms of time.

Well, one of the things is, do you think time is, or this process is distributed around different parts of the sensorium processing because different sensorium have different speeds or different rates or different abilities?

And then the other thing coming back to time as well is people can be going through time

They can be like, or they can be, time can come towards them, or time can be sort of developing around them, which often happens in Asian cultures.

Time is seen more as something that's around them.

So I'm curious, like, how these ideas of temporality might link to the ways that we imagine ourselves with our sensorum.


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, if it is indeed the case that some forms of the spatialization, if it is the case that spatializing time is happening both in some cases through some fairly abstract metaphorical and linguistic constructions, then this would imply that you should be able to get meaningful cultural differences

based on these shared constructions and maybe even some like quasi like warfian effects where like linguistic modifications could actually um change the way people are seeing themselves and others in relation to time with some fairly significant consequences so um our warfian effects to unpack the jargon of just like um you know the idea that the um our thought is constrained in some meaningful way by the uh

constraints and affordances of our language are constraints and affordances on the way we think.


SPEAKER_04:
There's like stronger and weaker versions of that hypothesis.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, blue.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's interesting because as we've been talking about like spatial maps and spatial context, like spatial representation, navigating through space, I have been thinking a lot about semantic navigation also, like when we're looking for a thought, when we're looking for, we're navigating, forging for information or, you know, in these context rich domains.

And I just wonder what,

Is the semantic navigation related to, linked to, is there overlap in the brain in the way that we process semantic orientation and representation and space also?

So I'm just curious.


SPEAKER_01:
Hashtag maps of meaning.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah maybe uh i can uh i can respond on this from from my perspective and then i'll probably have to leave you guys um but so i think one of the most important things at least to me uh of of how this this whole endeavor of of constructing this uh and and doing this together with adam is that

we basically we start off with uh with robot navigation which is from a roboticist perspective it's really like about x and y position and about times and seconds but what we do here is we by by creating this model we basically get rid of this

close tie of being grounded in seconds and meters, basically.

I think this is one of the most crucial aspects of our model, because it shows that, well, on the one hand, I think we all agree that we don't get born measuring time in seconds and measuring space in meters.

So,

that we actually get at least the framework that also gets rid of these these metrics and just learns to navigate in this more abstract space and if we can get it to work for

for navigation per se, moving through actual physical space, then I'm pretty sure that we can also extend the model further to navigate any abstract space.

Because in the end, once we are at the

once we get the level above our our sensory inputs then everything is in our case just a learned latent thing basically so if we can if we can make this work for physical navigation i think we are already a

a big step closer to making it work for any navigation.

And indeed, we come to the realm of like, okay, I have lots of memories.

These are tied together somehow because how these memories just came to be

Can I now navigate this space towards the memory that I'm looking for?

Or if you are solving a math problem, how do you navigate the space of math equations to get the solution for this thing?

I think once we get rid of

the time and space that are so tight for your sensorium and move towards a more abstract space and be able to navigate that, this is the crucial bit here, I would say.

And so with that, I'd like to thank you for the discussion until now.

I'll try to be there next week as well and join the discussion further.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Tim.

Cool.

Very interesting.

And also speaking to that cultural basis, there was the inch, foot, pound paradigm.

And that has, in certain places, also coexisted or been complementary or contradictory with the centimeters, grams, second based upon something different.

And what would happen if a larva was born and the little one, the second, was like what we call three seconds?

Is that just a more chill larva?

Because every...

One of its moments is taking a few more heartbeats.

It can actually take a breath per little one.

So there's a lot that we probably don't even know how much we don't know until we're in feedback with these models that both fully realize not just in the equations, but in the actual robotics

grounding us in those actual observations of red green blue pixel intensities which is like what adam was saying that robotics are are an empirical platform to be studying the nature of cognition and brain and mind and then here is where we move into a different space and time and so that is an excellent point by tim stephen yeah so following on from what you're saying daniel is um


SPEAKER_03:
I know Tim just mentioned about, you know, have the abstracted ideas.

But there's also maybe the grounded, you mentioned grounded ways of knowing.

So it might be that the future we abstract out what we think it might be.

And then there may be ways where we feel what's right, what feels.

So you hit a door.

and you feel there's an information affordance and it can ground.

So I was wondering how much that supports not needing to have the metrics, like you say, and maybe the metrics that we've created, like the second, are partly because they're at that kind of sweet spot or somehow close to a sweet spot of what sort of makes sense.

You know, someone had to decide on a foot or a hand, you know, so...

Was it the small person's hand or was it the big person's hand?

And they sort of said, well, what about John?

And maybe he was the king.

I don't know.

But it got decided somehow.

So I think this is a good question about grounding versus abstraction.

I don't know what the thoughts are on that.

Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
This higher level in a purely metric model, it could be like, well, on the bottom level, we're dealing with centimeters and 100 millisecond frames.

And the coarse graining is at the level of 100 times the spatial distance and 100 times the temporal distance.

What this model is doing is something different.

And I think that is, again, this biological inspiration, which is that what is happening in the level that the action perception loop is nested within is not just a bigger version of

Well, it both is and isn't because it has some resonance graphical structures that support the composability and attractability of act-inf models, yet also it's doing something that's categorically different, which is navigating in a more topological space rather than the more geometric space down the bottom.

What are you thinking about, Adam?


SPEAKER_05:
It seems like with the

well i guess one is i suspect it is me on no coincidence that seconds are about the time extent that they are and that we have like the metric units we use like a foot or a meter or a yard in terms of like in terms of grounding and in terms of connection to affordance it's like a second for maybe you know um a relation to a certain

maybe like a heart rate or certain like biophysical pattern generators, or like the scope of working memory being an iconic memory, being stable on different scales or like a yard or a meter, like the, basically the reach that you'd have your arm, like, like Perry personal space and like a field of affordances around your body where it's particularly concentrated.

And so,

These are ways in which the granularity of our modeling would be influenced by language, or language would reflect it and maybe, to different extents, influence it.

But you would have this other kind of granularity of space that might be different for different species, but also within a species and within an individual.

For instance, the hippocampal system will lay out these tilings of space.

For a task domain and they'll have like a kind of they'll be refreshed like maybe it looks like like every like three seconds or so, but if you're in like a big space.

But this tiling will actually have hexagonal arrays or hexagonal time it'll fill whatever space it's in and it'll have different levels of granularity.

And so, if you're in like a big space it's going to necessarily be less granular.

And if you're in a small space, it'll probably be more granular.

And there's other things that will influence the granularity also.

There's a brainstem locomotor nuclei that are detecting how fast are you moving.

And then this will influence the granularity of your of space.

And so that's some of it.

some of this what is relevant, some of this are greening of a domain, some of it will be reflected by these basically innate architectural inductive biases, and some of them will be more socioculturally constructed.

One thing before moving on is I like how Tim, as he left, that was one hell of a mic drop.

So he's already solved, in terms of kinds of grounding, not only is this potentially a way of having an architecture capable of navigating conceptual domains and abstractions, basically what Bengio calls System 2 AI,

or what some would call strong AI.

But it's also grounding in that it actually works as a control system for an embodied embedded agent.

And so now you might have a single system capable of both giving you symbol grounding by allowing something to be in the world alongside other agents and have actual semantics in terms of pointing to things in the world.

So you can have a semantic network

Just like symbols pointing at symbols.

But ultimately, such a system would allow you to ground up your semantic network in things in the world and shared symbols.

And so, I mean, ultimately, this is a path to, you know, who knows how far, you know, anyone working on it today gets.

But this is ultimately a path to AGI built that takes on an activist principles of what you would need to do so.

Which is more than a little exciting, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I'm starting to see why people are interested in this.

Excellent point about the symbolic semantics and logic and how that connects to the inactive insight, the pragmatic turn, ecological psychology, biosemiosis, all of these features that get left on the cutting block if we take a computational linguistics approach only.

Computational linguistics plus the mouth movement

already one has incorporated that pragmatic turn in that embodiment element and that's quite a different model than just the substrate independent symbol manipulator stephen


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think it's exciting, indeed, because it can open up a lot of... I'm really interested in mental space psychology and peripersonal space and working with space as an instrument.

And, well, I'm more than interested in it.

That's my main focus in many ways.

But what's really been the challenge is giving it a plausible bridge, right?

Because they're working primarily, you're looking at what action policies are

and what has been enacted.

And it's very hard to go back to observations because you're coming from the other direction.

So I think it'd be really interesting to see what this robot, whether you could actually see, well, what kind of robot is this robot?

What's it like?

What kind of story patterning gets triggered by this robot?

And maybe if I...

it grew up with a slightly heavier wheel on one side or something it has a slightly different um character you know so i mean i wonder if there's a kind of an actual uh a way that the action policies themselves start to encode a certain personality based on the physicality and sensorum that get weighted


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, that would be like, in terms of this generalization of slam principles as a way of understanding cognition more generally, I think that would be a great test case.

And those are the kinds of hypotheses you would look for.

If your wheel is weighted more heavily on one side or the other, that could have all sorts of things.

For instance, what Tim was describing with this node creation, where it's not just a function of metrics, but on

information.

And the and so this creates like a distorted space, but but an adaptively distorted space, you would expect usually, because multiple forms of value are influencing the granularity of this sort of space, like necessarily is like a map, it's like space is a graph, but but a graph being shaped by multiple kinds of value.

And so you would expect things like like that kind of real asymmetry you're talking about to result

in different kinds of graph spaces.

And this could then potentially have some transfer more generally across more than just physical spaces in theory.

Also,

Coming back to that granularity issue, let's say the way you move through the world is quicker or slower.

That itself then might have transferred not just to, well, how is it that I'm representing the space I'm physically moving through, but that then can get reflected in cognitive styles in terms of the way you relate to semantic spaces, in terms of the way you're going to forage through them, what you consider to be near or far connections.

This is the kind of...

that would be like a whole research program, which would be, but using this as like a source of bridging principles of like, so some connection between embodied experience and then more abstract thinking.

Well, maybe this is a source of some of the ways in which concrete embodied experiences go on to shape basically thought on the more abstract level as well.


SPEAKER_01:
very very interesting and especially when we think about the mental action papers that we've read like live stream number 25 with sanford smith et al about metacognition as mental action and so in this two-level robotics case

talking about the sort of lower level motion and then the higher level navigation of locations where we can say i want to go to the post office and then the grocery store but then we have this more tactical taking a step time scale that's a lot faster if this bottom layer is based upon cognition and perception also this higher level is not just navigation in

the warehouse, that's actually like, where do I want to be in my regime of attention?

Or what would I like to be considering from a metacognitive perspective?

How do I navigate to a place where I prefer what's healthy for me?

So there's all kinds of other questions about navigation in parameter spaces that are not just like topologically the cousin of the warehouse space, but truly in the mental space fully.

Blue, and then Steve.


SPEAKER_00:
So since we brought up hierarchical here in the paper, it looks like and I mean, I can hold this for Tim, Adam, too, if you don't feel comfortable talking about it.

But maybe maybe you're good in the hierarchical space.

It seems that it's just a core screening like in this paper.

So like, you know, the higher level is just like a coarse grained version of what happens at the lower level.

And it's easy to see how that takes place or take shape in like a topographical way.

it doesn't leave a lot of room for emergence.

And I wonder, like, if we jump to thinking about a semantic space, you know, we have words and we've got the relationships with words to each other, proximity, you know, how close do you expect to find, you know, there to was or whatever.

So how linked are the words together in a semantic space?

But I wonder if, you know, you can go into topic modeling and that gives you like a kind of a core screening.

But is there more room for emergence in that kind of space, maybe?

Or what other, how do you, I don't know, how would you just allow for emergent things to come through in this kind of hierarchical modeling or mapping?


SPEAKER_05:
I think when Tim comes back, it could be worth it for him to go into more detail on the

parameters that go into node creation or not.

Because I feel like to the extent that you're getting some flexibility in ways of understanding like emergence, that would be your models of emergence.

And that would be like where you would basically create this coarse grained ontology of different levels of granularity.

What

what constitutes like an occasion for core screening of what kinds?

It seems like the node creation would be where your, your assumptions about that of what kinds of emergency you might be dealing with.

That's where we'd come into this kind of model.

Is it rich enough to account for like all, I wouldn't quite say that in terms of like, you know, all the different forms of emergency you can get.

So some of it, you know,

But by enough, I mean enough to be a full on general intelligence.

But I do think there is room for some flexibility there at that parameterization of Tim's model.

But he would explain it better than I would.


SPEAKER_01:
i'll make a comment and then ask a question in the chat and then also see you steven so um it was mentioned that uh there is the embodiment of certain prior information in the continuous attractor network like if my position is this and i move forward then that is putting me into this different position in the can and um

Blue asked about topic modeling and semantic spaces.

So that territory is different.

So the maps should be appropriately different.

And so we could say, for example, like California is nested within the United States.

That is not violating any geographical priors.

But what about a paper that's interdisciplinary?

that might be at the intersection of two different topics, or depending on how those topic models are generated, one could think of every paper as existing across 100 different topics to different quantitative amounts.

And so it actually does bring us to this question, which Sid has asked, which is we're hearing a lot in the paper, in the natural speech and so on, different complementarities.

lower and higher so here where the lower model is the finer scale and the the red i'm trying not to mix metaphors but lower and higher is sometimes used with inner and outer or finer and coarser coarse graining more specific more general so what is that restaurant where those are the dishes

could it something be above or below and you get it but it could also be more like a kernel and more like the fruit and you get it and it could be more like sand or more like gravel and you would get it what does that mean or say we'll think and then allow adam to speak first


SPEAKER_05:
I think that's a deep and complex question.

And there's a couple of levels or a couple of entry points there.

But one thing is, like you mentioned, like inner and outer is another way of describing as opposed to higher and lower.

And there's a, I think, connection between this latent slam architecture and meta learning, where you're having like a more fine grained process for like

that's more task specific and for like adaptive fine grained couplings.

But then you nest that or you create like an outer loop, which is like a slower aggregation process that's coarser, but then allows for sharing of information across episodes.

So it's a kind of like so this is basically a kind of meta learning system and giving you this divide and conquer approach of like levels of granularity.

I don't think

anyone quite knows yet what the significance of this is.

But one interesting thing about the grid cells is they seem to have a multi-scale hierarchy in their organization in terms of there's this axis.

I believe as you go within entorhinal cortex, as you go more dorsal to ventral or more superior to inferior,

you'll get these discrete cutoffs of potentially implying some kind of harmonic nesting of scales, maybe even coupling with multi-scale synchronous dynamics in cortex, unclear.

But there does seem to be these multiple scales reflected in grid scales, in internal crystals having different levels of granularity of their spatial representations.

And the thing that's interesting, I'm curious about is like, what are the, or one thing I'm curious about is like, to what degree, for instance, do different like neuromodulator systems, like some of the ways in which like they could be understood in terms of like them having their functions is maybe like influencing which granularity is most present, like moving into like now in a situation of like attending to like the fine granules and, or,

this is a situation where we're going to really go course and just ignore those details.

And that some neuromodulatory systems, their effects on neural dynamics might actually be best explained, might be well explained in terms of this adaptive changing of the granularity.


SPEAKER_01:
Very cool.

And we see that in teamwork where sometimes it's time to control paste and just fill out the spreadsheet.

Other times it's time to add a column to the spreadsheet.

Other times there are this open-endedness to the task and including the local objectives and also even broader mission and one's own relationship to the team and the project.

perhaps if there's a similar biological substrate, then it would stand to reason that there could be multiple representations that are emitted from some kind of common generative model.

Steven?


SPEAKER_05:
So one thing that I'm actually really interested in is exploring these SLAM principles in the insect case, because they have analogous and potentially largely homologous systems with the central complex.

And I feel like that's an area I'm looking to look into next is to really understand these things, not just looking at the mammal case, but I want to look at the insect case with the central complex and see the similarities and differences.

What special adaptations were there?

To what extent are the functions realized by similar means or different means?

But in terms of a way of understanding things like that neuromodulator hypothesis of influencing the granularity of spatial modeling,

It's possible, although I wouldn't necessarily bet on it based on conversations with you, David, but it's possible that you're getting extensive homology and common significances for things like flexible influence of the granularity of the forging parameters.

It's possible those are remarkably conserved and that you might actually see them.

That being said, like you also were alluding to, though, the SLAM instance is different in insects in that this is a multi-SLAM.

In general, there's a lot of multi-SLAM happening in vertebrates also, but I think not to the same degree.

And so you might expect some potentially substantial differences there as a result of the SLAM problem having that additional set of challenges and sources of information it can leverage.


SPEAKER_01:
I can't wait for solitary wasp slam and eusocial colony slam.

Steven?


SPEAKER_03:
From what I'm hearing, you could correlate these multi-slams to regimes of attention in many ways, because that could dictate the nature of these granularities and where they are in the space, in the place, in the body.

we often assume i think when blue was saying there about there's there's inner outer and the some of those are also false assumptions that that rolls out over everything that we assume so in the sense that inner is purer and higher is purer but often um that might depend on the multi-slam that's been dunked at the time


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, like coarser and finer, slower and faster.

So one interpretation would be that the slower timescale is the coarser graining in the sense that it's like seconds, not milliseconds, and the finer is the faster.

but there's also maybe an interpretation where actually the, if you're clicking up mile by mile instead of foot by foot, that is actually moving faster and it's coarser.

And if you're counting grains of sand at a time, it's finer and slower.

So I think even sometimes the direction that one interprets is not there, but it doesn't remove the dialectical nature or the intermodal nature, but the way that, is it gonna be like,

A sugar with all the OHs pointing down or all the OHs pointing up or some blend.

It has to go one way or the other, but maybe it doesn't have to be any one specific way.

Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
So I am wondering, and this is also interesting in terms of the insect case, if there's some kind of, maybe like a generic, free-installed, readily adaptable, coarse-grained version of a place cell that's just kind of there as a generic representation.

Like a perfect example, I mean, when you're thinking about core screening, like a map and a location, like you know where everything is in your house, like you know where your bathroom is and you know where all the things are.

But, you know, when you travel, you have an expectation, even if you've never been to the hotel before, you have the expectation of what the elevator is going to sound like.

how the carpet all looks the same with that funky weird pattern and the hallways twist and turn and like when you get into the hotel room there's going to be a bathroom and there's going to be a window and there's going to be a bed and a tv and a remote so you have this like pre-generic supposition of how the hotel is going to look does that live in a play cell somewhere that just like morphs into oh the bathroom's here and the light's here so that you're not stumbling around in the middle of the night like

And similarly, like there's all kinds of, when you go out hiking, you know, you expect there to be trees and rocks and stuff outside.

And so do you just like mash your map onto like some preexisting generic place holder, a place cell place holder?

It's interesting to think about.


SPEAKER_01:
it's like a prior for the abstract space.

It's a prior distribution over hotel rooms, which is totally encultured and totally based upon experience.

And then either one is surprised or not, just as when any other prior meets sense.

Adam, what do you think of that, Steve?


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, these are details that are definitely like half or beyond the edge of anything I or maybe anyone knows.

But the

I guess just like these, how many different, so one way that these place fields are sometimes modeled is in terms of like these like chained attractors.

And so like within the hippocampal system, like you can get like this highly recurrent activity, especially in some of the subfields.

And you can set up like this set of these densities of

recurrent activity and then you can have like information kind of moving between them as a like predictive map not just of like not just like here's the things but you know people debate how the best things like Gershman talks about successor representations but that there's a transition structure of which attractor will act which of the places will activate first in the sequence and

And so I guess the question, the question I'm wondering is like, so like, you know, you're encountering like a new scene and you're like laying down like a set of landmarks or a tiling of space, like to what degree is this information encoded in, in what circumstances and to what degree is it encoded in like the local connectivity within the hippocampal system and whether you're getting like this set of schemas that you're going to like draw up like the most similar one based on

some like degree of similarity will cause like one attractor network to get pulled up over another and now this is the timeline you're working within and this is like the policies the the policy set you're like would be pulling from and this is your framing of the domain um or to what degree is it relying more heavily on like the moments and moments um like cortical dynamics and like the mental simulation that might be happening and like to which extent like is it constrained

by the history of plasticity within the hippocampus, what schemas are going to be operative?

And to what degree is it more of a negotiation where it's going to be more ad hoc, more determined by the moment-to-moment contingencies and this funneling through the whole cortical virtual reality machinery or whatever you want to think of it?

And to what degree is this?

There's not one answer.

This varies both across and within individuals.

that this is actually like a core aspect of cybernetic functioning is actually leaning more heavily on the priors or the current of established over more learning ethics or leaning more on the situationally specific factors.

Like how much do you shoehorn what's going on into your existing schemas?

How much do you simulate?

How much do you accommodate?

And that this being potentially like a flexible parameter and maybe some of that flexibility is

like baked into the logic of neuromodulators like actually flexibly influencing this uh unclear but like yeah so very very edge of anything i know but it's it's very much like part of the excitement for me is like wondering like is this like um does this provide like like a functional and algorithmic significance for like

this otherwise just mess of biological details?

Do some of them have elegant cybernetic understandings by virtue of thinking of these kinds of questions?


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just respond really quick?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, please, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
That made me think a whole bunch about like, maybe we don't need a map, a place self for each individual hotel room, but it's like a node when we were discussing nodes earlier, like a coarse grained, just an attractor space, like dump all of the hotel room maps into this little nodule so that when you get to a hotel room, it's all the same.

thing like it's okay i've been here before even if you've never been to that kind of place and and that would kind of explain things like deja vu like when you get to a place like i've been here before when did i come here like when you're driving down the street didn't i just drive down the street you it just is lumped over there into that little attractor mesh node that that's not necessarily a specific place but just like a squishy ball of similar places


SPEAKER_01:
And also, I really love how we spoke about some of these things, Adam, in your collaboration with Colin DeYoung, Cybernetic Big Five, in livestream number 13, I think at the beginning of 2021.

And now we're revisiting.

Same but different.

The more things change, the more they stay the same.

And this idea of like modulatory features of cybernetic systems as being important for variation within and among individuals is just such an essential point.

And it's so true that a lot of the details are yet to be resolved.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, you could go a bit further still, because what if you don't have maps put to one side, but there's action policies

actually have interest in how much this is feasible but action policies that recapitulate something like a map so like by an embodiment by an inactive chain of or initiation of some actions at different scales it basically recapitulates some sort of uh nascent starting point so you don't have to have any representations there and like when the door is

engaged the set of actions that that does that creates could open up an effectively a map um so i don't know how much between i mean i know in this model it does start to create a network of attractors but i'm wondering whether how much things could be sparked off from engage in a particular affordance a particular meaningfulness in something


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, there's actually a live debate about the extent to which... So Tolman initially was talking about the hippocampal cognitive map.

And part of the reason people like to talk about maps is because of the flexibility they give you in terms of if you... Like the map serves as a generative model and it gives you like a...

I can flexibly access it to generate trajectories.

But you can do that with a well-structured graph also.

But there's a spectrum of interpretations of people thinking that you're dealing with more things that are more map-like and things that are more context-specific and graph-like and flexible and more dynamically constructed.

And it seems like

It's kind of a cop-out, but in general, I always take every debate, and I'm like, you're probably both right.

And so it's like you want, for the sake of, I guess, maybe stability or for the sake of potentially greater transfer of understandings and inferential power across episodes, you might want something more map-like.

But if you go too map-like, you're losing the ability to deal with the nuances of specific contexts.

And so...

So this, again, might be different perspectives on the same thing that tend to converge with trade-offs.

You could have more context-sensitive or more situationally invariant representations, and these could reflect cognitive styles and maybe fundamental axes of variation for cognition and sense-making.

One thing that's

In terms of like cybernetics, Daniel pointed out like earlier, like, you know, like Jordan Peterson, like part of like, it's actually interesting that maps of meeting Peterson's book was actually heavily informed by Yacht-Pangsepp's affective neuroscience and ecological models more generally, like based on things like animal foraging.

So I actually think that's where Jordan Peterson got that rhetoric about maps is actually from doing a kind of affective neuroscience perspective, grounded

in this ecological perspective of foraging animals.

And so, yeah, I think that's actually where that came from.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, very nice.

And I think I agree.

We may have even explored as such.

In one paper, Reimagining Maps, that I wrote with RJ and a colleague, Mikel,

we learned about this historical distinction between archival maps and itinerary maps and today we just think about maps as being like one more lumpy category but there's many differences between the map that actually is like a multi-map or mega map and holds a lot of information potentially in a metric way versus the itinerary map

head straight until you see the two big trees, then you're gonna wanna take a left, that type of more conversational or casual or navigable map that is highly contextual.

And with current map systems, that's one of the challenges because we have that mega map, it's downloadable, but it's not gonna fit on your phone.

So what is the projection that's contextual and situational that's actually gonna enable effective action

that is also going to be perceived as map-like by the user.

Yes, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
So this is like a personal attack in question.

So anybody who spent any kind of time with Daniel knows that he's constantly drawing or writing or writing things down, like all the time, taking notes, taking notes, taking notes.

And I wonder, like, can you take your notes as like a mental map of where you were at that time that you were making that drawing?

Like, does it like...

recapitulate your conversations that you were having, the ideas that were running through your head.

Can you use these drawings that you're always doing as a kind of conversational mental space map?


SPEAKER_01:
If anything, it's the opposite.

I just leave the thought behind.

And if we look at this, I think, okay, something happened by which we wrote this down.

It would be awesome if there was many people with their regime of attention on taking live notes.

I know that's not an approach for everybody, but then we could all look at that shared pheromone distribution

and then make it new again.

And maybe we remember our exact previous thought, though that's impossible, or unlikely.

But instead, we can make the relationship with the material and with those notes like new again.

Steven?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, maybe a little harder to categorize with language.

But in a way, it's the traces of your action policies, even if it was capturing

The interpretation.

So one thing I'm very interested in is how we realign things to action.

Because we've kind of been enculturated to think it's all about thoughts and feelings, right?

And because active inference puts it in this other domain, well, what does that mean?

And how do we talk about active inference when we're enculturated to think through other things?

natural ways of using english i'm finding that a big challenge myself but i think so as you're laying down those traces are you showing your action policies of how to record something rather than your thoughts if that makes sense and is your thoughts always slightly hidden


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, great question.

Just like we were thinking about earlier with a sort of substrate, implicit, agnostic, ignored, linguistic, symbolic models, like a Turing tape.

It has infinite space and it can just make infinite grammar.

And so that sort of purely symbolic approach to language.

and then its relationship to thought and experience is one question.

But when we think about finite actual sequences of language use and deployment as action, either keyboard typing or assisted typing technology, or speaking as also a motor action,

it totally changes the game because we're not just in this forest of infinite plausible grammars, but rather one realized and preferred action sequence.

And then, of course, thoughts are unobserved, but the actions are not.

And that's the whole...

um quantum reference frame and share generative model and rhetorical nature narrative nature of cognition and so indeed the the action insight I think is going to be something that we'll keep returning to um we'll have a final closing the plane or whatever and um I'll also just

give a little preview which is that next week we're going to be having a guest stream with Adam so if it relates at all Adam how does it relate what is the guest stream going to be about and then um perhaps in your absence what would be exciting to discuss in 42.2 um no you're right there is a guest stream


SPEAKER_05:
A quick thought though.

So like Blue, you were suggesting like Daniel's notes could serve almost like a kind of memory palace and accessible map.

And then Daniel, you're saying it's more like a stigmatistic mechanism for coordination, like with pointing and cueing.

And that's interesting.

I wonder if when people are reading books, the ability to use the book as a map slash palace gives you better retention than something like a Kindle.

Like the book is like a physical object.

Anyways, so oh yeah, free will.

And so for next week, I would say that basically, so my over hypothesis is that many of the details

that Tim is using for these systems will end up being relevant as abstract interpretations of the core parameters of us as active inferential cybernetic systems, both with respect to basically the basics of it lets us be in the world in an embodied way as living robots.

also in terms of their extension to high-level cognition, scaling active inference to more complex domains.

And so in general, I'm trying to understand with limited success as many details as I can of Tim's work, because I think it's just some of the most promising sources of constraints we have on inference interpretations and sources of hypotheses.

basically whatever details tim is willing to get into i think it would be well well worthwhile to try to grok those and that's what i'm that's what i'm doing um in terms of uh next week uh so some of this is relevant in that um the basic idea would be that um

these LeBay phenomenon, these studies in which people are seeing these slowly building potentials leading up to action that have predictive information, but where they peak in advance of people claiming that they have decided to take actions and where these studies are interpreted as evidence that people don't have free will and we can get into all sorts of conversations about how it makes sense to think of free will in different ways, whether it makes sense to talk about it at all.

but that these studies are usually interpreted as saying that your consciously experienced mental states cannot enter causal streams leading to action.

And so what I'm suggesting is that is not the case and that there's multiple ways in which your subjective states are meaningfully causal.

If we think of what's leading up to something like deciding to move your hand in like a labette experiment,

if that is reflecting a buildup of model evidence over your proprioceptive pose or of you deciding to take that action this kind of evidence accumulation if it's occurring via sophisticated affective inference that this would be a way of understanding it and that part of what would influence how much buildup or not you get would be the specifics of this basically deep tree search

from sophisticated, that we might understand as sophisticated affective inference, as being orchestrated by the hippocampal and entorhinal system as iterative mental stimulation, where you're sampling out these different possibilities of, hmm, what would it be like if I move my arm or not?

And then you're then evaluating that, and you're peeling off these different counterfactuals, and that if across these you get enough

affective charge associated with going down some of these forks eventually this results in threshold crossing but the idea would be that this would be relevant to some of the hippocampal slam work and that you can think of this imaginative planning stage leading up to even seemingly spontaneous actions you can think of this like imaginative phase as being largely orchestrated

by the hippocampal system which might be best understood as a general system for uh or a system for generalized foraging and mapping i don't know if that made sense but that's like some of the connections wow if you still want to come for the guest stream you're welcome to do so


SPEAKER_01:
No, thanks for the awesome summary.

And I know that we'll be able to unpack it a lot more next week.

Blue or Steven, what are some last thoughts?

What was exciting or interesting to you in where we've been and where shall we forage next?


SPEAKER_00:
So I can go.

I was really interested in taking this into semantic space.

And I wonder what other kind of spaces that we can maybe think about mapping out

how we build, how we construct maps, cognitive space, and so forth.

And I'm excited to talk to Tim about where Emergence fits into the hierarchical model.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you, Blue.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think keeping the idea

keeping things clean, keeping things nascent and deflatory, even in this case here, is really something I think to continue looking at.

And I'm really curious about what happens when we see that door and that door says you can go down that corridor.

Am I going to go down into a different corridor

regime of attention, I'm gonna stay where I am.

So I think that ability to take these principles and say, okay, what is it that happens when I encounter something and it triggers something?

How much is that?

significant in terms of making things happen and i'm curious then how that can marry with a lot of the mental space work that i do building out metaphor landscapes or actually letting someone explore spatially and one last thing actually that came up and someone said to me that the other day is that he's really curious why when he picks up his plastic pencil it doesn't mean as much to him as when he holds a shell

So there's something about like when that door has got some prior, there's something that you know about being in the woodland versus being somewhere which is dead.

And even that itself could explain a lot about how navigating those places, the eco-psychology of going into a wooded space, a living place, actually can be important for people just in a wellness, what might seem a very woo-woo,


SPEAKER_01:
uh type of stuff actually could be somehow linked to what we're talking about here so yeah brilliant thanks awesome yeah very exciting and fun discussion i really like that last piece which is what i know i'm gonna carry forward and hopefully reflect on next week how will we build that colony is it a memory palace blueprint

is it stigmatic coordination but how and so somewhere between the um mental Palace Cathedral and the sort of picking up pebbles and having no bigger picture is where we are in our cognitive and social Maps and so

that's quite an area and Adam the central complex modeling I can't wait so thank you all for joining thanks Tim also so Adam Steven and blue and Sid and Dean in the chat so thanks everybody and see you next time

## IXJn-BMsKVw

SPEAKER_02:
right hello and welcome everyone it's april 27 2022 and we're in acton lab live stream number 42.2

Welcome to the Act-Inf Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is recorded in an archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll follow good video etiquette for live streams.

Check out activeinference.org to learn more about what's happening in the lab.

right well here we are in 42.2 we're in our third discussion around the paper robot navigation as hierarchical active inference by the authors listed here and

this is a discussion where we're going to pick up on a few different threads that were arising in the dot one and have a lot of time to explore some of the formalisms and the robotics aspects of the project and take any questions that people are bringing up and just randomly posting in the live chat

so we'll just start with introductions and saying hello and then we'll jump to where we were leaving for last time or leaving for this time from last time and then just see where we go so I'm Daniel I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass to blue I'm blue I'm a researcher in New Mexico and I will pass it to Tim


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, I'm Tim.

I'm a researcher in Genz, Belgium.

I'm one of the co-authors of the paper, so feel free to ask me anything.


SPEAKER_02:
Wow.

Three researchers walk into a .2.

Do you have that kind of joke over there, Tim?


SPEAKER_05:
We'll see how it evolves, this joke.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, we had a few different notes down.

So anyone who wants to pick one of these threads up or we can return to some of the formalisms and questions about the robotics, but we're just going to pick up a thread and start with whoever wants to go first.

So we mentioned different detail and implementation and just like fun stories or things that happened in the implementation.


SPEAKER_05:
the idea of different types of maps and where does emergence fit into this maybe one thing i could uh i could elaborate on is basically from the last stream i think blue brought up the idea of um

When you enter a hotel room, everything kind of looks familiar.

Rather, you might have never entered that particular hotel room, right?

And the question was, how could this arise from this kind of model?

Because here it's still kind of very tightly coupled to whatever you're observing in that particular environment, and it doesn't really seem to scale to something else, which is correct.

And so for this kind of understanding, I think you will need to build a system that goes even higher in hierarchy and higher in abstraction levels.

And I've been thinking about this kind of emergence slash kind of models that could give this kind of behavior.

And I think at some point,

you'll need to have a model that is completely reasoning in abstract concepts rather than observations that you can observe in your sensory streams.

So I could imagine that you build a layer on top of this model.

So here you basically go from

camera inputs to a graph-based representation of your environment.

I could imagine that you repeat this for many different kinds of environments, which yields you a number of graphs that map to that particular environment.

and that at that point you start kind of looking for patterns in this repertoire of graphs that you that you visited in the past and you start

figuring out structure in these graphs like bedrooms all have like a bed and maybe a closet, whereas kitchens rather have a fridge and a sink and that you kind of see these kind of repeating things in certain graphs and that at this level you kind of make

a model that classifies each type of environment into such a category, which will then inform you or give you a prior on what kind of graph to expect in a hotel room, for example.

I realize that I'm talking in very vague and abstract ideas here, because we don't have it yet.

I think that's kind of the way how to how it could be done.

And I look very much forward to actually head into this research direction as well, in particular.

So if we would think about how would I implement it, then I would start with first applying the current system on a bunch of environments that have like a

like two different categories for example um so uh and then kind of learn a model on these graph structures and in particular these these current evolutions in graph neural nets might might be a an interesting route to take to see can you learn representations of

graphs or parts of the graphs and and like build the latent codes that that generates similar style graphs basically and then you can kind of navigate to real environments then learn a model that that builds similar graphs and then use that model to kind of imagine potentially similar looking environments

But still, this will be so if we would implement it purely on this level, I imagine it will still be very much tied to the observation level, like you could generate potential camera frames that kind of look like it's like creating a generic model on this LSU and bedrooms data set.

So you can kind of generate novel kind of bedrooms.

but it's still very much tied to the pixel level.

Whereas I think to go to a more semantic and human level reasoning like we do, then at some point you'll have to start to have more understanding, carving up the observation space into different kind of objects and have these kind of representations which are totally not in the current model.

And yeah, you'll need to have some understanding at that level before you can have reasoning like, okay, I go to a hotel room and I expect there to find the TV and remote control for TV, basically.

But yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, that's super interesting and kind of a good maybe tie in to like, I was also thinking about different kinds of maps

more than just over some kind of spatial scenario.

And the one obvious idea that comes to mind is like a semantic map over language in natural language processing and using this kind of hotel room scenario as a topic, like in the topic of politics, you expect to find right-wing, left-wing, conservative, liberal, like you expect to find all of these words in the topic of politics if you're trying to model a topic.

And I just wonder what other, if either of you guys have ever thought about other kinds of spaces that can be mapped over like this, like physical space, semantic space, where else can we build maps where we can kind of implement this type of navigation?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, that's a very interesting question.

And actually, I think one of the core hypotheses that Adam and I are investigating is basically that

anything that is related to to our cognition is it basically stems from building a kind of map and then navigating it and how this could be more concretized for different kinds of maps of course this is a huge huge effort and you'll need to have like experts on a certain domain in order to kind of

think about is this possible and how could it be?

And for some topics, it's pretty obvious, like navigation, for instance.

And the semantic modeling that you mentioned, I think it's also

Intuitively, you can relate to how you can build a map from this and relate it.

There's also the work from James Whittington on the Dolman-Eichenbaum machine that goes in a similar direction, where he basically builds a system that also

through navigating a structure, tries to infer certain relationships.

And he also applies the same model on different kinds of tasks.

So, for example, one task is also navigation, but like navigation in the grid world, like you go north, east, west, south, and then you expect to be in the same location again.

But he also applies it like on family trees, like...

John is the father of Daniel, and then Daniel is the brother of Blue, then you could infer who is the sister of Daniel, for example.

And he also maps this in navigating a space and learning how relationships, which are then like taking actions in the map, it's like following the

the broader arrow, it's like it's taken an action in the physical map, let's say.

And then you basically have to traverse through the family tree only once, but then you basically know all the relationships and you can start navigating and make these kind of inference.

So this is actually pretty cool work.

And there was another, I think there was another task we also applied it on.

There are some tasks where it's really obvious how to do it.

There are plenty of others where it's not so obvious.

But yeah, somewhere Adam and I basically think, yeah,

this is kind of anything should be mappable to the system and and this could then be like a universal way of of how how did humans come to uh thinking in in these kind of abstract levels well basically because they evolved from a very good mapping and navigation system and that's kind of the the main idea so if we can solve

how to build a map and then navigate it, first on the navigation level, and then on a more abstract level, then we might be on the way to kind of a general system for a reason.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, Bla, thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, that was super helpful.

So I really, yeah, that opened up a lot of doors.

So in relationship to another project that Daniel and I are working on, it seems like from the family tree, then it would be easy to map over like a genetic space, a genomic space, or even like a phylogenetic space from one species to the next.

or even like mapping over recipes, like when you're cooking or even like different types of art.

So just kind of anywhere where there's the adjacent possible, it seems like that's where you can construct these kinds of maps.

That's really neat.


SPEAKER_03:
I think the main thing is how


SPEAKER_05:
how do you transfer the action concept to to the the space that you're looking at like in a family tree the action is like moving from one person to the other and the the action type basically defines the relationship between two persons um i think that's kind of the the difficult portal always like which is the action space that you need to traverse

the world and then the second thing is like what are the what are the locations in the world and once you can map these two then i think you're pretty pretty much done right it's like it's it's finding a way of moving from one location to another via these actions and if you if the actions are relations between entities you can basically draw an inference on what is now the relation between a and b given this structure


SPEAKER_02:
awesome a few points so tim thanks for beginning with this nice description about how we could add in this conceptual or in cultural layer and about generalizing across different environments and that reminded me of the work on pattern languages and it's kind of a bottom-up discovery and then it was a great point like yes there's the

algorithms that generate a house scene.

But there might be something that at a pixel level makes sense, like putting a toothbrush under a cabinet.

But then semantically or culturally, a person will look at that.

It's like, but that doesn't make sense.

And so then that would be like, let's just say it explored a bunch of different warehouses.

And the commonality was like, it was always rectilinear shelving.

there's a genre of warehouse that's like always that way and then whether it was like three shelves by 10 shelves or the other way around there would be like another space that those graphs would map to so that was a very nice piece and then um chris fields and michael levin just a few days ago wrote this paper competency in navigating arbitrary space intelligence as an invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments

So perhaps something relevant for us to explore going forward.

What do you think, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
I think these guys write papers faster than I can read papers, which is amazing.


SPEAKER_02:
I know.

It was April 24th, so three days ago.

I have not fully read it, but a lot of the figures look very interesting.

But I want to continue on this last point about the actions and maps because...

that kind of mapping and multi-scale mapping and transmuting and translating across different types of maps is kind of the what the multi-level slam is it's what a single level slam is but then the composability of this discussion is what enables like there to be a slam where it goes from a geometric space to a topological space and then from that into like a cultural or narrative space or something

So how does action relate to maps?

And I thought about that family tree.

You mentioned how there was one representation where the actions were like, just like, well, if you were in a room shaped like a bifurcating tree, then the actions would be you walking around that room.

So that's one action.

Then there's the cognitive action as that entity is building its knowledge representation of the tree.

And that is related to its planning and its preferences or all of this that isn't it inferring the tree, but it's like figuring out how it's gonna infer the tree.

And then there's like, there's other actions though.

There's the action that we won't talk about it of how families arise.

there's all kinds of actions and the tree is just a representation of some other process.

So how do we think about all these ways that action relates to maps and what kind of maps are actionable?

What about ones that are about action but not actionable or all this other possibilities?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I'm not entirely sure whether I'm

all the way with you with your with your last explanation so i i think that the second bullet like the action of updating the genetic model i would not necessarily consider that an action i think that the updating of the genetic model just arises from from experience and trying to minimize your free energy anyhow the the action from uh

from the other actions, I think is like, what is the action concept on different levels?

For example, to be more concrete in the genetic model, we had the low level action, which is basically a velocity command for the robots, like move forward or turn around with this kind of velocity.

But then the higher level action concepts would be, we called it the move, which is like traversing the space from one location to another, which is kind of, in this case, a coarse graining of the low level action.

But I think for every level in your abstraction hierarchy, there will be an action concept that moves from one thing to another.

And what that concept has to be will be tied to whatever level of abstraction you're modeling at that stage, I guess.

But I don't see any other actions besides that per se.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Tim.


SPEAKER_05:
Liv?


SPEAKER_01:
So I think about like at different levels of actions, if you, for example, think about foraging, right?

And so you can have like camps of human foragers and the task of each individual forager is to go out and find food.

So you go out, you find food and you come back and you go out and you find food and you come back.

And then like, if it takes too long to find the food, then collectively as a unit, the camp decides to move, right?

So you pick up and you make camp somewhere else.

So that's like an example of like every day the individual unit does something, some task, and then the collective makes a decision based on the input of the individual foragers or like the time it takes them to find food.

So that's kind of a way that like I can think about the nesting of action.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, and so I think we're on the same page on that account because you will have at some point a very high level generative model that encodes in the state like do we have enough food?

If not, we collect.

If we don't find food, we go to another state.

So it could be like a very high level abstract map with a few states and notes and you could draw.

I imagine you can draw out like

a graph with nodes where every node is kind of specific state and then doing an action brings you from one node to the other it could be a node like

not enough food, enough food, move to another location.

And then you go from not enough food to foraging, which brings you either to, which either brings you in the same state or brings you to the state, I have enough food, which is fine.

And if you keep on residing in the not enough food state and you decide to move and you might

So you could kind of imagine an abstract map where you have this kind of dynamics and the actions make sense.

And then at some point you will have the task or the action in this level that says search for food, which at some level down the road will

will be driving actions for start walking or start navigating or search for places that are promising for finding food.

lots of levels of a conceptual hierarchy, you will have different kind of actions that bring you from one node to the other, where the nodes might be like a general state of the community, which is like the very top level that you just described.

And then you will also have like nodes that are like physical locations in your environment.

And then you also have like very low level nodes that might describe like your current

pose in the world basically and and the lowest level action will just be the the torques that you do or the the muscle the muscle movement that you do with your legs and your hands it could be the very low level so i think um you can you can draw this concept all the way up and down with a very with many layers of the hierarchy and at each layer going from one state to another this is basically the action

at that layer.

But the meaning will be different depending on which level you are.

And the difficult part, I think, is how can you have these concepts emerge from bottom up?

And I'm not sure whether it's possible, but we are trying to get as high up as we can, basically.


SPEAKER_02:
Very interesting guest.

Thank you, Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
So it's super interesting and definitely it's why I link next to semantic space, because when you're trying to like communicate with someone, like the purpose of communicating can be, you know, have many faces, but, but in, in communication, it's like reaching a shared understanding and then like, okay, we have enough understanding of that topic.

Like let's move on to another topic in a, in a conversation.

And so that's why that's like,

very easily, it's very easy for me to see like how the semantic mapping and the spatial mapping can link together.

But I can't think of like why, I mean, like why would people like, well, maybe in genetic or genomic maps, that also makes sense, right?

Like to...

like what would be the action like to evolve, I guess is the action in kind of a genomic map space, but like think, I guess maybe novelty and that's kind of where active inference comes in.

Like why would you traverse a map of recipes or a map of different types of art?

And I guess like the idea is in exploration, like in trying like, well, what happens if I combine these ingredients in this other way or add this other ingredient or like where is the adjacent possible?

Like that's where I kind of think that the exploration, the room for exploration comes in.

And so when you traverse the map, sometimes the action is just to see what's next or just to explore or reduce uncertainty about your possibilities or affordances.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I think once you've nailed down the different nesting of states and what are the different actions you can take that bring you from one state to another on a certain level,

then basically the the what you will do can emerge just from from minimizing expected energy right and that that would be the the the powerful ingredient or the powerful um tool detective inference gives you is that once you you i i i would see

building a map or like more that kind of graph structure where you connect nodes and the transition between nodes or then the actions as kind of a way to build a generative model that is a bit more complex than, well, actually it's not that more complex, but then the traditional A and B matrices.

And in that way, you can apply the same principles, right?


SPEAKER_02:
me write this one very important point down tim because you said maybe you could just unpack this in active inference being able to provide a structure of the model provides us

a way to optimize it using variational Bayesian methods, message passing, software toolkits like Forney Lab, Active Blockference, PyMDP, MATLAB, SPM.

And I think that's something that's subtle, but interesting and different from a lot of other models where the mere data structure doesn't lend itself to like an implementable algorithm.

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think that's very true.

And I think one of the important things also in the whole SLAM system here is that we basically move from more or less high dimensional continuous observation and action space.

I mean, you could

you could do any continuous you can command any number of velocity that is sensible to the robot and the amount of pixel information that you can get is also very big if not close to infinity so

we basically move from this high dimensional continuous spaces to something that is more like a discrete set of nodes that you can traverse which is much more like an a and a b and a c matrix like like we are used to in py mdp so just by enforcing

the model to learn this more discrete state space that we can manage is already a big step that would allow for active inference to be applied, basically.

Because one of the biggest issues is always like, okay,

You could use active inference for planning, but if your state space is so large, then you cannot just iterate over all potential policies and calculate the expected free energy and pick the best one because your space just blows up.

But if you are able to, at some level, discretize it to a limited set of states that are applicable to your current context, then maybe you can start

iterating through all the potential relevant behaviors.

It's like going back to the foraging example, if you just have to choose between moving versus foraging, the problem becomes much more easy than when you have to decide for any possible muscle movement that you can do the next few hours.

I think moving to a more discrete set of states is crucial to scale these methods to realistic settings.


SPEAKER_02:
awesome so returning to this maps of action question and that's a little bit in contrast with like the maps of meaning and i think it points again to active inference as always having inference and action as like two approaches to minimize free energy two ways to think about the same process um

i want to return to this question about like what the actions and the moves are so i'm imagining uh blue on the foraging trip and there's what was the um the semantics of the slam presented in this paper

was it was a location based approach whether in a geometric space or in a um in a topological and a relational space but am i in the right position like is a question about location satisfying

And then it can also be thought of as like that entity is existing at a location in cognitive parameter space, because this question about estimate about space is a cognitive parameter.

It's one about the territory, it's a map of the territory, but these are cognitive parameters that can include like, am I where I wanna be with respect to how I'm paying attention about things?

And so to actually explore that, I wanted to juxtapose

two different generative models that we've seen.

And keeping in mind also that capacity of active inference where being able to form these generative models, it also is helping us get towards applying them.

So on the right is the structure of the model from your paper.

On the left is a three-level model, but there's also a two-level one that I can pull up.

And it's from the Sanvid Smith et al paper

on computational phenomenology and mental action and so the actions in this case are happening at the level of what am i perceiving what what is the action at this sort of like motor level and whereas in in your multi-level slam

this level was about space still again from the geometric smaller scale tactical scale of space to the topological bigger scale strategic level of space but it's still about the territory and in here a somewhat analogous multi-scale nesting of the partially observable markov decision process is used to represent not a spatial

layer or coarse graining but actually an attentional layer so what do you think this what does this make you think of or what does nesting pomdps mean and what could it mean well in essence what it what it basically does it puts uh


SPEAKER_05:
The higher level puts a prior on your lower level, right?

On the next.

So in my figure, if you have a belief over your state in the red box, then basically this gives you a prior on what you expect to observe in a single blue box.

And in this case, in my case, it's indeed very tied to the spatial domain.

But in essence, it can give you a prior on any aspect of the level below, right?

And I think that's what they do in the left model then.

Where also, if you have an inference on

if you have a belief on the orange states in the left model, it basically gives you a prior on what states you expect to observe or to believe in the blue one there.


SPEAKER_02:
Here's going to be, I think, this is figure 12 instead of figure 5.

So this is the generalized deep model of action.

And here, the emissions

of the hidden state at the higher internal mental level, cognitive domain, the emission mediated by the A matrix, just like it would be in a retina, but the emission of A is the hidden state at the lower level, S1, but also the uncertainty parameters, like the variance estimates on every other core kernel parameter.

So yeah.

So in the SLAM, which of these other generalized connections do you think have relevance for the robotic SLAM context?


SPEAKER_05:
I think it makes a lot of sense to also have something modulating your precision parameters.

It's like having a certain trust on your observations for certain environments, for example.

For example, if you go to your cellar, you might know that the lighting conditions will not be optimal and you'll have different precision than when you're in your kitchen, for example, just thinking out loud.

So I think it makes sense to

have this hierarchical structure on any on on anything that that you have beliefs over or that anything that can have importance on on your on making better predictions basically so you can have a less you can you can have better predictions if you have a good prior on how precise you would expect your observations to be here so that's why it makes sense to


SPEAKER_02:
have a model evolved that that takes this into account i guess it just is very interesting like if the nesting can represent staying within the same domain

a core screening of like okay you know district state continent like a sort of within the same genre but different core screenings or it can seemingly at least in the case of mental action and um hyper prior optimization modeling in general like investigation and research in general

In those cases, this is not a core screening.

It's something totally different.

So if the interface can mean two totally different things, couldn't there be a third implication too?

Or do these exhaust the implications of nesting?

can nesting only refer to a like-kind nesting?

For example, nested time scales, nested spatial scales, or the cognitive action

of basically removing something from the sensory territorial domain and then like entering it once into the cognitive domain but then once it's been entered into so-called hidden internal states which are not even being proposed to actually exist in space or time then you're kind of in in like the Matrix slash simulation slash structure learning on cognitive models

And then it's not like that's going to be nested.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_05:
I think it's just in the end, it's just finding the most simpler model that explains it, but not simpler, right?

And you could imagine

a model that operates on the lowest level always and that indeed just has, in case of a robot, has pixel inputs and has torque or velocity output and built a model that can predict for hours in the future accurately

but then you also realize that this should be a very very very complex model it it it must always it's almost the environment right and this is unmanageable and the only way to kind of

do it then is to to start adding structure to the model and start vectorizing out different variables and in essence nesting is nothing else but vectorizing out a certain variable so so i think in the end it's just a matter of finding the model that

most accurately predicts what's going to happen with the least complexity and building an hierarchical nested model is one way to make this happen.


SPEAKER_02:
the way that Blue spoke about the genetic nesting in the sort of Aristotelian sense, giving rise to in the genetic sense and in the sort of cellular, and then how you framed it as the simplest model, but not any simpler, which is often, at least in the Bayesian area, framed as being like the AIC or BIC Pareto optimal model, like some kind of a trade-off of accuracy and complexity, so on.

And it's like, there's a process of,

structure learning because we want to know, okay, categorically, should we be fitting a one-level, two-level model?

What kind of structure within the three-level nesting?

Which one of these edges are going to be making the machine learning model in real life run 100 times slower and not even converge?

Which one of these edges are we going to be just totally in the dark without?

Bayesian model selection on structures, including cognitive structures.

And those structures were not picking the final best.

This structure learning is not picking the final best parameterization.

And this is kind of like how Carl is always speaking about developmental robots and how out of the factory or whatever, it's gonna be in a learning mode.

So the structure learning is on learning structures and the learning structures are about perception

including the actions that one is observing themselves to be doing because if we couldn't observe the consequences um or at least even our own action states in some way there'd be like a total disconnect and our we could never get our action policies it would just be like the motor babbling and the sort of uncoordinated movement and i'm sure a lot of robotics and evolutionary simulators like that's why they have that wobbly leg

phase because I think a lot of those models they don't know they're wobbling they're just implementing like in this super high dimensional space of of motor policies they're just they're not getting the feedback so this is it is like a nesting um cool very interesting um direction here and I think there's a lot more to explore

about what kinds of nestings because maybe it's actually that attentional layer that you described in your opening thoughts about the uh higher level of abstraction that was taking in a graphical a graph I mean you know maybe that is the layer that it just comes on top right here and the current the can gets input into some other thing

let's uh look at some of the formalisms and figures or if blue or if anyone in the live chat has any questions they can totally ask i have a question on uh this or if there's another uh equation or formalism that it's clearer to address this question

This P on the left side, you can describe it in your own words, but it's a joint distribution of multiple variables.

How does one go from knowing what variables they want to include in the joint distribution

like what arguments they want that function to take and then a specific partitioning factorization like is this the only factorization or how do we make this factorization based upon what we kind of know what we want to model maybe even very early yeah so so basically


SPEAKER_05:
going from the left hand side to the right hand side you can basically um one-on-one derive it from the figure basically so if you look at the figure you see that the that pi has no incoming arrows so there there will be no conditioning on on pi and then if you look at the action uh um

notes then you see that these all get an input arrow from pi so then you know that pi is actually influencing the action that you do so this will be a probability of actions given pi and so that's basically how you could you can write down the equation just by looking at the figure basically so typically how we if we if we start off with a new with a new type of model

we start off indeed with just listing all the variables that we want to model and then we start with drawing out a potential diagram like we have on the right and try to make sense out of that and once we have that

the the equation just falls out basically and it's always a matter of thinking like which variable has influence on which other ones and for instance you can also make make make your own assumptions there like one the assumptions that we often make is like okay the hidden state should be kind of should be markovian so once we know the state at time t we don't need any

information on the post anymore.

uh to generate the current observation for example so so these kind of assumptions um go also in and they will then decide on uh on which things you need to uh condition uh because you could also uh if if in general uh you have uh the joint distribution you can also just restrict yourself to basically base rule to come up with the factorization so that this could be then

p of pi times p of a given pi times p of s given a m pi times p of o given s a pi so if you just use base rule you could also come up with a factorization that will be perfectly valid

but that might not be easy to implement.

So you basically search a bit for what is possible and you add some assumptions in order to make it work intuitively as well as practically, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_02:
thanks a lot so you mentioned the first two terms here it would just be great to hear for the green blue and the purple term just how do you describe the way that you look at the graph and then translated it here and then I'll have another question but first that yeah so green blue purple


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so for the green one, you look at the initial nodes of the blue part.

So it's like your initial your initial state at the start of sequence.

And you can and this one is this one has now

Oh, no, this will be the ultimate original state.

I don't think that the equation on the left corresponds to the figure because there is no locations and moves in there.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

OK, yes, this is a lower level model that we're looking at.

And yes, OK, the initial condition is conditionally independent of other edges.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, and so the green and the blue is basically your initial start state.

So you have to bootstrap somewhere.

So you have some prior on your starting state.

And then from then on, the next states will all depend on the actions you take.

So then it's in the purple, the first term is basically saying, okay, my next state will depend on my previous state and the action I took.

And then the

The second one in the purple is saying, okay, the action that I take will depend on my policy.

And the last term then just says, okay, my current observation, it only depends on my current state.

Because I assume that all information of that time step is basically represented in the state at that time.


SPEAKER_02:
this is really powerful and I think that the fact that all future states are part of a combinatoric relationship with action it really shows how deeply action is embedded within active inference like there simply is not a consideration of future observations or latent states

except for conditioning action on policy and conditioning states on action.

So policy is above actions that are selected, that are actually taken and enacted, but all inference is conditioned on action selection, which is conditioned on policy.

And there aren't two separate models like an expectation module and then like an action selection, state value mapping, state policy mapping, policy statement, all those kinds of constructs that are meant to bridge the gap between inference and action being two sides of the same coin to minimize free energy, literally also for those machine learning models.

it's just really interesting how that is all concisely simplified and integrated in active inference and so i want to ask a question on this purple term which is is anything known about the computational complexity of changing h

with respect to how you actually ran the models, like sort of in principle or how you actually ran it?

Like, is it like, if you go like one, two, three, four, five time steps, does it go like time steps squared?

Is it like time steps triple squared or what is it?


SPEAKER_05:
yeah so i think you have to distinguish uh two uh two differences here so when when just modeling the system then h doesn't really matter it's just it could go to infinites without without loss of generalization so it's like your your agent gets born and then it's it operates like this until the end of its life and it could be h so from from just modeling the system

It doesn't really matter.

I just say, okay, this is the time horizon I consider the system.

And this is then how I assume it acts, basically.

It's a different story if we look at an actual implementation where you suddenly have to choose an age.

If I implement this model, how long do I want this thing to be able to predict?

Because of course, if you

you build a model that is predicting and then you have to check whether your prediction was correct and you use the kind of models that we use that basically want to back propagate all the way back to to have a gradient update step then of course the age becomes determined by practical and considerations like

how much memory does my machine have to keep all these intermediate states and memory and i can still back propagate through uh through this model um so so then it it's basically a an implementation implementation driven choice on how how far in the future do you want to model this thing or can you model this thing because it might also be that if you try to predict two

or a hat that there's so much noise that it doesn't even make sense to to try to predict it so far in the future so it can be um it can be driven either by what makes sense for this environment versus how much uh how much computes and memory do i have to to make this happen basically awesome blue do you want to yes go for it


SPEAKER_01:
So I have a question over this figure and then also over the, it's formalism six.

I don't know if you have that anywhere in the slides, Daniel, if you want to grab it.

Yep.

Okay, so in formalism six, like the same observations are there at both levels, at the lower level and the higher level.

And this makes a lot of sense for something like forging, right?

Like the lower level, the group is gonna, the individual is gonna go out, move, forage.

And then at the higher level, it's going to, the group is going to move, right?

So in a hierarchical sense, that makes sense.

And then in figure two,

in the legend of the figure, it says that the higher level operates on a coarser timescale.

So where like the lower level decisions are made at, you know, 15 minute timescales or one hour timescales, the higher level is at like a day or something, some similar relationship.

And that also would make sense for something like forging.

This is kind of relates back to the question of emergence.

And I just wonder,

If you can allow for so like not all systems operate this way.

And, you know, here's the big, big question, right?

Like, like,

every like organ in my body does something different, right?

Like, so, and then like, you know, all my cells are getting dehydrated and then suddenly like I say, I'm thirsty and I drink, right?

It's not like my cells cannot like move to go like take a drink of water.

So like in a hierarchical sense where, where the higher level is doing a different action than the lower level,

Have you thought at all about how to try to navigate something like this?

Like where at the higher level, the action is totally different.

Well, the time scale might be coarser, but here the variables change.

And this is something I think about a lot.

And so I'm always collecting input.

And I just wonder what you think, Tim.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so basically, I guess the core question is how...

if you take a decision at the higher level which is like a move in this case how does it ripple down to um a lower level action that might not even be related to to the move you want to make at the at the higher level something like that right so basically what how how this happens is that

if you if you look at a single level um so like a vanilla active inference formulation then at some point you you tie in the preferences from from a prior it's like these are my preferences so that's what i want to obtain um in in in this one level and in the hierarchical model how how how we do it is that basically the

the the action on the higher level.

So in this case, making a move to another location, it basically sets up.

So if we if we do, you have a bigger version of the of the of the image, maybe.

So suppose that we go from so we are now at our big T.

and we want to make a move to L big T plus 1.

So at some point, this is the decision we took.

We want to go to the other one.

Then basically, we can use then the A matrix or the likelihood model that then says, OK, if I'm at L T plus 1, then this is the kind of state and pose that I expect

So this is then being fed back downwards as like this is now the preference for the lower level model to obtain this kind of state.

And then at the lower level, you again have your expected free energy to work out the low level policy and actions that actually bring you closer to that kind of preference.

But at the same time, so at each actual fine grained time step,

you get low-level observations that then give you new beliefs over the state and the pose you're in which might give you more which might give you more information on the location that you're in and then either at some point you will reach the preferred location and then okay great success or it might be that something went terribly wrong and you'll end up in a different location but then it basically

also goes up again and at the higher level you then say okay i'm now not at the location i want to be but apparently some different one that i was so then you start planning again at that level to to correct and search for a new step to take that will then ripple down as like a preference for the lower level and that's how everything kind of um continues on going so the you have your your

the you use the likelihood model that maps the states from higher level model to a belief on lower level states and these this likelihood model becomes kind of your preference for the lower level which then has your inference process there to do to infer the actions and that's how you can kind of decouple them from semantic meaning as well


SPEAKER_02:
this is awesome it reminds me of the kind of question that people often ask where do you want to travel where would you like to travel where would you prefer to travel it's often interpreted in a very life scale of analysis like i would really like to go to this other area so then that's like let's think about that as the biggest level so where would you like to travel i'd like to go to california

how will you get there I'll take a plane where will you go to take a plane I'll drive to the airport how will you drive to the airport I'll get in my car how will you get in your car I'll leave my room how will you leave your room I'll get out of my chair like that's very much the nesting between the top level having more of like this topological

where i want to be which then is imposed and propagated as and sets the constraints and opportunity for this lower level like how i will get there because it's a totally where would you like to go somebody could think in their head i want to go to california in my life and then the answer to the where do you want to travel would be like to the next room but be like that wasn't really the scale of the context of the question

But this really shows how the multi-scale nesting of location lends itself to heuristics and algorithms that help us chunk complex navigation tasks, like navigating to somewhere in California in the next few years.

but you can't do the rollout for all of the actions taken at the chair level for that because it's going to be too many explosions of combatorics Tim


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, and just to add into the storyline, at some level in the hierarchy, you are like, okay, I want to go to my car, but then you could say, okay, but I need my car keys and I don't know where they are.

Where are my car keys?

So then suddenly from having this really goal-directed nesting, at some point you say, okay, I need some more information

at this level to actually reach my goal.

And so at that level, it might switch to more epistemic forging, which will then

ripple down to the level below, like, okay, let's take a look in my kitchen or at the kitchen table, maybe they are there.

And so that's how at every level of the hierarchy you have this exploitation, exploration trade-off, and the outcome of that inference process will then ripple down to the level below, like, this is the preference for this level to obtain, and this is how everything then starts flowing.


SPEAKER_02:
This is awesome.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm going to now ask another really hard question.

So this is really awesome, and it reminds me of how the higher level constrains the actions at the individual level.

It reminds me of, and I know you were intending to take this out of semantic space, but it puts it back into semantic space for me.

I was having a conversation over the weekend at Complexity Weekend, and one of the participants brought up a kind of

political and controversial topic.

And I was, you know, they said, so what do you think?

And I said, I think I shouldn't talk about that.

And then they said, okay, well, so what do you want to talk about?

Which is like, kind of like a...

like an odd question to have in a conversation, but it constrains like when you assign a topic or like here, I mean, we're obviously assigning a topic also, you know, we're here to talk about this paper and related things that might come up, but in like a spontaneous conversation, when you assign a topic, it very much constrains the conversation to, it limits the topic or at least starts a seed.

uh and i wonder like why do we have to talk about anything like can't we just sit or like can't we just like you know talk about the first thing that comes to mind or can we just like be and be quiet uh but for a lot of people that that space is kind of awkward uh um and where then does emergence fit into the model which this is the hard question or or can it fit into the model like when um

one component of the lower level says, well, maybe we'll move to the right.

And then everybody says, okay, and they start to pull to the right.

And then, okay, well, maybe we'll pull to the left.

So is there room for emergence or it's always constrained by the assignment of the top level?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, you spoke about the top level propagating and rippling down.

So what's the other direction there?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think

I think ultimately you need some preferences at the highest or at any of the levels, right?

And if there is no such preference, then indeed we end up in this situation like, yeah, what happens now?

And there is no real constraint and anything can happen.

But I think typically in life we are in the, at some level we'll always have a preference and that defines our behavior, I guess.

I was actually talking to a colleague on similar things, like as a human we always have like, we make plans or there's always something on our mind to do and we're like,

but if you look at the monkey in the zoo he just he can just sit there and do nothing so what goes what goes on in in in the animal's mind is like okay all my preferences are met i don't i'm not hungry i i have a safe place so i just do nothing so yeah it's an interesting question like what what happens if we don't have

If you don't have any urgent preferences that need to be met, I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, in the zoo example, that behavior of, for example, low levels of activity might also be associated with learned helplessness or trauma or a freeze reaction or the affordances are not presenting themselves in a certain way.

So then that speaks to the ambiguity of cognition with respect to behavior.

And the robot could be bumping into the wall for a lot of cognitive reasons.

It could prefer to bump into the wall.

It could prefer to do something else.

And so there's a many-to-one mapping with...

cognitive systems and behavior like someone could be thinking you have different reasons or preferences for why they emit a given sentence so that's part of the complexity but also like the opportunity of the cognitive and then also the classic lewis carroll quote um probably also misquoted slash alt quoted many other places but it's like a great you know folk active question

If you don't know where you want to go, then it doesn't matter which way you go.

If you don't have high precision-ish on your preferences at location, then it's a wash.

It doesn't matter which policy selection you're taking.

Because why would it?

The only way that you could justify, well, I like this way.

Okay, because you have a preference for simplicity or you want to head off in this direction.

Those are all valid.

It's not to say that if you do know where you want to go, you're right, or you're doing the right thing, or it's going to be easy or possible.

It's just like, if you don't have preference, then it's not possible.

to make any kind of decision worth evaluating.

And that also speaks to the integration of preference in active inference as a means of guiding epistemic and pragmatic value, rather than reward learning, reinforcement learning, which only centers on pragmatic value.

And the implicit preference is more reward would be better.

And then there has to be all these ad hoc ways of introducing epistemic and balancing the paperclip maximizing into these models.

Blue, and then Tim.


SPEAKER_01:
So great example, Daniel.

And I think back to the monkey in the zoo and...

if the preferences of the monkey might just be constrained by the zookeeper.

Like the monkey just does whatever the zookeeper wants it to do.

And then that made me really think about parents and children in the United States.

So is there always some kind of downward causation, right?

So like if you have a child,

And in many families, and not only in the United States, but it's different culturally, right?

So even the school system in Europe is very different than that in the United States.

So the kids just kind of go to some generic school.

The parents may or may not have some preference for what they want the child to be.

I want you to be a doctor.

I want you to be a lawyer.

I want you to take over the family business or whatever.

And the child grows in these constraints with this predetermined idea.

So there's some kind of top-down causation happening from parents to children.

But in many Americans, we're just floundering over here.

So what drives then the preferences of the child when there's no downward causation?

And this is kind of where exploration comes into play, right?

So you might try this major, or you might try that major, or you might do this, or you might do that.

And you have this incredible amount of freedom.

And so you really kind of don't go anywhere.

Or maybe you take one path in 25 different directions and then just end up right where you started.

So like you just start a whole bunch of things and then don't really get down, make any progress on any one path.

In contrast to Europe, where I think you have to choose an eighth grade like STEM or not STEM or something like this.

So it's interesting.

So I think this lack of downward causation.

So the emergence may, this is what I'm picking up from our conversations.

The emergence may come from just an exploratory thing.


SPEAKER_05:
an exploratory structure and like in this exploration you just kind of find some direction through exploration thank you maybe maybe two notes so so one thing is if if if we don't have preferences then we still have our information game term right so this might drive you to at least some um some form of exploration or some drive to kind of

At one point, infer as good as you can where you are.

Or on the other hand, maybe some actions will yield you more new information to update your model, like the information gained on your model parameters.

So this might still drive some exploratory behavior.

And then how preferences come to be shaped.

I guess one relevant piece of related work is done by Noor Sajid on her preference system where it's actually all about can you learn preferences from behavior where the idea is kind of like

the the things you usually usually do when you you're happy with basically grow to be your preferences as well and you're kind of attracted to to revisit these states um and this also ties in like parenting like just seeing your parents or having your parents taking you to some states

just make it happen that these become your preferred states also culturally the the things that you just get to do because that's what people around you and you do just become your preferences because you you you see it being done and you're doing it all the time so

by doing it, it becomes kind of your prior on things that happen and that you have to do or that you are expected to do.

And I think it's kind of related as well to the work of Noor, like how maybe the things that you just ought to be doing and that somebody takes you to do becomes kind of your preferences.


SPEAKER_02:
great points so when you said that even without preferences there's still info gain so that does hide a little preference which is a preference to resolve uncertainty but

If you remove that like preference or assumption, then it's kind of like, okay, there's a million ways to make your Gaussian distribution worse.

You can just inflate the variance and your error will get infinitely high.

So putting those types of inferences away, then there's the info gain approach.

And then the things that reminds me of was the idea of novelty search.

And so this is within the field of evolutionary algorithms and evolutionary computation where there's often this very exacting fitness test.

The top 5% fastest runners are going to survive or they're going to be evaluated on the task every single time.

And then people realized and thought about how, well, maybe it's not like super harsh selection.

Maybe there's sort of oscillating selection pressures on the task, or maybe multiple tasks are being selected.

And then sort of like the ad absurdum, but not to say ineffective version of this argument is forget the task and the performance and the fitness on that task and either entirely or partially use novelty search.

and simply select for novelty of different kinds.

And so it does need to make its way back to task performance like homeostasis maintenance.

But this is like an interesting thread that was sort of like balancing out the overly pragmatic value view.

And the second thing that it reminded me of is the figure in the active inference on discrete states basis synthesis by DaCosta et al 2020.

And so here,

in the case of no priors on the left bayesian surprise optimal bayesian design intrinsic motivation curiosity and the info max principle and so it's like interesting to see how under different special cases that are shown here no priors

which might be no prior preference but let's think about that no ambiguity like no no space between the observation and the hidden state total observability that's the mall where we were speaking about the robotics last time like where you can just have perfect resolution of your spatial location

then there's no ambiguity or risk a deterministic action environment where you know exactly how well each stock is going to perform then you can make expected value decisions purely based around utility and then no ambiguity or priors on the right side here with maximum entropy principle and jane's and max ent so it's like this action perception loop

has so many degrees of freedom that it's just wild and the special cases help us zoom in on like the information gathering aspect of a given level epistemic gain the utility oriented components of a given level that's the pragmatic policy and the utilitarian component and then there's this balancing of

pragmatic in the epistemic and the ability to flex and to adapt between those which is why some are excited about active inference as speaking to this explore exploit dialectic in a way that hasn't been approached by like we'll learn a parameter that switches between them this is like a very different way to to integrate all those things by finding an action perception Loop that's a generalization of some of these cases

And it's really interesting that this is a discrete state space synthesis.

So all but implying that there hasn't been a synthesis on continuous and hybrid state spaces.

So how do discrete and continuous variables come into play in just like this paper or robotics more generally?

Like how does that field think about discrete and continuous actions?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so in this paper, it's rather all discrete, right?

So we use discrete time steps.

And personally, we didn't do a lot of research on actually the continuous time from formalism.

I know that, for example, Pablo Lamios has done a lot of work and Martin Wisse in Delft, where they actually do the more continuous time torque control, low-level control of robotic arms and so on.

and there's uh it's an entirely different formalism and i'm i'm personally not too i'm not an expert on on that kind of uh um systems but i i i guess that similar uh ideas uh

are there as well on the information gain versus reference resolving kind of planning.

But yeah, I cannot really say a lot about it.


SPEAKER_02:
what is it like in this warehouse like do people work in there or is it just a test area or what is it on the shelves


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it's just a test area.

So basically, when we enter that particular building, this room was allocated as... We have a data center in the building, so it's the ground floor of our building.

And this room is actually...

allocated as as the as a part of the data center but at the moment we don't have uh we don't have enough racks to to fill it but it was like like to be future proof and so uh it was just an empty space and then people started uh using it as as storage space for all of the things that are just lying around and nobody really has like a a place for them to be so they they uh

they had some racks over there with all kind of random stuff that needs to be stored somewhere like you also have like

a lot of old server cases from older machines over there that are just sitting there in case we need a spare port or something.

So it's like generic storage space.

And then we figured, yeah, if we have the space anyway, we can start doing experiments in this.

And so we have an area now where we have some robot manipulators.

And then at the same time, we have this more kind of warehouse setup that kind of reflects how in actual industrial warehouses things might be.

And so we share the space with researchers working on wireless localization that then put some beacons on and see how the wireless signal propagates with all these metal shells around and these kind of things.

So it's just now a generic space that we can use for

experimentation on navigation, but also localization, signal propagation through different kinds of material.

These kind of experiments all happen there now.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

The...

part you mentioned about the the electromagnetic radiation and how it propagates it like makes me think about how you have this current bot using only the visual light like we kind of talked about that previously it could have all kinds of different sensors but it only has the visual light um and it doesn't use any kind of wi-fi updating like what if every minute you know it gets an update of its actual location so that could be in the model and then different kinds of um

situations could be enacted simulated and then enacted like what happens when the lights go off what if the wi-fi goes down and then that is where the generative model being on board is really going to reveal like the robustness of the approach because if it does have this internal

spatial sense the lights going off may or going very dim which changes the pixel values of every pixel and the ratio of the colors and like everything but maybe just the the very slight you know the the exit sign that light alone is enough for the camera to still do to relearn and just have enough input from the observation layer

So it's very cool that you can control the space.

You have policy over this space, whereas in an operating environment that you don't control, it's like you are subject to the generative process

emitting actions to you which might have regularity or favorability but like you don't control them and then that's what the lab is it's like a space where there are nest mates or robots or learners but then the lab can also set policy

with feedback from the bottom up, but also it is a place where the policy can be controlled and that can help the robot learn and develop.

So that's kind of cool.

And again, it speaks to what Carl was saying about the learning robots.

There is a timescale at which the community or the collaborators are in feedback with this niche.

Without this paper, there wouldn't be the discussion, but then without this being enacted, there wouldn't be the paper.

So there's a lot of interesting dynamics there.


SPEAKER_05:
maybe to add on the scenarios that you were describing on turning off the lights and so on and using other sensor modalities so we actually do have experiments with um with for example also modeling the so on this on this robot in particular at the front you see a plane or like lidar scanner so it just scans uh for uh with a light ray and it's it's measured the distances um

and then the the red thing on there is actually a radar so that's one curves and at 6 79 gigahertz curves and then it listens for the the reflecting signal and and and that's also a way to kind of estimate where are obstacles around you and at which distance are they and which velocity are they approaching or are going further from you

we actually also create models on these kind of modalities and we could actually show that it could kind of imagine like lighter scans inside the ale or how radar would evolve if the robot is moving and

uh some other things that we did which was these things are uh especially awesome catal who is uh the first author of this paper as well did a lot of work on this so so one of the the things he did was if we now put like a cable gutter in one of these ales

then when the robot would drive over it, you would see a whole different type of dynamics because it would bump up and go down.

And if you monitor the Bayesian surprise, so basically the KL divergence between your dynamics model and then your posterior, you could see like a huge spike in kind of surprise signal.

on uh on this kind of uh dynamics like this is something weird that's happening and you could kind of use this to to see is everything going normal or is this something weird going on suddenly in in in my space and we also did tests where we had the robot driving around but also people passing by just walking by

And if that was in a train on that model, it would actually not be surprised if it sees people passing by.

And if you would let it imagine

How would it be if you drive forward and sometimes you could see, of course, very blurry because it's like a reconstruction where you could see kind of skinny signatures passing by as if a person was walking past a robot like, yeah, this is a scenario that can happen.

You just learned it, which is pretty fun.

So maybe this covers the fun fact.


SPEAKER_02:
That is a fun fact.

yeah this is the total do uh do robots dream of electric sheep like that whole question it's like if their generative model is generative sure depends on what you mean by dream if it's only a recognition model probably not that's very funny um

let's take just one last look since we talked a lot about the factorization of the one level which was i think a great discussion let's just look at the factorization of this multi-scale setting and uh just

any other things that people want to ask or any other thoughts you have but what is happening with the factorization here and similar to how you kind of like um gave a natural language representation of the um the factorization that we looked at here um this is the single level just within the blue level and so what is happening with the multi-scale factorization yeah so


SPEAKER_05:
if you here look at the at the bottom you basically um see again the uh the same kind of factorization as you had before right so it's like okay my current state depends on my query state and action and my action depends on the policy and my observation depends on my current state

And the only thing that is added here is the term on P's, which are the poses.

So it's the second term on that one.

Lowercase P is pose.

Yeah, exactly.

And so basically what we did here is since we are working on this navigation setting, and we already had some inspiration from existing SLAM approaches,

we decided like yeah it actually makes a lot of sense to treat poses as kind of a first-class sentence in in in the model and we we really would like to have like because you you kind of know how poses evolve given the action right because it's pretty simple uh you can have a pretty simple uh transition model that says okay if you

move forward then your pose will increase in the direction that you're heading basically so that's a very basic way of of integrating your pose and your pose is of course also very relevant for knowing where you are so that's why we decided to kind of split off the uh the abstract states and have an additional post state that was dedicated for um

for modeling where you are in the space, like in this pose continuous attractor network.

And then if we go to the level above, then there you have a similar structure, but now the action is the move.

So we have a prior on moves and then you move from one location to the next, given the move that you're doing and

Then you have the connection between the upper level and the lower level, which is what's now the probability of having a certain lower level state, given that I am in this location, and what would be my pose of the robot if I'm in this location, basically.

And that then sums it up, I guess.


SPEAKER_02:
What is the purple term, and why is there the big pie at the end of it?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So the the purple term basically is your initial your initial state for a higher level.

So it's I think it's like the if you look at the blue box, it's the the gray notes.

So it's like you observe

the initial um observation from the new blue block basically that's your current time step okay cool and then and then the the big pie is then from then on you basically uh go for a number of like

sub level lower level time steps which is basically the the counts that you make within the blue box basically so we have like this this big t and small t which basically uh are like to just denote

a time step in within the the fine-grained level or time step within the the orange level but um in in actual timing like the big t uh

going from big T to big T plus one is just like a number of time steps on the actual real discretized time let's say so suppose if we say that our sensor operates at 10 hertz like every 100 milliseconds you get a new observation that's like the the lowest granularity time stamping

and then the the big t just is like okay i know i'm at uh current time step and now it could be one second later it could be two seconds later could be five seconds later it's just like going from big t to big t plus one just says there some time has elapsed

from going to this discrete thing that I call a location to this next thing that I call a location, but exactly how many actual seconds have passed.

Yeah, that's up to the model basically, because we have this system that looks at how much surprise or how much information did I gain from moving.

And this basically determines when you shift from one location to another.

So the concept of location is based on this threshold on when we add a new node to the map.

So we added this big T notation just to introduce kind of a time step on the higher level.

But this is totally abstracted from the actual timing.

which you do have for the lower level so the lower level there the small t is actually um the rate at which your observations come in basically so this could this is could be fixed to like 100 milliseconds every 100 milliseconds you shift time step but when the big t shifts it all depends on when you infer to be in a new location basically

if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_02:
And you mentioned that there was a parameter you kind of just empirically determined when it made sense to add the new node.

Yeah.

But then the the frequency of the discrete time steps at the bottom was 100 hertz, like 100 or 10 hertz, 100 milliseconds.

And that was just the sampling rate of all of these features.

Yeah.

Wow.

There's so much happening with nesting.

There's the movement from the geometric

to the topological.

There's the movement from something that is at a smaller, finer scale to something that is enclosing it, really enclosing it, or conceptually enclosing it in this kind of way that we were talking about the cognitive domain earlier.

There's this movement from the chronos to the kairos, from the actual sensor movement

defined speed that things are happening in the world to like the timeliness of when it's time to think that you're in a different location and then in the biological case it was woven so clearly to this multi-scale navigational capacity of the of the he system because like if you said i'm in a different place in my room that might be

a foot but if to be in a different place in the train might be the next train spot and so the way that language is vague yet does allow us to really drill into what model what was valuable about that for you what were you curious about in that moment like these kinds of ways that we interrogate ourselves and that we can also engage in conversation so yeah blue why don't we sit silently

maybe for you know performance art stream number one it could happen but also there's uncertainty to resolve and uh message passing to be done otherwise it's implausible that we're going to coordinate in our like actions or in our thoughts um

If you have any other ideas or thoughts or questions or places you want to jump to, we can totally do so.

Otherwise, this is a great thought too.

What are the next steps?

You've mentioned several things, but just what would be a next outcome or deliverable or thing that you're hoping to see in the niche and maybe even enact yourself?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, some of the things that I was discussing today with one of the students just today actually is to basically work on, can you, because one of the biggest limitations now is that in order to navigate, you're basically limited to

what it has seen before right so we still need the um we still need to hand control the robot through the lab to build the map and then only when it has visited the whole space it can start it can even just then start navigating it basically so one direction is can we kind of have the robot self um navigate and one idea there is to

Again, linking to our story about preferences that different hierarchical levels, maybe we could have like a, a preference on the lower level that just says, okay, I don't want to bump into things.

And, um,

If you don't have a map, the only thing you want is, on the one hand, be curious and try to update your model as good as you can, but also not bump into things.

And then you have this robot that just starts driving around and at the same time building a map.

and then at least you can you can just put it anywhere it will start mapping and at some point you say okay the robot now now go to now search for this particular object and then you give it a goal and it starts exploring maybe it can imagine oh this is maybe the location where I last saw something very similar so this is probably the location I want to go to

um and and and then you can have it like more goal directed behavior so this is one thing uh we were thinking about and then another limitation is also that like the edges between the nodes are also only the edges that you actually um traversed once so for example one one stupid thing is that it it does not know that if um

if it went from one location to the other, it can actually turn around 360 degrees and go back and it will be at the same location because in this visual space, it might be a totally different thing.

And if you never thought it or actually controlled it to turn around 360 degrees, it will never make the link.

Okay, I can actually do this.

So one of the things that we were exploring is like, can we use our low level generative model to kind of

imagine potential links between nodes and then kind of add these links to the map as if you kind of visited those before or maybe add some weight to these links so you know yeah this this might be a link and this is the likelihood of this link but at least you can take them these links into account and planning is okay i'm feeling adventurous so maybe it's time to explore this link or

for this particular goal.

If this link exists, I never tried it, but if it exists, it will be a huge shortcut to reach this goal.

So I'm willing to take this gamble in this situation and to have these kind of behaviors by just kind of imagining

which kind of locations can i visit that maybe i never tried this before but given the the things i've learned from this environment this might be the case so i'll just try it and so maybe these kind of um these two points are basically are the next things uh on our lists to to uh to start exploring nice it is like


SPEAKER_02:
knowing other streets you could take what if the road i always take is blocked and then there are so it's just cool and what arises after you're after you're implementing it and and in the chat steven has been making some comments about the door and we discussed like being in the hallway and then there's the pixel contrast and then like if there were a higher level concept of door

probability of a door at that location so that that pixel change abruptly could be associated with a door and then um then there's this location of door not just the pixel level mapping but then there's like what does the door bridge to and what if it explores a closed room and now the door opens and then it can say well now i'm curious about what's out

or what is that node, a bottleneck, and that's the door as Markov blanket.

What happens when you train it up on the warehouse, including with Curiosity, and then you open the door?

What's going to happen?

But these are awesome directions, so thank you for sharing it.

Blue, do you have any final comments or questions?


SPEAKER_01:
Just thanks.

This was super interesting to think about and explore and try to map onto my map of my cognition and my mind.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah agreed it was really cool to see the the analytical formal and the biological and the robotic coming together and so much appreciated tim for joining us and to adam for joining previously and all the other authors so hope to see you around yeah it was also from my side it was a nice discussion opened up a lot of new perspectives also for me a new idea so uh thank you for that

Thank you, Tim.

See you later.

Thank you, Blue.