## eZlG_J7sPj4

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

This is the Active Inference Lab.

It is Active Inference Lab live stream number 26.0 on August 6, 2021.

We're going to be discussing the paper Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes.

Welcome to Active Inference Lab everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here as well.

Today, as you can find out at this short link, we're going to be having the context video for the discussions on August 10th and 17th in number 26.1 and 26.2, which are gonna be group discussions with some of the authors joining.

So if you wanna join for any of these talks or discussions, then please just let us know.

And also we have a few weeks where we don't have a paper decided.

So if you have a suggestion and wanna be in those discussions, let us know.

Alright, today in Actim stream number 26.0, the goal is going to be to learn and discuss this paper, Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes, by DaCosta, Fristin, Heinz, and Pavliotis, which was posted in June 2021.

This video, just like all the .zeros, is just an introduction to some of the ideas and a walkthrough of the paper one way, it's not a review or a final word.

We're gonna give some overview to the paper, then address a few of the keywords from a big picture perspective, then go through the figures and the formalism.

I'm Daniel, and I'm a postdoc researcher in Davis, California.

So in this paper, the aims and the claims are laid out as followed.

They wrote, in this paper, we considered the consequences of a boundary mediating interactions between states internal and external to a system.

So it's about interfaces and interactions.

That's the first point.

On unpacking this notion, we found that the states internal to a Markov blanket look as if they perform variational Bayesian inference, optimizing beliefs about their external counterparts.

When the boundary is set up in a certain way for which kinds of systems, that's what we'll be asking.

How do those systems look from the outside or what does it look as if they're doing?

And then three, when subdividing the blanket into sensory and active states, we found that autonomous states perform active inference in various forms of stochastic control, i.e.

generalizations of PID control.

So a lot of these terms like variational Bayesian Markov blanket, PID control, we're going to be talking about more.

But at the overview level, that's the aims and claims as the authors write them.

The abstract states that the paper develops a Bayesian mechanics for adaptive systems.

And then there's only these three claims again, which are again related to the blanket and adaptiveness

systems and then this partitioning of that interface into sense and action.

So first we modeled the interface between a system and its environment with a Markov blanket.

This affords conditions under which states internal to the blanket encode information about external states.

Second, we introduced dynamics and represent adaptive systems as Markov blankets at steady state.

This allows us to identify a wide class of systems whose internal states appear to infer external states consistent with variational inference in Bayesian statistics and theoretical neuroscience.

Finally, we partition the blanket into sensory and active states.

It follows that active states can be seen as performing active inference and well-known forms of stochastic control, such as PID control, which are prominent formulations of adaptive behavior in theoretical biology and engineering.

This is going to be relating to math and physics with the Markov blankets and the far-from-equilibrium thermodynamics component.

and information theory and then it's also going to be developed into some domain specific cases or shown to be a generalization of domain specific cases like theoretical biology and engineering these are the sections of the paper so first there's an introduction which has some of the general concepts then there's a section on markov blankets which is going to be a key

framework and a key formalism to track because it's kind of what the paper's about.

So first technical sections about the Markov blankets, followed by a discussion of how that relates to Bayesian systems or certain types of Bayesian systems.

And then this general Bayesian framework is then sort of specified towards an active inference model, specifically with an eye towards stochastic control.

And then there's a discussion and conclusion.

And then there's three supplemental sections related to the synchronization map, which is about the synchronization of internal and external states and how that's related to some math results.

There's the Helmholtz decomposition,

which is related to vector fields and splitting them into different components.

And then there's the free energy computation and some more details related to what exactly that formalism is used as here.

The keywords of the paper were variational Bayesian inference, non-equilibrium steady state, Markov blanket, free energy principle, predictive processing, and active inference.

So first, non-equilibrium steady state.

Here's a figure from this paper, stable, unstable, and metastable states of equilibrium definitions and applications to human movement.

So there's gonna be some mathematical definitions and uses of non-equilibrium steady state, but this is a domain specific usage that gets at some of the nuances.

There's not just one single way to frame equilibrium, especially for dynamical systems.

And this is shown with an example of a person in movement.

So there might be a total thermodynamic equilibrium, like death, but even within the non-death regime, there are still many types of equilibrium.

There's lying down, there's sitting in a chair, there's a walking steady state, there's this meta-stable state, and then there's unstable states of equilibrium.

So a few just questions would be like,

what does it mean to have equilibrium of a measurement or a system at a given level and what's the difference between that static just something on the ground versus a dynamic equilibrium like something that maintains its position and uses energy to do that so in those cases where does the energy come from

How does this relate to dissipative systems?

So something where there's energy to be expended like a battery or a tornado.

And how does that relate to adaptive systems and predictive systems?

Which ones are related to active inference?

One or both?

And what about when there are multi-level systems of equilibria?

So some that are higher frequency or shorter time scale or smaller spatial scale and others that are broader.

And also what if we want to have action-oriented models of those systems?

So we want to have the description that's optimal for some other set of requirements other than just accurate measurement.

and that's where this paper is going to be kind of headed is thinking about dynamical systems in general and looking at equations that relate to solving them another keyword was variational bayesian inference and there's a lot of good literature on this topic from a lot of different perspectives but this article had a good way of phrasing it which is that

Variational inference methods consist in finding the best approximation of a distribution among a parameterized family.

And in contrary to sampling approaches, a model is assumed, which is the parameterized family, implying a bias, but also a lower variance.

In general, variational inference methods are less accurate than sampling based like MCMC ones, but produce results much faster.

These methods are better adapted to big scale, very statistical problems.

So again, to just kind of give a qualitative example, it's like the real world is giving you this data, which is the blurry image of a cat.

One way to get at what was the generative underlying cat that generated this blurry image would be to sample and find the most likely cat generating this image or do various other sampling schemes.

And if it's set up properly, it can fit arbitrary distributions.

However, it can be computationally expensive and really hard to know if you're solving the problem at a functional enough rate.

In contrast, the variational inference approach is related to fitting the data based upon a pre-specified family of distributions, which can still be really general.

And it can be fast, but it can sometimes lead to fitting the optimal support for a given distribution, but having it just be categorically wrong on some other dimension, like estimated through a deep time or something like that.

So variational Bayesian inference is this lower cat where there's a known cat and then you stretch and distort the cat, for example, re-parameterize the cat to find an underlying likely cat.

Another

Keyword was Markov blanket.

And there was good discussion of this with Mel Andrews in Actim Stream 14.

And we kind of had this continuum from Markov on the left here, which was studying systems from a mathematical perspective, didn't have a computer.

So it was looking at matrices and which elements of matrices were connected to each other or not.

And then that was developed later by Pearl and others in this broader Bayesian statistical framework.

That's where the Markov blanket terminology starts to come from.

And it's also oriented towards empirical data and discovering dependencies in data.

And it's very computational.

And then part of the literature that we're discussing is where Friston and others have

built on or used this Perl blanket slash Markov blanket theme and done a few things like separating the blanket states into sensory and action incoming and outgoing nodes, introducing the cybernetic imperative to be a goal-seeking or a multi-scale good regulator to maintain that non-equilibrium steady state, which we'll talk about, and we did,

And then also what's being explored from a formalism perspective in the paper we're discussing is how is it or under what conditions do internal states act as if they're a model of their non-local dependencies?

So causal dependencies in the world would be reflected by how the brain or some other computer system works.

So that entails this

generative model of the action in the niche and also brings in the element of including the blanket in internal external states as part of this broader inactive embodied and cultured slash pragmatic term also in active stream 14 we had this sort of progression emerging from the structuring of the paper

where there's a sort of vector field meets diffusion thermodynamics branch on the bottom with the Fokker plank and Helmholtz.

And that's related to non-equilibrium steady state densities.

And then the free energy principle, subsuming all these sort of pieces like the Markov blanket being maintained through time, necessitates the generative model of action is what the internal states have to be inferring.

So the useful components of the external world.

And then under free energy principle, there's all these sort of

related areas like active inference.

Is that an implementation of systems under the free energy principle?

How is this related to predictive processing, Bayesian brain?

So we talked more about that, but today we're gonna look at how it's used more by the authors in this paper.

So the first thing is that

The code is available on Connor's GitHub, and we'll also be talking with Connor, hopefully.

So let's maybe work through it, or if anyone has the chance to run it, tell us about how it went or what they learned from it, but I didn't get to run it.

We can start with figure one, which is laying out the big graphical intuition of the whole paper.

And everything is going to be specifying

constraints or some details or implications of a way of interpreting this intervention of the blanket states between internal and external states.

So we have mu, the internal states, b, the blanket states, and eta, which looks like a curly n. And this is gonna allow us to separate any set of nodes

mu that we're specifying and ask what are the blanket states that insulate from a some statistical codependency sense which we'll be exploring insulates these two partitions and um the caption says the markov blanket is depicted graphically as an undirected graphical model also known as a markov random field

The circles represent random variables.

The lines represent conditional dependencies between random variables.

The Markov blanket condition means that there is no line between mu, internal states, and eta, the external states.

This means that mu and eta are conditionally independent given B. So conditioned on the blanket,

these internal and external states are separated.

In other words, knowing the internal state mu does not afford additional information about the external state eta when the blanket state b is known.

Thus, blanket states act as an informational boundary between internal and external states.

So that's what the blanket states do, and this paper is going to explore some of the consequences of that.

Again, anyone who has more expertise in this area or some piece of knowledge that I totally missed or got wrong, my apologies, but just want to try to represent it as I saw it because a lot of the details I was just wanting to learn more about.

and go over with the authors.

So if anyone has comments in the chat, they can also just like mention it.

Okay, so let's jump into how they present some of the key pieces of the formalism because that's the details of free energy principle slash some of the grounding of active inference.

So even if this is new formalism for you, then also hopefully it's also interesting.

So keeping that picture in mind of figure one, another way of writing out that graphical model with a formalism is this eta and then upside down t. So that's the external states and then mu conditioned on b. So that is blanket states are Markov blanket separating internal and external states.

So in the top third of the slide, these are like writing out in prose the same thing as this graphical model.

And then we can take that tuple, that set of those three kinds of nodes.

So we have measurements from all these different things or generative models of each of these different categories of nodes.

And then that

set so all the measurements slash generative processes that x is existing in a bigger state space so the little x which consists of like the real measurements are part of the bigger x which is kind of like the capital versions of each of these

And those spaces, the E, B, and I, are taken to be Euclidean spaces for simplicity.

So I don't know if it holds for other kinds of spaces.

So that's just defining the total space, the possible states of each of these nodes, and then also the ones that you actually observe.

They start with

this case of a gaussian distribution p encoding the distribution of states of the world so p is a random variable that has drawn from n that's like a normal distribution symbol with a mean and a variance and the mean is zero and the variance is this um pi to the negative one

And this has an associated precision covariance matrix.

So mean zero, that's the convention, n means the normal distribution, and so it's zero mean, that's the variance, pi.

And the precision matrix is pi, so then the variance is this pi inverse.

And sometimes the equations are formulated in terms of precision, other times they're

discussed in terms of variance but those are kind of like two sides of the same coin because the same it's just like describing it whether it's how uncertain you are is like looking from the mean out and then your precision might be kind of like is like focusing down uh unpacking in terms of gaussian densities so we find that a markov blanket is equivalent to sparsity in the precision matrix

So the Markov blanket condition is entailing that the covariance, the pi, between external states and internal states, that's the first one here, is equivalent to between external states and internal states, the mu and the eta, and that both of those equal zero.

So there's no covariance, and they're the same as zero, so they're conditionally independent.

That's the Bayesian covariance matrix framing of the Markov blanket sparsity.

Blanket states act as an information boundary between external and internal states.

And this allows the breakdown of instead of the all by all consideration of correlations for data fitting or generative modeling, you can reduce

the model space to a much better formulated subset of equations which are related to inferring distributions relating to external states conditioning on the blanket states and internal states conditioning on the blanket states.

This enables us to associate to any blanket state its corresponding expected external and expected internal states.

So then this equation drew us a set of equivalencies, which were that the internal states as a function of blanket states, so mu of B, were equal to the expectation, fancy E, of mu conditioned on B. So that's the expectation of external states conditioned upon of internal states.

internal states conditioned on blanket.

I think that's corrected is right.

Then three, that that expectation is the same as the distribution that's being calculated involving the objective distribution P. And that also that that's related to

variants and covariance like this sigma variable of internal and blanket states mu and b mapping to the space of all the possible internal states which was i from here and then they wrote pursuing the example of the nervous system each sensory impression on the retina and ocular motor orientation blanket state

is associated with an expected scene that caused sensory input, which is the expected external state, and does an expected pattern and an expected pattern of neural activity in the visual cortex, expected internal state.

So it's a way that that objective distribution of P gets integrated into the internal model's output

given blanket states.

Or maybe there's another interpretation too.

So that was just, I don't know, one way to look at it.

This question about the relationship between the internal and the external states after you've not denoised them, but de-correlated them in a specific way,

is this topic of the synchronization map.

So they go from just pointing out that, okay, we've decorrelated internal and external states with these blanket states.

Now we're going to ask how these internal states might encode information about expected external states.

So after we've decorrelated systems, how do they have a memory or a model of one another?

For this, we would need to characterize a synchronization function, sigma, mapping the expected internal state to the expected external state given the blanket state.

So sigma mapping function of internal states of blanket states is gonna relate to the external states at a condition on blanket states.

So there's still the dependence of both internal and external states on

the blanket states B, and now there's a Sigma mapping that is gonna connect internal and external states.

And Lemma 2.1 goes through some details of that specification.

So the first is proposing that there is a function that maps internal and external states

for any blanket state.

I don't know how generally it holds, but, or this would be cool to talk to the authors about, but it's sort of proposing this sigma function.

And maybe in certain cases, it's a zero line.

Maybe in other cases, there's some meaningful relationship, but for biological systems, it does seem like there's a meaningful relationship.

So those are the systems that we wanna explore modeling.

then write in how to construct this synchronization map the key idea is to map an expected internal state mu of b to an expected external state eta of b and to do this the two points they provide are one to find a blanket state that maps to this expected internal state i.e by inverting mu and two from this blanket state find the corresponding expected external state

i.e.

by applying EDA.

We now proceed to solving this problem.

Given an internal state mu, we study the blanket states B such that the internal states of B equals mu.

They provide some details.

Maybe that is meant to be external states.

I'm not sure.

Here, they're framing that inference that mu is doing, the internal states, in terms of covariance matrices, which is in this equation 2.4.

and then frames that matrix of unknowns as a system of linear equations, or those are kind of similar representations, and then solves for it in the vector space using this equation 2.5.

They use this matrix negative function, which is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse function,

It would be helpful to have someone explain in a little more detail what the matrix inverse is or what degrees of freedom there are in choosing different kinds of matrix inverses.

But I just found it interesting from Wikipedia that a common use of the pseudo-inverse is to compute a best fit or least squares solution to a system of linear equation that lacks a solution.

Another use is to find the minimum norm solution to a system of linear equations with multiple solutions.

So this means that there might be multiple solutions that are equally well fit, and this just allows you to pick one fast, maybe.

And then they write that the key for the existence of a function sigma mapping expected internal states to expected external states given blanket states is that for any two blanket states associated with the same expected internal state, these be associated with the same expected external state.

This non-degeneracy means that the internal states, e.g.

patterns of activity in the visual cortex, have enough capacity to represent all possible expected external states, e.g.

3D scenes of the environment.

That's formalized in this lemma.

So, first was the point discussed before, that we're interested in positing the existence of this sigma function.

And then point two, so these are all points that are going to be equivalent to each other.

Point two is that for any two blanket states, one and two, that if the two external states are equal, I'm sorry, if the two internal states are equal to mu's of those two b's, then it's going to map on to equal points in mu's.

external world.

So the blanket is a map that conserves certain properties of the relationship between internal and external states.

Then points three and four of the lemma 2.1 use this kernel and image notation.

So here was a image that was kind of interesting about how spaces were mapped to each other.

So someone could definitely help explain what some of these mappings mean or what the implications are.

And then this sideways U shape

is the proper subset symbol.

So that's meaning that every element of the first one is in the second one, but B is a bigger subset.

So certain mappings between the internal and blanket covariance and the external and blanket covariance, and then similar for the pie.

Figure two provides a visualization of some simulations drawn that support, just from a simulation perspective, the existence of a useful synchronization map function.

So figure two on the left side shows a simulation

the external states given blanket states.

So those are the orange external states up.

These are the flipped.

Sorry about that.

So the

blue are the internal states the sigma mapping corresponding to the internal states conditioned on the external states and they're doing a very accurate job of mapping onto the external states in orange and then in b is a so-called non-example and

I'd be curious what changed or what was different about this second example, or is there more than one way to break the model?

What are the cases where it does or doesn't have a mapping?

Then in Section 3, they go from that sort of static estimate of variables that are just having a specific relationship to one another

to Bayesian mechanics operating through time.

So they write, in order to study the time evolution of systems with a Markov blanket, we introduced dynamics into the external blanket and internal states.

Henceforth, we assume a synchronization map under the conditions of the lemma 2.1.

So that was what was discussed up here.

And now in contrast with figure one, which was just the variables by themself,

Now we're putting the T subscript and looking at how those variables are changing through time.

We use a bacillus to depict an intuitive example of a Markov blanket that persists over time.

Here is the blanket state between the membrane and actin filaments of the cytoskeleton, which mediate all interactions between the internal states and the external states.

in example 3-1 they write there are many examples of stochastic processes at a gaussian steady state p to name a few stationary diffusion processes with initial conditions x0 tilde p their time evolution is given by an ito stochastic differential equation appendix b next slide that will be on the next slide

And then also example 3.1.

More generally, any Markov process at steady state P, such as the zigzag process, any mean zero Gaussian process at steady state, and any random dynamical system at steady state P. So questions for people who know more or the authors would be, what kinds of systems fall under this category of stochastic processes?

And what kind of real world systems would be modeled well or not by this formalism?

And then going a little deeper into that first point in the examples, Appendix B points to this Helmholtz decomposition, and that is conditioned on this Ito stochastic differential equation.

And again, just questions for someone who knows more or for the authors, what does this Ito mean?

calculation entail and what does or doesn't fit under this edo framework that would or wouldn't work using some other definition uh just not sure about that but in this helmholtz supplement

there is a very nice figure 10 that is looking at in this kind of hill climbing perspective so in an algorithm that's looking in its local neighborhood and doing a calculation to sort of make local decision making and hill climb

that action of a stochastic but hill climbing algorithm up this gradient or down depending on which way you set it up is going to have two components to its motion this

straight up the mountain component like putting a ruler on the mountain and the maximum slope and then another component that's at the same likelihood like the same altitude same energy that's going at an iso contour just like you can always do for a mountain so

with that idea in mind it's possible to take the full dynamic of a stochastic trace on the top left this is like this particle that is going different colors through time that's just like converging to the top of this mountain diffusing like to the bottom of the bowl like a marble going to the bottom of a bowl and then that trajectory can be separated into this spiral or I mean this

oval, the time irreversible component, and then a time reversible component that has a much more direct trajectory.

And that was in the section with remark 3.1, which is again related to the Ito stochastic differential equation, which I just am not too sure about.

but they write, when the dynamics are given by this Ito stochastic differential equation, a Markov blanket of the steady state density does not necessarily imply that internal and external states cannot influence each other.

So that's, I think, kind of the interesting tension in question is, how do certain mathematical definitions of conditional independence of blanket states separating internal and external states

how does that partition sometimes result in subsets or systems that don't influence each other versus systems that do?

So in the case of systems that don't influence each other, I was thinking of like an empty bottle of air in a room of air, like they're separated systems, but they interact through the bottle so they could transfer heat, for example, through hot,

bottle could transfer heat to the room but the systems would only interact conditioned on the temperature of the interface versus a person in a room could be planning or thinking about the external states so just how do we think about what kinds of systems are

still having an influence or a long-term implication for each other, even after conditioned on the interfacing a certain way?

And then also just how does this example provided kind of show that that'd be good to walk through?

And the absence of reciprocal influences between two states in the drift sometimes, but not always implies conditional independence.

Okay, going back to the main facts and figures in figure four, there's now looking at this synchronization map and transition probabilities for processes at the Gaussian steady state.

So on the left is we plot the synchronization map as in figure two, only here the samples are drawn from trajectories of a diffusion process with a Markov blanket.

So now it's a temporal process.

on the right panel there are the transition probabilities of that same diffusion process for the blanket state at two different times and this is called a joint distribution because there's two distributions that are being looked at jointly and if you kind of went to one side and looked through the cornfield one way you'd see this Gaussian

p of b sub s. And if you looked at it the other way, you'd see p of b through t. And then they write, which is kind of interesting, this shows that in general, processes at a Gaussian steady state are not Gaussian processes.

So that was just like very curious about what that meant.

In fact, the Ornstein-Ohlbeck process is the only stationary diffusion process that is a Gaussian process, so the transition probabilities of nonlinear diffusion processes are never multivariate Gaussians.

Not sure what that means, but sounded kind of interesting.

All right, so then, from this sort of mapping between internal and external states,

through time, the synchronization mapping, sigma, they write in the section on predictive processing, we can go further and associate to each internal state, mu, a probability distribution over external states, such that each internal state encodes beliefs about external states.

So

now rather than just framing these as two dynamical processes that track one another like oh there's this synchronization map between this random variable internally and this random variable externally they're going to frame this q distribution so q is going to be a probability distribution inside of mu

that's over external states, such that each of those states encode beliefs about external states.

So Q of internal states is about eta, and that's gonna be a normal distribution

with a mean of the actual external state it's like mean and variance um so it's eta and then sigma of mu the mapping function comma variance so here these two are both what it's being uh is being inferred is the the external state and the mapping and then there's the variance of the precision on external states

And then 3.4 is just giving a little bit more details about how that Q is like this internal function where the states of it are reflecting beliefs about external states.

And then there's a relationship to how the internal states are conditioned on blanket states.

This was a...

interesting remark that'd be cool to have people discuss would be when they wrote note a potential connection with epistemic accounts of quantum mechanics namely a world governed by classical mechanics sigma conditioned at zero or I don't know if there's another way to read that symbol with three lines in 3.2 I'm not sure because in 3.2 I'm not sure if there was a sigma

in which each agent encodes Gaussian beliefs about external states could appear to the agents as reproducing many features of quantum mechanics.

So this was just cool, like what is the relationship between the sigma internal external mapping function and then classical versus quantum mechanics?

So maybe classical systems are like the ones where there's a clean separation

between the internal and the external states, quantum states being ones that are more with residual influence between internal and external states.

So returning to the predictive processing, they write that under that three, four, so under this implication of the Q internal distribution,

Expected internal states are the unique minimizer of a Kolbach-Leibler divergence.

So that mu through time, internal states through time, are the minimization, the argument, over the mu states, internal states, of the dKL, the KL divergence, of...

the internal belief distribution Q about external states Q of eta double line diversions between the objective distribution of external states conditioned on blanket states.

So if that Q distribution can converge to the P, then that is being minimized effectively.

This measures the discrepancy between beliefs about the external world

q sub mu of eta, and the posterior distribution over external variables.

Computing the KL divergence, they're going to obtain this 3.5, and that's arg min, so it's minimizing the differential between sigma's prediction

So that's sigma of mu minus the actual external states through time, sigma mapping function of internal states minus the actual state, multiplied by, so pi of the precision matrix of eta relating to how wrong that differential is.

So that's kind of an interesting framing.

And then they write that the right-hand side of 3.5, that equation, is commonly known as the squared precision weighted prediction error, which is the discrepancy between the prediction and the expected state of the environment

and it's weighted with a precision matrix that derives from the steady state density.

This equation is formally similar to that found in predictive coding formulations of biological function, which stipulate that organisms minimize prediction errors, and in doing so, optimize their beliefs to match the distribution of external states.

So that's pretty cool, and we can talk more about it, but it kind of...

reminds me of this uncertainty reduction imperative rather than reward maximization imperative it's kind of like saying if the organisms are minimizing their prediction errors not maximizing the reward they will optimize their beliefs to match the distribution of external states so maybe that's related to that variance reduction imperative

So we had the predictive processing section and then there's one more layer that gets added on.

So from the Markov blanket to making it a Bayesian Markov blanket happening through time to introducing this Q distribution that's a special type of internal state

they write in the next section we can go further and associate expected internal states to the solution to the classical variational inference problem from statistical machine learning and theoretical neurobiology so it's going to be that q function is going to be a very specific kind of q function so

Not all systems are going to be doing this subtype of variational inference, or maybe they are.

That is something we could discuss.

But we can finesse that mapping function between the internal and external states and what exactly the internal states are.

Because if you can co-design both the internal states and the mapping, then

you have a lot of degrees of freedom in mapping on to external states even as they change.

So now we're going to do a really sub-special phrasing.

Maybe it's a more general one, but just one specific phrasing of how the internal states could map onto the external states.

And that's going to be as expected internal states as the unique minimizers of a free energy functional, i.e.

an evidence bound.

So now there's a F function over blanket and internal states through time.

And that f function is going to consist of two elements, which is like a divergence term that we saw before with a divergence between Q's internal estimate of external states, divergence and the actual external states, conditional blanket states, minus the evidence term.

And then that can be equivalent to this energy minus entropy term.

So that last line expresses the free energy as a difference between energy and entropy.

Pretty cool.

Energy or accuracy measures to what extent predicted external states are close to the true external states.

While entropy penalizes beliefs that are overly precise.

So that's cool.

Like energy is locking in on the good solution.

That's like maybe the component that is going up the hill and then entropy is keeping things away from just going up the hill and keeping this other component in.

But if entropy overwhelms the energy, then the solution will not kind of fit the situation.

So at first sight,

Variational inference and predictive processing are solely useful to characterize the average internal state given blanket states at steady state.

It is then surprising to see that the free energy says a great deal about a system's expected trajectories as it relaxes to steady state.

Pretty interesting.

So here's how they kind of show that.

Figure 5 is using that free energy minimizing framework.

to look at variational inference and predictive processing.

So the highlighted part says, the figure illustrates the system's behavior after experiencing a surprising blanket state.

So kind of like a perturbation.

This is a multi-dimensional Ornstein-Ohlbeck OU process with two external blanket and internal variables.

initialized at the steady state density conditioned on an improbable blanket state which was given at the initial time actual distribution of x and b at time zero and on the left top left quadrant is sort of this red to blue gradient of free energy so it's kind of high elevation to low elevation and through time the blanket states just converge down to the bottom of the bowl

So that's the free energy minimization in action.

The upper right is the free energy over time averaged over multiple trajectories.

So it starts out really high and then it kind of rolls down and it converges to this low level at 40 time points.

The lower left is showing this predictive processing framing.

of the q distribution versus the actual distribution and said at steady state from time step about 100 the predictions become accurate so that's showing how for the estimate of the parameter um converges to the accurate external states under their simulation be cool to do a walkthrough and then on the bottom right

is looking at the error, prediction errors, the covariance, so the two co-errors, the evolution of precision-weighted prediction errors over time.

These are normally distributed with zero mean at steady state.

Figure six is looking at

Maybe I didn't change.

Not sure exactly.

It's a similar figure.

It has a little bit of differences.

Again, showing the predictive processing lock-in on a free energy minimizing process, showing the average free energy initially having a slight increase maybe, and then just decreasing through time, and then also just showing that the...

the relationship of the covariance was raised up from zero and then started converging back to zero.

So just cool figures, but cool to see what other people would think about them.

In section four, we get to active inference and stochastic control.

So they write, in order to model agents that interact with their environment, we now partition blanket states into sensory and active states.

So everything that we've talked about before is like an undirected Bayesian graph.

It's not...

using that frist and blanket separation so that's where we're going to be bringing in a lot of other cool formalisms and ideas so let's go from that sort of blanket one type of fiber in the blanket to two now in order to model agents to interact with their environment we now partition blanket states into sensory and active states

So the blanket state B of T, blanket through C, is now two subsets of sensory and action states through time.

So now that whole tuple, the whole set that you need to infer the four kinds of states are external, sense, action, and internal.

Eta, S, A, U, mu.

And now that previous example of the bacillus, so here we had just one, we had external and internal states mediated by one kind of node, and now the external states are coupled to the sensory states, that's S of T, and sensory states are coupled to internal states, internal states are coupled to action states, and actions connect back to external states, also sense and action are connected to each other,

i wonder if that part is needed or i'm always wondering what topologies of connectedness different functionalities arise from and uh miguel aguilera's paper and recent uh guest stream speak to that so we take that dynamic markov blanket model from the previous sections and now split the blanket states into sense and action

that was this piece here now then they write intuitively in agents actions and internal states depend upon its sensations therefore we are interested in characterizing autonomous i.e active and internal so we can't control our senses directly but we can control internal states and active states so those two states we're going to think about that pair of notes given sensory states so

that is the following free energy equation that was brought up earlier so taking that free energy minimizing perspective on the distribution of mu internal states and blanket states as a whole b before we introduce the split here then do a similar free energy equation

with three variables on the sensory action and internal states which is just another way of saying the blanket states and the internal states mu and then etc etc more details that people can explain if they know better but the results that um

comes out relates to action so be cool to learn more about what this equation means but then they write this is known as active inference because expected autonomous states minimize free energy crucially active inference is a well-known framework to describe and generate adaptive behavior in neuroscience machine learning and robotics see figure eight so figure eight

is a similar diagram to we had before but now it's an active inference agent rather than just the free energy minimizer of the previous framing and then they write

The figure illustrates a system's behavior after experiencing a surprising sensory state, averaging internal variables for any blanket state.

This is an Ornstein-Ohlbeck process with two external, one sensory, one active, and two internal variables initialized at steady state density, conditioned upon an improbable sensory state.

And...

Also, one pattern that they found was that the free energy minimization here, it's relatively monotonic.

It kind of doesn't ever bump back up.

It just goes down or stays the same.

But then it was kind of interesting.

They said, we plot the free energy of the expected internal state averaged over multiple trajectories.

So this is not just one aberrant run.

In this example, or maybe...

This is just one example, but they wrote, the average free energy does not decrease monotonically.

See figure five for an explanation.

And then maybe we can learn more about that, but that was kind of cool.

Okay.

They continue on and write that any mean zero stationary Gaussian process with exponentially decaying autocovariance function, so it resembles itself less and less through time,

is an ornstein olbeck process which is kind of cool because in phylogenetics we sometimes would use this for let's just say the average femur length of some mammal and then you would be inferring a model that had an average value so it was kind of like a peg and then like a tether so like a diffusion term

and then a mean.

So just a mean and a variance that drift through time is like the Ornstein-Ulbeck or the OU process, sometimes known as Dube's theorem.

So those kinds of processes, which are apparently general enough to be really good model systems for studying math, I guess.

Thus, if...

c equals the finite sum of exponentially decaying functions we can express s of t the states sensory states as a linear function of several nested ou processes i.e an integrator chain from control theory so the integrator chain was kind of a cool idea and we'll talk about maybe applications of integrator chain in a few slides

but just to continue with the math that they have.

So there's this S of T, states through time, sensory states, is going to be this F function.

And then there's these kind of similar D equations.

So it says in this example,

f and f sub i are suitably chosen linear functions not sure what the pronunciation is but the squiggle are matrices and w are standard brownian motion thus we can see sensory states through time st as the output of a continuous time hidden markov model whose hidden states s of t superscript i

encode various orders of motion, position, velocity, jerk, etc.

These are known as generalized coordinates of motion in the Bayesian filtering literature, which we'll look at graphically in Figure 9.

And more generally, the state process S of T and the function f need not be linear, which enables to realize nonlinear non-Gaussian processes S of T. Technically, this follows as Ornstein-Olbeck processes are the only stationary Gaussian Markov processes, yet we emphasize that stochastic realization is not as well developed in the general case.

So this is in a way saying that we're gonna have like the position of the ball is the sensory data.

That's like the first pass of where the ball is.

That's the measurement.

That's the sensory data.

Then there's the variance.

And then there's the second derivative of that statistical moment.

And so if the variance is equal through time, then you can just integrate away and the higher levels are zero and you've kind of locked on to the pattern after just one or two levels.

But there's other distributions where as you go to higher and higher derivatives, higher moments,

There's just more or different information.

So there's this concept of the integrator chain where these relationships of equations are all integrals or derivatives of each other, which are kind of like going up or down in this rows of equations.

And then this helps use Gaussian type mathematics, like the OU stochastic process, where a lot of the math is clean.

It allows you to apply these systems of equations of well-behaved types, OU, to model highly nonlinear systems.

So this was related to some interesting discussions.

Avil, I'll look forward to hearing what you have to say about these so-called generalized coordinates of motion.

And that relationship between control theory and then looking at nonlinear functions as relationships of integrals and derivatives leads to this discussion of the PID control.

So proportional integral derivative control, PID, is a well-known control method in engineering.

More than 90% of controllers in engineered systems implement either PID or PI, no derivative, like just proportional integral control.

The goal of PID control is to control a signal, S sub T, its integral, S sub T with a zero instead of a one, and its derivative, S sub T with a two, close to a pre-specified target value.

So it's like, I want 95% battery, and I want it to be a rectangle at 95%, and its derivative to be such and such during use.

This turns out to be exactly what happens when we take stochastic control of an integrator chain

with three orders of motion.

So that's just a three-level model in this sort of infinite rows of the moments of the distribution.

The three levels are just what are described here, the signal, the integral, and the derivative.

When f is linear, expected autonomous states control to what extent integral, proportional, and derivative processes, S of t at 0, 1, and 2 levels of derivative, are from their target value of 0.

So it's like if it's a linear response function, then the first derivative is going to be a constant value, and then the second derivative, you get rid of it.

Furthermore, from F and K alone, one can derive integral proportional derivative gains, which penalize deviations of these three moments respectively from the target value of zero.

So these are highly optimizable problems and computable.

Crucially, these control gains are simple byproducts of the steady state density and the stochastic realization problems.

This is a cool question.

Why restrict ourselves to PID control when stochastic control of integrator chains is available?

It turns out that when sensory states S of T are expressed as a function of an integrator chain, one may get away with controlling an approximation of the true sensory process obtained by truncating high orders of motion as these have less effect on the dynamics.

Though, knowing when this is warranted is a problem in approximation theory.

So how, let's just say we open the door to doing infinite derivatives of statistical distributions, infinite variances upon variances.

How would we know when to stop?

That's the problem in approximation theory or approximation science.

This may explain why integral feedback control, which is just like battery good, PI control, n equals one, and then the PID control with two extra layers of the derivatives, are the most ubiquitous control methods in engineering applications.

However, when simulating biological control, usually with highly nonlinear systems, it is not uncommon to consider generalized motion to fourth or sixth order.

So that's pretty cool.

um like how many levels of recursion and depth in modeling are needed to have a people so calling back to here when we defined that initial sense function as part of this integrator chain setting off the integrator chain here's that initial sense function as part of a broader set of dependencies

So here is that sense function at time three, six, and nine.

The figure is depicting in a graphical format, the Bayesian network of those equations flipped.

The encircled variables are random variables, and the processes are indexed at an arbitrary sequence of subsequent times.

The arrows represent relationships of causality.

So the sensory states are not causing each other through time.

They're getting measured through time, but they are being emitted through time by this S at the zeroth level, like just the base generative model,

of this s of zero level function so this is the generative process then that can have higher derivatives of change and each of those are being framed as well behaved statistically so in the hidden markov model and these white nodes are hidden states but they're inferred by statistics

The hidden state processes as a T is given by an integrator chain, i.e.

nested stochastic differential equations.

These processes can be seen as encoding the position, velocity, Jurek, et cetera.

So higher derivatives of the distribution.

So this integrator chain is kind of a cool idea.

here was one paper stabilization of integrator chains in the presence of magnitude and rate saturations a gain scheduling approach so this paper wrote and the conclusions in this paper we have given a time varying controller so kind of like a heuristic or an algorithm for control for stabilizing a chain of integrators in the presence of magnitude and rate saturations

It is proved that the controller gives a convergent closed loop system, i.e.

for any bounded state initial condition, the state will converge to the origin.

The main strength of the controller is that it gives provable convergence without being overly conservative.

This is verified in a simulation study.

So it's kind of like we have the frame of the airplane at steady state, which is flying through the air.

So how are we going to re-equilibrate all the sensors so that if we get knocked off to the side, what's the path by which we're going to get those sensors back to their desired level?

And it's just a question.

Oh, and this was kind of what it looked like, one of the figures from the paper.

So these are these derivative functions that get bumped and then they come back to the level that they're desired, almost in this signal processing-like way.

So what are integrator chains?

How are they used?

Maybe someone has used them before.

That'd be cool.

And then one kind of random thought was there's a lot of cases where we frame a process as mean zero because it allows thinking about something in relationship to a defined axis, whether it's the number line or whether it's some other variable.

it kind of splits half the things negative and positive, or there's various other times.

But there's actually a bunch of places and maybe more, or maybe these are not all the same.

So it's okay if somebody knows more and helps us all out.

But there's actually a few cases where a distribution that's hard to estimate is replaced with a zero mean.

Like sometimes there's replacing elements of a list with a Z-score, like their standard deviation from the mean.

or the mode, but then it's like half are above and half are below.

So that's like replacing something with a zero centered z-score or t-distribution.

Sometimes there are error distributions, which are extracted from a signal.

It's like the signal is the underlying line, and the goal of the signal extraction is to leave your error distribution mean zero, and then equally distributed in both directions.

So sometimes we're pulling out an error distribution.

Sometimes we're trying to find an error distribution

that mean zero get to a level of derivative of a signal where the mean is zero like where the rate of change of some high derivative is zero which implies that it's not changing at that level and then sometimes we're trying to get um like in predictive processing study the differentiable or predictive processing with trying to get a zero centered variance on the sensory input

but more about how we can study the differential between some controllable distribution and then some other distribution that we can't control and then how to make how to zero center that to determine which solutions are better or worse than each other and there's a lot of different methods there and then there was this other paper

Time optimal regulation of the chain of integrators with saturated input and internal variables in application to trajectory planning.

So again, just kind of a open question.

What is the relationship between integrator chains and then this idea that we talk about a lot with action planning as inference?

Then the conclusion.

This paper outlines some of the key relationships between stationary processes, inference, and control.

These relationships rest upon partitioning the world into those things that are internal or external to a statistical boundary known as a Markov blanket.

When equipped with dynamics, the expected internal states appear to engage in variational inference, while the expected active states appear to be performing active inference in various forms of stochastic control.

The rationale behind these findings is rather simple.

If a Markov blanket derives from a steady state density, the states of the system will look as if they are responding adaptively to external perturbations in order to recover the steady state.

Conversely, well-known methods used to build adaptive systems implement the same kind of dynamics implicitly so that the system maintains a steady state with its environment.

So maybe this isn't a totally accurate classification.

but there's some algorithms that are being connected on one side to each other.

So we have learning and optimization, learning as inference, all of machine learning, et cetera, learning and optimization, and then variational inference being used as an optimization technique with the gradient descent by free energy in machine learning and maybe in evolutionary systems

then there's this question about estimating latent causes in the world and connecting that to higher derivatives in the integrator chains or as just variables under consideration that's that mapping of external states which aren't directly seen and then maybe this one goes on this side but

uh there's this whole other set of algorithms related to adaptive systems and these are framed variously but we have adaptive systems cybernetic systems anticipatory systems holism homeostatic slash active learning allostatic agents all these sort of biologically inspired

yes drawing on far from equilibrium thermodynamics but here was like the flame dissipating like it's about something that just sort of gets to its free energy minimization just like gets there but with these active systems the question becomes how do we take this ongoing multi-scale inference side and connect it to this multi-scale action in the loop

niche modifying, also action planning, biology section.

One friend looked at these slides and then made a comment and they wrote, I think it would be good to expand on the differences of the paradigms in section three, which were lettered as they were in the paper, a priori,

A posteriori estimation, afterwards estimation, predictive processing, and variational base.

I get the differences formally, but still not at a super intuitive level.

So this might be good as a pedagogical exercise for ourselves.

So that'd be cool.

Maybe everyone can think about that and come to their own explanation for what the difference is between these three.

And we'll talk about it in the dot one and dot two.

Then just a few of the implications and bigger questions that are raised by the paper.

So in the section on interacting Markov blankets, they write, the sort of inference we have described could be nuanced by partitioning the external state space into several systems that are themselves Markov blankets, such as Markov blankets nested at several different scales.

from the perspective of internal states this leads to a more interesting inference problem with a more complex generative model it may be that the distinction between the sorts of systems we generally think of as engaging in cognitive inferential dynamics and simpler systems rest upon the level of structure in their generative models i.e the steady state densities that describe their inferential dynamics

So that's pretty cool about maybe this framework or at least work in this level of analysis mapping just directly to nested Markov blankets.

And it brings up this whole discussion about,

what kinds of systems can we model with active inference so no one's saying that the stock market is an auto-regressive model but people use auto-regressive models so what kinds of systems will we usefully be able to model with active inference without really just getting into a debate about whether it quote is active inference in the system just how are we going to use variational base methods with

modern twists and developments related to cybernetics and multi-scale systems.

So that's like the instrumentalism side.

And then the realism side is what kind of systems are doing active inference?

So there's maybe even a realism of philosophy branch, and then even maybe on the applied side, like it's a philosophical debate.

Is the cell doing active inference, doing free energy principle?

Is it realizing certain constraints of nature?

Or how would we know what an ant is quote, doing free energy minimization in its brain?

And then on the engineering side,

It could be argued that if a robot is implementing active inference code, that it is actually doing active inference.

So this question about designing systems within the active inference framework, so instead of saying, I think all internet networks are active inference systems, it's definitely a claim somebody could make, interesting claim, but it's quite another thing to design a computer network that is within an ontology of active inference.

then it would be fair to say that that network is, quote, doing active inference.

So that's like realism.

And maybe for some, it's more of an engineering realism.

Others, it's a philosophical realism.

Another implication and bigger question that arises in the paper is about temporally deep inference.

So they write, this distinction may speak to a straightforward extension of the treatment on offer from simply inferring an external state to inferring the trajectories of external states.

So again, moving from not just the point estimate, current estimate of external state, that was what was presented earlier, to inferring the trajectories of external states, which is to say decomposing their higher orders of movement.

This may be achieved by representing the external process in terms of its higher orders of motion by solving the stochastic realization problem.

By repeating the analysis above, internal states may be seen as inferring the position, velocity, Jurek, etc.

of the external process consistently with temporally deep inference in the sense of a Bayesian filter, a special case of which is the extended Kalman-Busi filter.

So these are cool things to talk about.

We could talk about what is temporarily deep active inference, what

are the ways that the model deals with internal and external categories and discrete variables.

How do we deal with the inference on external states and how does that relate to our action selection?

And then what happens when there's a feedback or some other type of interaction with the niche, the informational niche, the social niche, the stigmatic niche.

So, or other questions people can write.

Well, that was

a sort of quick run through the paper.

And I'm not sure if I got each section 100% correct, so it will be good to have the author's perspective on a lot of pieces as well as a lot of other experts who I'm sure could have said a ton more and better about some of the math.

But we can offer up the same questions that we have for any paper, like, what might a good understanding enable?

what are the unique predictions and implications and the unique developments of this paper what are some of the next steps for free energy principle and active inference research what are the goals of this research and then also to the participants and the authors what are they still curious about learning so uh

Thanks for participating.

It was a fun 26.

And we hope that you'll join for 26.1 and 26.2 if you can or comment on the videos or whatever.

And thanks.

Talk to you later.

Bye.

## 1rHz3Ir5v9c

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

Today it is August 10th, 2021, and we're here in live stream number 26.1 discussing Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, if it's your first time or not.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams so people can just raise their hand visually or in the jitsi if they want to speak.

This short link here has our calendar of live streams for the year.

And we're here in number 26, where today on the 10th, and then next week on the 17th, we're gonna be continuing discussion on the Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes paper.

And then we're gonna launch into some other papers.

So take a look at that link if you wanna learn more.

Today in live stream number 26.1, the goal is going to be to learn and discuss, thankfully and really appreciatively with some of the authors of the paper.

We're gonna be discussing this Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes paper and asking questions, writing things down we wanna look up over the coming week and just seeing what is fun to talk about in this paper.

So we'll start with just an introduction and a warm-up of the non-authors, and then we'll go to the authors for conveying anything that they'd like to just at the outset.

So I'm Daniel, and I'm a postdoc in California.

I'll pass it to Avil.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello, I work in the AI and modeling collective intelligence.

I founded and coordinate the Kairos Research Laboratory on building inactive models for navigating the Anthropocene.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Let's go to Stephen and then Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, welcome.

My name is Stephen Sillett.

I'm based in Toronto and looking forward to hearing the new developments in Active Influence this paper covers.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Dean?

Good morning.


SPEAKER_05:
I'm Dean.

I'm a retired guy.

I live in Calgary and I'm trying to see what new insights can be provided by all this math because it's quite impressive to me.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So onto Lance and Conor, whichever one of you would like to go first and sort of give us the big picture and how we got here and how you got to this work before we jump into the paper.


SPEAKER_02:
Conor, do you want to go?


SPEAKER_06:
You should go ahead, Lance.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So hi, everyone, and thanks for inviting me, Daniel.

So my name is Lance, and I'm doing a PhD in math and neuroscience in London.

with Carl Friston and Greg Pavliotis.

And basically, I came to writing this paper and doing this kind of research because I'm interested in the question of artificial intelligence.

And I think a lot of people who are doing machine learning are approaching the question from an engineering perspective.

But I'm more interested in the scientific perspective, the scientific question of what intelligence is and what do we really need to create an intelligent system.

And so researching around what people were doing, I found out about the free energy principle.

And to me, it was the most mathematical piece of work that I had seen in neuroscience.

And it seemed like it could encompass many things.

And you also had applications in active inference to model the brain and generate autonomous agents.

And so now in my PhD, my goal is to deeply understand the free energy principle and to lay out the mathematical foundations, because I think the free energy principle started out as an intuition and gradually people have tried to make it more formal and grounded in mathematics.

And so this is what we're trying to do in this paper.

So this paper is not the end, but I think it's a step forward.

So I'm really excited to

to share it and talk about it with you guys.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Sounds really cool about starting as an intuition and then working to ground in mathematics, or then would it be grounded in intuition and then elaborated with mathematics?

So, Conor?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, thanks.

I'm happy to be here.

And good morning, good afternoon to some of you, depending on the time zone.

So yeah, my name is Connor Heinz.

I'm a PhD student at the Max Planck Institute for Animal Behavior, the Department of Collective Behavior in Konstanz, Germany.

And I'm co-advised by Carl Fristen at UCL and then Ian Cousin, who's my advisor in Konstanz.

I'm in the US at the moment.

But yeah, so I am also generally interested in Bayesian mechanics, I think.

So Lance and I started our PhD at the same time.

And ever since I found out that Lance was also interested in kind of the mathematical foundations of the free energy principle, we've been in discussions about Bayesian mechanics for a long time.

So I was really grateful that he invited me to contribute to this paper and kind of, it relates to my own interests because I actually used to be more involved in neuroscience.

Now I've moved more onto the idea that

any generic complex system can be described as engaging in a kind of process of approximate Bayesian inference.

And so I'm exploring that in my own research in the context of collective behavior.

So in particular things that collective motion, like schooling in fish and flocking in birds.

So this paper, I think,

it gets at kind of the mathematical foundations of sentience and autonomy in all kinds of systems, not just nervous systems.

So that's why the framing in terms of stochastic processes, I think is really powerful because it allows us to extend the framework to all kinds of complex adaptive systems, not just the ones we might associate the predictive coding free energy formulation with like brains.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

And a really nice point that like there's activity in the nervous system, but it's not moving or the subunits are not moving around.

So what are the similarities and the differences or what's the framework that's going to allow us to accommodate systems that are moving around like the schools of fish, flocks of bird, and then systems where the topology is either fixed or slowly changing.

And we have to do similar kinds of dynamical analysis.

So also welcome, Dave.

So Stephen, I see your hand raised, go for it.

And then anyone else who wants to ask a question at this stage?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just I'd like to comment.

I think those, thanks for the introductions and those insights.

I think, you know, as there's been this progression, oh, we've gone from Bayesian approaches and now we had predictive processing approaches and active inference approaches.

It's nice to also think about, okay, once we start to generalize, it can be nice to go back

um to the bayesian idea more broadly and see okay now that active influence supports all of that you could then start to open the net so to speak so i'm interested in a lot of community psychology approaches and even interactive theater and immersive theater where you're trying to work with people's sense making so i like that

re-broadening to maybe a more heuristic mindset um so i thought that was interesting cool so anyone can


SPEAKER_00:
raise their hand at any point, but let me just maybe start with our, as we tiptoe to the edge of the paper, like what brought you, either of the authors to this framing?

Did you find something in the junkyard that was looked over or was there something that was already being worked on and you wanted to introduce a new thread or how did it come to be composed and worked on in this way?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, so there has been... So I think Cal Friston has been working for the past decade in trying to put mathematics on the free energy principle and trying to explain why... So as I mentioned before, I think the free energy principle started out as an intuition.

And I think he has been working for the past decade on a mathematical theory or a physical theory for why the free energy principle

should hold as an explanation for what the brain is doing.

And so what we wanted to do in this paper is to actually take these developments that were mostly coming from physics and that weren't necessarily as general as they could be or as mathematically rigorous as they could be and actually put it on a firm mathematical framework.

and try to explain it clearly.

And I mean, as clearly as possible.

So that was the goal here.


SPEAKER_00:
So what do you think that intuition was?

Or maybe there's a lot of ways that I'm sure first in and others have said it, but what is the intuition that at least you are pursuing with this work?


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So I think the intuition, so I think it came from two different ways, from two different ideas.

So the first idea is if you come from machine learning and you look at machine learning from a very broad perspective, you look at many different algorithms and you look at what they do, you look at many different problems and you look at what they do.

And it actually turns out, and I think that's something that people started to realize in the early 2000s, that a lot of these algorithms, arguably all of these algorithms, they can be seen as minimizing free energy.

And so without getting deeply into that, I think the moral of the story is that a lot of the things that work in machine learning

are special cases of minimizing free energy, so of doing some kind of Bayesian inference.

And so many of these problems, you can think of them as like special cases of Bayesian inference.

So I think if you come from machine learning, then it would be quite natural to say, or at least you could say, oh, approximate inference or free energy minimization is the most general thing you can do in machine learning.

And therefore, since the brain engages in some kind of commission,

it seems reasonable to assume that it may be doing some kind of Bayesian inference.

And approximate Bayesian inference, so minimizing free energy, is the most general way to look at it.

So that's one way to get to a free energy principle.

But maybe it's not very convincing.

So I think the other way you could get to a free energy principle

which is more grounded in physics.

And I think that was the content of the original papers, is that if you look at a system that persists over time, so a system that does not dissipate, then you can show that it has to be optimizing something.

And then it has to be optimizing some what people call model evidence.

So this system must have implicitly or explicitly a model of its environment.

And it has to be optimizing.

In order not to dissipate, it has to be optimizing that model.

And then you can show that actually minimizing free energy enables you to do that.

So I think that's the other way.

Anyway, so what we did in this paper is we took this intuition of what it means to persist.

So there's actually a clear way of thinking about those things in mathematics and stochastic processes.

So what we did in this paper is we look at systems that persist over time.

And we also look at systems as the first assumption.

And then the second assumption is that the system has to be separated by a boundary with its environment.

And I think intuitively it makes sense, because we're looking at systems that are bounded with their environment.

So they interact via a Markov blanket, but they cannot mix, per se, with the system.

It's not like milk and coffee, if you wish.

It's like a person in an environment.

well-defined in space.

So these are the two things that we assume in this paper.

And then we show that you can actually describe the system as minimizing free energy in some way.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that.

It's interesting about the machine learning branch towards the FEP and then the physics branch, because of course there's also sort of the third leg of that triangle with the physics and machine learning.

So we go from that just a interdisciplinary connection or an interface

to add in the third, which is this active inference or the free energy type framings.

And all of a sudden, some of the ideas that were a little bit hard to map from machine learning and physics kind of come around the horn.

And maybe there's a way that we can see active inference playing a role there.

So again, anyone can just raise their hand if they have a question or write a question in the live chat.

Here's the roadmap.

these were the sections of the paper which introduced that boundedness notion of the markov blanket discussed bayesian mechanics active inference and stochastic control and then had a nice discussion and conclusion with a few supplemental sections so

What went into how you laid out the arguments or what sections do you think were condensed or which ones would you want to expand on more?

So first just to the authors on that and then Avil, your question.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

Hello, Lance and wait, Connor.

I have a question.

Before we get into detail, I'm curious whether you were aware of the kind of criticism that an activist launched at the strategy principle in certification in cognitive science.


SPEAKER_02:
Could you mention what specific criticism we're talking about?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, so I'm referring to the paper Laying Down a Fucking Path by DiPaolo, Thompson and Beer.

There is a lot of criticism that is just completely out and related to anything that Actim says, but the core thing that seems relevant to me


SPEAKER_00:
is the role of creation and historicity and well self-creation in cognition intelligence and life so yeah the paper just i'm going to put it in the chat is laying down a forking path incompatibilities between inaction and the free energy principle so first to the authors for any thoughts on that and then steven with a hand raised


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

Um, so, so I haven't read this particular paper.

Um, so I can, I can give you an answer that's specific to this particular paper.

Um, I would say, I would say from a general point of view, so yeah, there's a lot of criticism on the free energy principle.

And I think it's natural because the principle aims to be, it's to be very general and it's also an extremely ambitious.

In regards to the criticism so far, it's either been on the mathematics.

And so this is something that we've fixed with the current paper.

So I think a lot of the mathematical criticism in the literature is rendered void by this paper.

And there are, there are other, um, um, I would say philosophical criticisms, uh, on the principle.

So it's not something I'm expert about cause I'm, I'm a mathematician.

Um, so I wouldn't be able to, to really debate about the philosophy here.


SPEAKER_06:
Um, so I'm not aware of.

Daniel, you said you put the link to the paper in the chat?


SPEAKER_00:
I'll put it in the Jitsi chat in just a second.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Because I noticed you mentioned the words like creation and historicity.

I'm not aware of the particular argument, but an argument that I've heard against the free energy principle that reminds me of what you just said, and this is one of the more philosophical arguments, not the mathematical things that Lance just mentioned, is the idea that

The free energy principle, the inference interpretation of a system with a Markov blanket at steady state, it rests on the idea of a steady state.

So basically there's an invariant measure of the system over time.

And when people have tried to say, relate or claim that something like societies or large scale sociocultural or sociotechnical systems are engaging in

free energy, you kind of have to enforce this assumption of a stationary steady state distribution on the system.

And so when you say things like historicity, I think of like revolutions or something, right?

So that kind of things where the kind of intrinsic nature of the system seems to shatter or fundamentally change, and that would seem to question

or violate the steady state assumption, which is kind of a baseline thing you need in order for the free energy principle maths to apply.

I can respond to that argument, but I don't actually know if that's the argument laid out in this paper.

That's just kind of what my brain jumped to when you mentioned things like historicity and creation and destruction.

Is that the core of the argument though?


SPEAKER_04:
So a thing like a revolution is not necessarily a sign of historicity.

It can be predetermined in the formulation of the demical system.

But what I'm speaking about in demical terms is the presence of a bifurcation that will be irreversible.

For example, we drive on the right of the road because some guy said so like 200 years ago, and this does not leave the law ever.

This is an example of forking or path dependency or historicity.

So that is the kind of arguments that DiPaolo and Thomson and Beer are leveraging.

but it is formally not proportionate because hegocity does not entail the absence of historicity.

It's Bernoulli systems that do not show historicity.

Hegodic systems only do not show irreversible transitions, which is a much quicker condition.

But where there is a convergence to a better argument is that

To have a test space description of a demical system, you have to assume, wait, English is broken, assume that this test space is fixed throughout the evolution of a system.

And if we agree with an activist and a system biologist like Kaufman and Monteville,

Yeah, Montevideo does, and Longo.

That core property of the integrative system is to, well, make sense to find observables and to create solutions to problems that did not exist beforehand.

Then the state space is not fixed.

It's created along the system's evolution.

It is not something you can account with a state space description of a numerical system that has state states, destructive states,

distribution, sorry.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think I would agree that as it currently stands, the free energy principle couldn't deal, the math couldn't deal with varying state spaces where literally the actual

interpretations or the finite dimensionality of the system states is changing over time.

Usually, you assume some fixed integer dimension for all the stochastic processing stuff, although maybe Lance could comment on that.

I'm sure that could potentially be extended to infinite dimensional, like partial differential equation-style formulations.

But if I understood you correctly, the first part of what you said about path dependence and irreversibility, that is all totally

accommodated by the maths laid out in Lance's paper.

So there's a very strong part of the flow that is irreversible.

Another way of describing that is you could say there's a strong degree of path dependence in the trajectories of the system.

So path dependence per se is totally accommodated

and easily path-dependent systems can fit into the free energy framework.

But the state space changing itself over time, that's something that I haven't really even thought about.

It's an interesting argument.

But I would agree that I don't think the free energy principle currently is equipped to deal with the state space itself being altered over time.

That's usually assumed to be fixed.

But I don't know.

Maybe Lance has a different opinion on that.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

Yeah, I completely agree with Connor.

So in this paper, we don't discuss changing state spaces.

And I think in terms of future work, that would really be the next step.

So I think the current formulation gives a mathematical framework to think about adapting systems.

But it doesn't really talk about, like,


SPEAKER_01:
environments that structurally change over time for example thanks um stephen and then we can continue on on this i think this also speaks to that the legs of that stool that was being talked about earlier if you're coming from a math and machine learning you've got um

you know, you've got more lower dimensional approaches, but they show the principles.

And then when you get into the inactive approaches, they're looking more from a biological perspective.

So it might also be a little bit around the very high complexity.

But my understanding is that

the dependency on ergodicity and also the ability to do approximation science interpretations of the machine learning does start to make this math overcome some of those limitations because it has more, that's my understanding is that the reliance on ergodicity is not as rigid now.


SPEAKER_00:
So let's go to the Markov blanket and then return to some of these important distinctions like ergodic systems, steady state, stationary.

So I'm gonna put the Markov blanket up through time, figure three.

Figure one has just sort of the timeless, the classic blanket.

And then figure three is adding a subscript T. So having that,

uh those variables describe time dependent functions since that's kind of what we're talking about with the dynamical systems so maybe to the authors like how do you summarize what this graphical figure means what is it being what is being blanketed what does it mean to blanket and then how does that relate to steady state or stationary distributions which are in the title of the paper


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So the Markov blanket is really the mathematical way in which you talk about boundaries.

And so having a Markov blanket simply means that the internal states here, they're separated from the external states by the blanket states.

And then the fact that the system is at steady state means that the blanket persists over time.

And so this is really the two things that we need when we're talking about a biological system or a stone.

So we need something internal to the stone or the biological system.

something external and then some kind of interface and of course when you're talking about something very simple like a stone it's not very interesting because you don't have any exchanges between what's internal and external via the blanket but when you're talking about biological systems like like cells or or bacillus you do have exchanges of matter of energy and information and that's something that you can accommodate with the mark of blankets


SPEAKER_00:
That's, it's almost a tension in the definition of boundedness, which is you said, well, there is a boundary, but then also it's exchanging matter energy information.

So what is the boundaries meaning?

If those are allowed to pass through it, Connor, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_06:
I'm unmuted, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, no, you're good.


SPEAKER_06:
I'm good.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So I would, uh, I would say that's a great question because basically the boundary we're talking about isn't when, when you shake a boundary for like a physical system, people often make assumptions about causality.

So that something on one side of the blanket can't affect something on the other side of the blanket, but because of this exchange of matter and energy across the blanket.

The actual definition of the Markov Blanket is a statistical one.

It just means that this boundary is statistically, in a sense, segregates the internal and the outside.

And that statistical separation can actually critically differ from just direct causal interactions.

So the actual definition of the Markov Blanket in a statistical sense

is that the internal states when conditioned on the blanket states are statistically independent of the external states and vice versa the external states when conditioned on blanket states are statistically independent of the internal states and just saying that definition might not make the intuition any more clear but that really is all that it is

So then when we actually look at the dynamics of particular physical or systems or stochastic processes, that statement can entail all kinds of causal graphs and all kinds of influences between those subsets.

It's really the statistical independence

which defines the boundary.

Yeah, so I think that's kind of the kernel of the definition.

And for certain kinds of statistical distributions, we can actually really precisely look at the structure of things like the stationary covariance, which is basically the covariance matrix of the process at steady state.

And you can read off what systems are outside the blanket, what subsets of variables are outside the blanket, what subsets are inside the blanket, which subsets of variables are the blanket.

So it's a really precise definition that kind of goes beyond whatever intuitions you might bake into that on your own about causality.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome points.

So Serval?


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry.

Does this not entail that blanket, if there is any causal interaction between internal and external states, then blanket states will mediate this causal interaction?

Because if they did not, then you would have information that will go directly from external to internal or vice versa.

So it's correct.

Then there is some causal sense to blankets.

Is it correct or not?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, yeah, definitely.

And that's a really good point.

So really what the blanket does is to separate the inside from the outside statistically.

And so what that means is that any information about the internal states, that any transmission of information on anything about the internal states that influences external states has to do it through the blanket states.

So there is a notion of causality, but it's like, as you said, the internal and external cannot affect each other directly.

They have to do it through the blanket.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So Dean, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, this might be a strange question, but that's fine.

So the blanket is kind of, we just use that as a way of describing the interface.

My question is, because most of the math that you guys use is over my head, but I appreciate that you've been able to come up with it.

My question is, we're thinking about this metaphorically, does the blanket

come with its own perforations?

I mean, we talk about it acting as a mediator, but is there a math that can kind of show it's managing this information flow back and forth, but does it already exist with these perforations present?

Or how is the math gonna tell us how that medium works?

Or is it, did you guys already explain that?

Because maybe I just didn't appreciate it when I read


SPEAKER_02:
paper um yeah that's a really good question so we didn't expand on that in the paper um and so it's good that we talk about it now so the definition of marker blanket as it is taking the paper allows for boundaries that are completely opaque so without any kind of transmission but also boundaries that would let anything through

So, so with this formalism is, is quite general.

Um, and so far we don't make any assumptions about the structure of the blanket.

And so it could be very permeable, not very permeable.

You can have all sorts of things.

Um, and, and I think that that's also, um, really interesting because then

I mean, ultimately, we want a theory that describes biological systems.

And so the blanket states have some degree of permeability in biological systems that we can actually exploit mathematically.

So we don't do that here.

Here the blanket is completely arbitrary, and so it could describe a stone, but it could also describe maybe a brain or a rat or something like this.

But then in the future, it would be really interesting to actually impose some more structure on the blanket to see whether we can say anything more interesting about the system that we're looking at.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Steven?


SPEAKER_01:
I think this is an area that's probably going to be growing a lot, is how much of that transfer process of information from the infinite, almost external states, gets onto a blanket and then gets transferred to the internal states.

So the question is, normally everyone talks about changing the generative model.

But there is obviously a question, well, what can you change in terms of the blanket?

But I don't think that's been fully explored yet.

But I think that's a big area that I suppose could be seen as part of the generative model or the regime of attention.

But it sounds like the mathematical model here is starting to be able to engage that more if it was expanded.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah let's walk through a few steps of the paper because that's really where we're we're building up this intuition or moving from the intuition and scaffolding it with the math um so first you phrase the blanket as intervening states between internal and external states

and defined the state space that those different internal, external, and blanket states can exist in.

So totally subject to Serval's comments about state space.

And maybe it'd be helpful to explain this big pie.

So what is the covariance precision?

What are we talking about with these matrices?

What's a system with a certain type of matrix structure that might help us get a grasp on what the covariance matrix at steady state is actually representing about systems?


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So in our scenario here, the matrix pi actually encodes everything about the permeability of the blanket.

But more generally, how do the internal states interact with blanket states?

And how do the external states interact with blanket states?

So matrix pi really gives you the structure of the interaction.

And so we simply show that the Markov blanket condition, so this boundary, actually is equivalent to some kind of structure of the matrix pi.

But then when we try to differentiate


SPEAKER_00:
living systems with non-living systems and then intelligent systems from non-intelligent systems then probably we could say a lot more about this matrix pi so like if there was non-zero everywhere in pi what would that correspond to or what would it correspond to have all zeros what does a big number or small number mean in this precision matrix because this is truly a key variable in these formalisms


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So one extreme would be the matrix pi to be the identity matrix.

And then this would mean that each state only interacts with itself.

And so that's kind of an extreme case of a Markov blanket, because you have a boundary, but then you don't even have any transmission with the boundary.

You have just three separate states, external blanket and internal, that don't talk to each other.

And then the other extreme would be to have a non-zero entry in the equation that we have there.

And then it would mean that internal states and external states can talk to each other directly without interacting via the blanket state.

So then you don't have a blanket.

You just have three states that mix with each other.

And so, yeah, you lose...

you lose kind of the basic point that says, oh, we're looking at systems that have a boundary.

And then in terms of the magnitude of the entries, so a big magnitude would say, I think I may get it the wrong way around.

But I think a big magnitude is like you have a lot of interaction.

And if you have a very low magnitude, you have very little interaction.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, great, because this variable is important and this relationship between the one over the precision and the variance is gonna come up a lot.

So we go from this idea of using a matrix to represent

basically the statistical connectivity of different nodes and then hope that the structure of that matrix is such that it falls out or designing systems such that the structure of the matrix falls out into internal external and mediating blanket states and then

you develop this notion that the that there's an expected uh internal state and external state that are downstream of the blanket states so what is happening with these formalisms or how can it be that the blanket state tells us about what to expect internally and externally um so because you have a because you have a boundary because you have these blanket states


SPEAKER_02:
So let me give you an example.

If you think about a human, then, for example, part of the blanket states would be what happens on your retina.

So the impression from the world that you get on the retina.

And so this is to say that if you have some kind of sensory impression on your retina, then this gives you some information about what's going on outside.

And so if on your retina you see kind of like a certain shape, maybe the thing that's going on in the environment that corresponds to that shape is a chair.

and maybe actually that shape that you see on your eyes like looks like a chair so then you would say oh the most likely external state is a chair so this is all formalizing the fact that the blanket states what you have on your retina gives you information about what's going on outside and also influences what's going on in your brain because you need to process that information

And so, yeah, so we have a most likely external state and the most likely internal state.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Any other thoughts on this?

Because then that's where we go from.

Yes.

So Connor, go for it.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I'll just add that it's critical that we're talking about expectations here.

So that's why we're,

writing down like a normal distribution that's centered on this expectation because remember these are stochastic processes so for any given blanket state it doesn't mean that the internal state on the others that directly is downstream of that blanket state will always be that expected one but this is just the mean of the distribution but the powerful thing about this uh the bayesian mechanics for these uh gaussian processes

is that those expected states are basically just linear functions of the blanket states just given by these sub matrices of the covariance and then their inverses and such like that so it's just important to know that if we're to pursue this example of the retina it's like

For any given retinal impression, it doesn't mean there's always going to be the same cortical response in visual cortex or what have you.

But there's going to be some distribution of cortical responses.

And what we're talking about right here is the mean of that distribution.


SPEAKER_00:
Very good point.

So Stephen, and then anyone else with a raised hand, and then we'll move forward.


SPEAKER_01:
So from what you're saying there with the stochastic processes is there's some transfer in a sort of a random kind of informational sense.

And obviously, it's lossy as it goes through.

And it's the expectations change.

I suppose at some level have to be able to be confirmed or disconfirmed or find some sort of statistical correlation to then actually use the information.

I suppose at some point there's just not enough there to work anything out or the model's not good enough to find it.

And I'd be interested in how much... Do you have a sense of how much...

tends to get through, or how long it takes for information to be processable, like if there's some sort of heuristic, or whether that's a little bit too unrealistic?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, that's a really great question.

I mean, in the brain, there's evidence that you can get pretty complex.

I'm not a vision neuroscientist, but you can get pretty deep in the cortical hierarchy, even up to the level of a decision.

within 150 or sometimes less milliseconds.

So this is another big important thing to discuss about this paper is,

The information processing we're talking about here is on the level of expectations, right?

So if the brain is really processing an immediate retinal impression, it doesn't have time to average across a ton of parallel noise realizations and then use the expected value to actually do its processing.

So the brain in any given moment is actually just getting stochastic realizations, and then it's using

information processing on those realizations.

So I would also, I don't know how Lance feels about this, but I would hesitate in reading in like the expected cortical state, given a particular blanket state, I would, I would with restrained from reading that as the informational currency that the brain actually works with.

Um,

So there is information transfer, but it's not like the brain always has to work with expectations.

It can work with stochastic samples at any given moment.

But that's also like a controversial thing in neuroscience right now.

It's like, what is the actual information the brain is working with?

But the fact that the latency on decision making can be so short suggests that the brain isn't really averaging over a bunch of parallel realizations of something in order to do a computation.


SPEAKER_00:
Another piece is that on this slide, we're talking about the expectation in terms of the mean, the average value of a distribution conditioned upon blanket states.

We're talking about average value of internal states conditioned on blanket states.

we haven't yet introduced this question about internal states expecting or making a prediction about external states.

So it's almost like expectation is being used as just the sort of broad statistical concept that you can condition an expectation on some other variables or the systems that we kind of care about and are interested in, the ones where the internal states are acting as if they are

Making expectations or predictions about external states, which is where it's taken in the immediate following section of the paper.


SPEAKER_06:
That's a really good point.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
what is the sigma function so i know there's some related um work uh like with miguel that we saw a little bit about like what is the sigma what kinds of gaps in the formalism does the sigma cover um how did it come to be this way with a mapping function and what does it reflect


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So I would say that the sigma is the most fundamental ingredient to get to the free energy principle, because ultimately what we want to be able to say or say that happens or doesn't happen is that the internal states have some kind of representation about the external states.

And so the way to get there is to actually have a sigma function that maps from the expected internal state or expected cortical response to the expected external state, like what's going on around you.

So we need to find a relationship between internal states and external states to be able to say anything about inference.

And so what we do in this paper is we give conditions under which you have this mapping sigma.

And then you're able to say, oh, we have some kind of inference going on.

And I think in terms of a historical perspective, in previous papers, the sigma was assumed.

And then Miguel wrote this paper saying, oh, the sigma, you need some assumptions for the sigma to work.

It doesn't always, sigma doesn't always exist.

And so what we do in this paper is we give conditions under which sigma exists.

And if these conditions fail, then sigma doesn't exist.

And crucially, I think these conditions can be verified from data.


SPEAKER_00:
Great points here.

The synchronization map and a few of these other pieces relate to the idea of an image and a kernel.

So maybe it'd be helpful to learn a little bit about what are the image and the kernel reflecting?

I found one.

representation about mapping the two different spaces to each other using that sort of kernel and image notation.

But when you're talking about in Lemma 2.1, the existence of the sigma function entailing an image function that maps the internal to the external states, like what is an image?

What is the difference between just the variable in itself versus an image of it or a kernel of it?


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So what we're trying to do is to map the expected internal state to the expected external state.

And so what we mean by image in the first line here is simply that we're trying to map variables that could be your expected cortical responses.

So we don't care about anything that's not your expected cortical response.

So we care about a specific type of variables

um and then we're trying to map these to expected external states so so that's the first line and so then here we we just say that basically the the gist of this result is that if if you have something that's going on in the environment let's say there's a chair in front of you and you get some kind of expected cortical response and then let's suppose there's a sofa in front of you and you get the the same expected cortical response

then you will have a problem because it means that your organism cannot differentiate between chairs and sofas because it has the same cortical response for the for the two two different external states and so what we're saying is that we actually don't want that to happen we want our organism to be able to differentiate between different external states

And so this is the condition three and the condition four.

They're both, I mean, each of them is equivalent to one.

And so it puts on the mathematical footing what it means to be able to differentiate between different states in the environment.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you, Serval.

And then we'll ask a question from the live chat.


SPEAKER_04:
So for this thing to work, you need the organism to be able to discriminate between any two states of its environment.

Is that correct?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so any two states that we model.


SPEAKER_00:
Not necessarily... Yeah, I see us mapping like for B1 and B2 being equal to each other.

Then it implies that the external predictions are going to be the same.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So if your expected cortical responses are the same, then the expected states must be the same.

So then again, this needs to be thought about in terms of representations.

So the external world does not need to be modeled at the molecular level.

So it's a model about the external world.

And so maybe in that model, there's things

Yeah, so it can be like a coarse-grained model of the external world.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, so you use the example of a chair and a sofa.

I'm pretty sure that most of the listening people can do the difference.

I'm pretty sure that most cats cannot.

Well, I said a cat, a fly, it's smaller.

Why would a certain organism develop a representation of a certain state under the Carnegie Principle?


SPEAKER_02:
So that's a really good point.

And I think to address that mathematically, we would need to actually investigate a state space that changes over time, to actually address the question of how things learn representations.

So that's not what... We haven't done that far yet, but that's definitely...

an important thing to address in the future.

So the starting point here is you start with a steady state, you start with a Markov blanket.

So the representation is already baked in the Markov blanket.

And so in this result, we just say, oh, if the Markov blanket looks like this, then you have a good representation.

If the marker blanket is sort of more degenerate, then you have a bad representation.

So in the next slide, actually, if you can put up the next slide.

So we show that if the condition from the previous slide is not met, then the organism would have a degenerate type of representation where, for example, it cannot differentiate between chairs and sofas.

And that, I suppose, is still fine.

So yeah, it would conflate different external states.

So in this paper, we assume that this wouldn't happen, because then it enables you to derive results exactly.

But you could assume that the organism conflates different things, and then it would have some kind of semi-degenerate type of representation.

And then everything still carries out.

But instead of saying, oh, my organism does exact Bayesian inference, and it's super accurate, and so on, you can only say, oh, my organism maybe is doing some kind of approximate inference that's good in some instances and bad in some other instances.

So I think you can definitely relax that condition and sort of assess empirically how accurate is your representation.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

To reformulate, any representation must have a precursor sensor reactive state in this framework.

Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, very interesting.

And also we're still in the inference section.

We haven't introduced

policy planning or planning as inference.

So it doesn't need to be the perfect state estimator in order to make adequate policy.

So we've talked about that in many other situations about action and loop and everything.

So let's look through the paper.

Then as we build in pieces, we can see where these different segments come into play because we haven't talked about like policy or conditioning inference on policy yet.

So Steven, and then I'll ask the question from the chat.


SPEAKER_01:
One thing that can also help think about expectations and simplify or get away from the pressure of representations is that the blanket can be seen in more like, or the perception, visual perception is more like an impressionist painter painting dabs on a painting and then stepping out and looking at it.

And we're just continually

like trying to find the textures and the patterns in that might help confirm our expectations rather than it being like we see the shape of the object.

It could be that as long as we're seeing the type of textures that we're feeling in the space and that some of that could be done at the retina level, there could be certain things that just gets processed.

So I suppose just couching that in the inactivist world of, you know, really,

When we say representation, that's a bit loaded in that world.

So it could be statistically predictable in some way.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And we've talked about representation and some of the different views on representation and Axel Constant's work on the armstice and the representation war.

So Blue's question, before we continue on with exploring the formalism, Blue asked, do the maths that you have been working with allow for altering the structure or boundary of the blanket itself?

For example, if I go blind, that sensory state is no longer available.

So how do we deal, which is a little bit we addressed earlier, but there's like different senses that the models can be changing.

They can be within the box changing at steady state, or there are these other types of changes that actually change the structure of the whole boundary or the internal model itself.

So what kinds of changes violate the model and which kinds of changes are allowing us to continue using the model?


SPEAKER_02:
So at the moment, what this paper accommodates are sudden changes in the blanket.

So you could at any point change the blanket and then see what happens.

So for example, if you go blind, you could change the blanket accordingly and then everything would carry out.

What this doesn't account for is blankets that continuously change over time.

So, for example, if you're looking at an organism throughout its lifetime, the organism would, after being born, it would grow and age and so on.

So we do not accommodate that, but we can accommodate sudden changes in the blanket.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you.

And also just anytime people need to drop off is totally cool.

So let's take another look at that Markov blanket persisting through time.

and maybe even return a little bit to what kinds of systems are we talking about here there was this very interesting piece in example 3.1 about describing which types of stochastic processes at the gaussian steady state p might fit under this phrasing so several things were mentioned

Connor, how would you summarize this list?

Or is this an exhaustive list?

Is this just the tip of the iceberg?

What kinds of attributes do these examples share that allow them to fall under this framework?

And then what violates it and moves us into a different space?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so basically the core set of stochastic processes that we deal with in this paper are diffusion processes.

So that's just a particular type of Markov process, which means that basically the current moment is totally statistically dependent on the last moment.

That's not to say that there can't exist mathematics that apply the free energy principle to other sorts of stochastic processes.

That's probably something that Lance is also working on at the moment.

But if I was to give like some

I mean, Markov processes are very generic in the sense that tons of biological processes, I think, and non-biological processes could be cast as Markov processes.

And I think there's also an important aspect.

This is kind of touched on a little bit in the next section with integrator chains.

Even though you might say, oh, but humans have memory.

There's all kinds of deep temporal dependencies.

you can have very high dimensional Markov processes with different levels of time scales.

But at the lowest level, I think it's a safe mathematical assumption to make that things are Markov process at the most fine grained level.

So I think that these kinds of systems

like pretty unrestricted in the kinds of things they can capture.

Everything from financial markets are modeled as diffusion processes.

The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, which is what we use in this paper, is a really popular process used to model things like decision making, like the drift diffusion process, which is used in kind of alternative forced choice decision making tasks.

And then things like evolutionary dynamics, like genetic frequencies drifting over time are modeled as a stochastic, like linear diffusion processes.

But I should also say that we use Ornstein-Uhlenbeck basically linear diffusions in this work, and that's how we get these nice linear synchronization maps.

The mathematics are all linear and easy, but this also applies to non-linear diffusion processes, so where the drift term basically isn't just a linear map like a big matrix like it would be for an OU process, but it could also be some non-linear very, you know, kind of

harsh function.

Some other restrictions is that the drift function, so basically the flow that determines the motion of the next set of states given the current state, that drift function has to be smooth.

That's another condition in these kinds of diffusion processes.

Yeah, that is, I think I pretty much covered it.

There's like some technical things like a zigzag process.

I'm actually not sure what that is.

That's something to ask Lance.


SPEAKER_00:
Great, thanks.

And what you said about that, the multiple levels of integration with the integrator chains and about how that addresses some of the comments about historicity, we can return to that because I think it's really instructive.

So Serval with a question, and then anyone else who wants to ask one.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I have a question which is mathematical in nature for a change.

I don't get what this means for random-linked systems to have a steady state if it is not ergodic, because if it is ergodic, then due to, well, ergodicity, you can find a measure that says something about how likely I am to find a system in such or such subspace.

If you do not have the ergodic conditions and you cannot exchange a distribution for time average, I don't get where, what,

where the distribution is coming from exactly in the case where the system is kind of deterministic at least


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I can't think of an example off the moment, but there are processes that have an invariant measure where the time and the space averages are not equivalent.

So if you just look up non-ergotic stationary processes, I think there's some examples with discrete switching processes like Bernoulli variables.

where the time and the space averages will actually not be equivalent.

So I think this is explicitly taking into account those kinds of systems where the time and the space average wouldn't be equivalent.

For instance, if you think about systems with multiple basins of attraction that might stochastically jump between those two basins of attraction, the space average there at any given moment will not necessarily be equivalent.

Like a bunch of parallel realizations at any given moment, the space average of that might be centered around one of the modes of that process.

and that will actually be different than the time average, which would actually give your distribution over both modes.

So that's just something that jumps to mind, but there are other examples of stationary processes where the space and time average are not equivalent, which is the definition of ergodicity.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, but how do you define steady-state distribution then?

What does it mean and what are the conditions for it to be defined?


SPEAKER_06:
So steady state distribution basically just means that the sufficient statistics that define it do not vary over time.

So they're invariant.

They're constant, basically.

So for a Gaussian process, the mean does not change over time, and the covariance does not change over time.

So that's an example.

Yeah, I mean, the definition of the stationary state, actually, if you get down to the fundamentals of it, I would more say that the stationary state is actually just a property of the flow.

So the flow, the stochastic differential equation itself, like the Ito-style differential equation, that's the most fundamental structure of any system.

And the stationary state actually is just something whose gradients drive the flow.

So rather than, but that's more an interpretational point.

But in terms of the actual.


SPEAKER_04:
OK, stationary, I guess.

So steady state.

OK, but you have stationary, I guess.

I know what stationary is.

And you have a steady state, which is defined, if I understand well, by distribution p. The question is, how do you define a distribution of a unical system in the general case of a stationary unical system?


SPEAKER_06:
So the way you define it formally is you define basically a partial differential equation that tells you the density of the system at every time point.

And that partial differential equation is called the Fokker-Planck operator.

And then you basically set the derivative of that partial differential equation equal to zero.

And then you solve for the density.

So that's the most minimal bare bones definition I can give you of the steady state is the density, which is the solution to the Fokker-Planck operator.

When the Fokker-Planck operator is derivative with respect to time zero, that's the stationary state.

So another way of saying that is if I start the stochastic process in a bunch of different places and run it over time, all those processes will converge to the solution to the Fokker-Planck operator, which is the steady state density.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, and for what kind of system do we have a stable solution for this?

Rather than say, I don't have the words, a chemical attractor or something that switches and goes to new places like a dissipative process.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so there's basically conditions on the drift that will tell you whether the system explodes or whether it converges.

So for instance, for an OU process, those solutions to the Fokker-Planck operator are defined when the eigenvalues of the drift matrix are not too big, for instance.

But what the actual conditions are for all sorts of stochastic processes such that there are unique solutions to the Fokker-Planck operator, I'm not sure.

I'm not an expert on stochastic processes.

That's something that Lance might be able to give a more rigorous definition to.

But it really depends on the drift, basically the f function, which tells you whether the system has an invariant measure or basically a unique solution.

And sometimes there's multiple solutions to the Fokker-Planck operator, which means that the system will end up in one thing or another.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for these helpful explanations.

Just one comment before Dean's question is that sometimes the steady state can be at a higher moment.

So like in the example of a car, there's like the position and then there's how fast it's moving and then et cetera, higher and higher derivatives.

And so the integrator chains and variational inference allow us to find an invariance at a higher level of the distribution,

that even as the actual position of the car is changing like that a stationary process doesn't mean the car is not moving it just means there's something about the car's movement that we can continue to integrate or derive towards finding a statistical invariance specifically one that's structured kind of like this where it's almost like a diffusion process or a flow across a field

So those are some of the pieces that link together.

And so it's not just that the position has to be well behaved.

It might look very nonlinear, but we're using certain ways of breaking down the problem so that at each level we can frame it as this like linked sequence of tractable calculations.

So.

Connor, if you have anything to add on that or Dean, you can question.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think that's a really good point.

So basically you can correct for a moving frame of reference through differentiation and that's kind of the basis of these integrator changes.

Something that might be a moving frame of reference, if you center it by its frame of reference, then it can actually look like something, like a stationary diffusion process.

And you get around that by encoding the system rather in terms of

absolute position, something like the velocity or the momentum of these higher orders of motion.

So yeah, I just totally agree with everything you said, basically.


SPEAKER_00:
And it's like the historical critique or comment like, well, that race car has a historicity.

It's like it is, but its position at the next time point is determined by its position and momentum and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera now.

And then that is happening through time.

So there is historicity.

We're not ignoring that, but we're setting up the problem with this like vector of higher derivatives such that it actually is being only determined by the next moment.

So.


SPEAKER_06:
Absolutely.


SPEAKER_00:
Dean?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, thanks for stealing all my thunder there, Daniel.

I basically was going to ask, so just to make this clear in my head, the metaphor that I drew is you've got classical mechanics and quantum mechanics in the room, and then Bayesian mechanics is kind of acting like the marriage counselor.

It doesn't really actually determine what is, you know, the math can't just be precise.

It just...

keeps the two other parties in the room and has them work out what's a gist and what's a reflection?

Or am I kind of way off in the reeds here?


SPEAKER_06:
So the connection to quantum mechanics, which was made in this one section of the paper, this was actually something that was suggested by...

um by uh greg pavliotis who is uh lance's supervisor imperial i'm actually not convinced that the connection to quantum mechanics is as fundament like so i i basically i don't think that uh basing mechanics is in between classical and um uh classical and quantum mechanics i see basing mechanics more as

the mechanics of statistical distributions or basically the moments of statistical distributions.

So in that way, if I was to put it in between two branches of physics, I would probably put it more at the three way in between classical mechanics, statistical thermodynamics and stochastic thermodynamics, because it's really uniting

the kinds of coarse-grained expected variables that you deal with something like statistical thermodynamics with the sorts of motion that you deal with in things like stochastic thermodynamics or classical mechanics.

So we're talking about the motion of beliefs or about probability distributions.

And then it gets interesting when you have a Markov blanket, because then you can start imbuing the system with these quasi-teleological

interpretations of one thing being a belief about another thing but the basing mechanics per se actually i think it even i mean it's it's it's controversial whether you would call it bayesian mechanics but there is definitely this kind of statistical or belief-based dynamics that you get even in systems without a markov blanket even a one-dimensional diffusion process where there's no boundaries or anything you can describe that system as optimizing model evidence or minimizing free energy

it's just, it's unclear where the Bayesian-ness is because the Bayesian interpretation really comes in when you're conditioning something on observations, and then you have uncertainty about another variable that you can only perceive via the observations.

So that's why the Markov blanket, I think, actually is kind of fundamental to the Bayesian slant on the mechanics.

But even without it, you have free energy minimization and you have

the evolution of beliefs or evolution of belief distributions.

It's just, they're not, they're not as, they don't have a nice analogy with like representational mechanics or the things we're interested in, in cognitive science or biology.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

That's the part where Lance was talking about gist and reflection and how the gist morphs into a reflection.

And that's, I don't even know how you would put the math to that, but because I don't know, I wouldn't know where to begin, but that's,

That's where I thought you guys were headed.


SPEAKER_06:
Am I misled?

No, I think that's right.

That's kind of, it gets at kind of, I think, the thing that Daniel was saying earlier, where there's

There's the expected internal state given a particular blanket state, but then there's the idea that any instantaneous internal state is actually also encoding an expected external state, whether or not that particular internal state is the most likely one given the blanket state.

So I don't know which of those would map to gist versus reflection, but that's basically the idea is that any given realization of the stochastic process

at any given moment, even if it's off, is kind of always parameterizing some just perception about something on the other side of the blanket.

So the Markov blanket, the fact that there's a multivariate system with these kinds of conditional independencies, that really is fundamental to the interpretation of saying one side is doing some kind of just perception of the other side.


SPEAKER_00:
you just don't have one side or the other without the ability to distinguish them which i think is a good example about how the intuition that there are separable systems is being built upon in this nexus as you described with thermodynamics and statistics and statistical mechanics and there's other approaches to delineate subsystems like synergetics trying to define subsystems geometrically or trying to define subsystems through various ways and

maybe those will become integrated as well.

So Stephen, and then anyone can write a question or raise their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks Connor for that.

That explanation is quite useful as well that

you know, when you mentioned that there can be Bayesian inference say on information coming in, but the blanket, you know, it gives a way to hold that information, I suppose, but I can see it giving a much more viable route to integrate many sources

um of information which might be also sort of staggered over time as they come in and they can be integrated i mean you can integrate across blankets whereas if everything's coming in as one mush of you know all data's coming in through the same

or even if it's not directly data, but if you've only got one causal pathway, then you can't necessarily, I can't see a way that you could disambiguate and do Bayesian inference between what we would use blankets for, or you could even say multi-sensory integration

then that becomes a physical channel.

So I suppose one question is, how would you think about different channels of information as opposed to different blankets in terms of Bayesian integration?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think the multi-channel or multi-sensory integration story is pretty nicely accommodated by this.

And this kind of brings back to an earlier question that Daniel had about what is the interpretation of that pi matrix.

So when you're thinking about the system minimizing free energy, another way of thinking about that is it's minimizing prediction errors

for each of the sensory modalities.

So if our blanket states, say we have a three-dimensional external state, a three-dimensional internal state, and a three-dimensional blanket state, because this generalizes to very high integer dimension.

Our three-dimensional blanket state you could think of as like eyes, ears, and somatosensation or something.

And then the distinct elements of that pi matrix are basically the weights that the system, that the internal states are assigning to each of those sensory channels.

So if you actually rewrite the flow of the internal states as a function of that pi matrix,

you can basically see that the internal states has differential sensitivity to each of the three blanket states.

In fact, it's literally integrating them.

And the weights it uses to do that sum or that average are provided by the elements of the pi matrix.

So I think the multisensory integration is basically just a higher dimensional blanket state.

What it doesn't get at with what I've just said is your idea of information from different channels coming in at different time lags or different delays.

That is what you would have to accommodate with something like an integrator chain where one blanket state is actually a high order derivative of some other blanket state or something like that, or of an external state.

So you can have different blanket states that from the perspective of internal states are all coming in at once, but the actual blanket states themselves are like

longer scale temporal summaries of other variables.

One could be the instantaneous temperature.

The other could be the time derivative of temperature.

The other one could be the average temperature over an hour or something like that.


SPEAKER_00:
also sometimes i think about it like from a data science example like imagine if we had three variables that are getting passed to us like height weight and favorite color um maybe that reflects this covariance matrix like height and weight up there on the first two have highest correlation with themself

and then they have less correlation with each other, and then the off diagonal is not having any covariance.

We don't get information about the favorite color based upon the other variables, say.

So multi-sensory can just be different state variables that are getting passed through that vector.

It doesn't have to be that all the blanket states are of the same type.

The blanket states are just the set of insulating states.

And they don't all have to be retinal cells.

Now, if you were making this type of a model of the retina, it would be that way.

But then if you wanted to make a model of a person who had sound input, light input, etc.,

you could have the blanket states reflecting multiple different types.

Then you get this challenge of how is the brain integrating different lags and different precisions, et cetera, across different modalities.

So that's not the end of the story, but it is phrased generally enough in the state space representation such that we can be discussing in the same matrix, multiple kinds of inputs.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep, exactly.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Actually, Connor, if you had any thoughts on this example, like how should we read the, you know, pi equals what?

And then Q equals what?


SPEAKER_06:
Right.

Yeah.

So this is a point where I kind of wanted to bring this up earlier because I think I don't know.

It would be good to talk to Lance about this.

I think he's coming to the next one.

So maybe he can follow up.

But basically, this is actually an example of a system where causality does basically not exactly correlate with the Markov blanket.

So in that pi matrix, that's not actually the covariance.

That's the inverse of the covariance.

So that's a really important point.

The inverse of the stationary covariance is not going to have necessarily zeros in all the same places that the covariance does.

So you could have two variables that actually have positive or negative correlation with each other as measured by the square root of the covariance.

that are actually conditionally independent.

So for instance, in this example, the internal, which is the first row or the first column, and the external, which is the third row or the third column, they're conditionally independent of each other, which means there's a zero in the corresponding entry 1, 3 or 3, 1.

So that doesn't mean that the variables are uncorrelated.

It means that if I condition on blanket states the middle row slash middle column,

then there's no more information I can get from external states about internal states or from internal states about external states.

It's basically saying that the internal states get all the information they possibly can from the blanket states, and the external states don't add anything else.

But that's actually a different statement than saying that there's no stationary steady state correlation between internal and external.

And it goes further than that.

Then if you actually looked at the drift matrix, which is the second equation here, you can see from the presence of elements in the 1, 3, and 3, 1 elements of that second equation, that big thing that's like 1, 1.52.

there's actually a direct influence of internal states on external states in the sense that the motion of external states is directly influenced by internal states.

So if you were to integrate that stochastic differential equation, there would be a causal, if you want to call it that, a causal connection going from internal to external.

But nevertheless, because of the way that the stationary covariance is designed, when you take its inverse, internal is still conditionally independent of external.

So this is a really interesting and kind of counterintuitive result that is talked about a little bit in Miguel's paper, and it's also talked about a little bit in an upcoming paper that is in review right now that basically rigorously defines the conditions under which a causal connection actually results in conditional independence between two variables.

So that's basically what the example here is showing is that you could have internal directly influence the motion of external or vice versa, but in the stationary sense, they're still conditionally independent and therefore the Markov blanket is still needed to mediate information between them.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And it was, we'll look forward to these papers, but that's a really great way of laying out how we build upon this idea of just Bayesian variables and the graph that describes them to dynamical systems and their covariances through time, and then frame that in terms of flow

which can then be decomposed into this time reversible and a time irreversible component, ties us into this entire flow, areas of thermal flow, but also information flow.

And so also just Connor, while we have you, let's take this next step, which is let's partition

the blanket states into two kinds of states, sensory on the incoming and action or active states on the outgoing.

So what is going on with this blanket partitioning and how does it relate to active inference?

How does active inference relate to this Bayesian graphical approach more generally?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so here we're basically making the move of taking the blanket states and they could be, again,

of general dimension and then partitioning them themselves into two subsets of states, active states and sensory states.

So if you basically look at the dynamics of the system and you look at the expected variables, you can say that the expected internal state given blanket states is doing inference about external states.

At the same time, you can say the expected active state

given sensory states, is in some sense minimizing prediction error.

So basically minimizing the deviation between the expected internal and the expected external state.

So that's where you get along the lines of basically an active inference interpretation.

And I think it's figure six, if I'm not mistaken, where that

Or no, that's predictive processing.

Figure eight is where you can basically show that the most likely active state, so again, this is an expected active state, is minimizing the sum of precision weighted prediction errors.

So the move here is then you relate minimizing, when you're minimizing prediction errors in the context of inference, it's like I'm doing optimal Bayesian inference.

When I'm minimizing precision weighted prediction errors in the context of control, it's like I'm doing PID control, which basically Manuel Baltieri has shown this in a paper from a few years ago.

That is a sort of prediction error minimization.

So now the elements of that pi matrix become the weights that you associate to each variable that you're trying to control in a PID system.

So PID is this kind of proportional integral derivative control mechanism.

So we don't do this in the paper, but if you were to associate different blanket states with different derivatives along an integrator chain, like the integral, the derivative, and then the second derivative of some process, and then those were your blanket states, then you could say that the most likely active state was basically trying to control the integral, the first order, and then the derivative of a given system, trying to control them using a PID control scheme.

and where the weights that the PID controller is assigning to the integral, the first order value, and the derivative, those weights would be exactly given by the entries of the pi matrix that correspond to the blanket variables.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And actually the integrator chain idea really connects some dots between this variational higher and higher derivatives of challenging functions, variational inference on nonlinear functions with planning as inference.

So again, it's like going back to that car with the position and the momentum, et cetera.

there's one way of working where you just want to fit the function of the car using its again position and higher derivatives but then what does it look like when you need to predict the position of the car so that you can act and intervene and so this just connects between this uh

graphical structure where you can have arbitrary number of layers of nodes.

So from left to right is going through time, but then vertically within a column is a differentiation and integration relationship.

So we connect from looking at a vector of position and higher derivatives, connect that to the kinds of systems that

have uh blanket states that's just really cool to see um yeah so with yeah go ahead uh yeah sorry was there someone else had a question or go for it connor but anyone can raise their hand or any questions in the chat is awesome


SPEAKER_06:
I was just going to say, it's essentially that.

So if we were to cast the blanket variables as this vector of higher order derivatives of a system, just by that system conversion to its stationary state, it would be implicitly, if we started it far away from the steady state, it would be implicitly essentially controlling each of those variables to some desired set point.

So that's often the terminology used in control theory is that I'm trying to keep the velocity

within some range, keep the position within some range, keep the acceleration within some range.

So if you interpret the dynamics of the most likely active state as doing PID control, basically what it's doing is it's punishing deviations around those desired set points with some control cost, where the control cost exactly is given by the PID weight assigned to the acceleration velocity position, which is, you can read off from the inverse of the stationary covariance, i.e.

the pi matrix.


SPEAKER_00:
To kind of give a fun example of that, one way of looking at this figure 10 in the Helmholtz supplement is kind of like there's an ink blot.

And so there's some forces that have it dispersing and some that have it staying together.

And then when you look down from the top,

That's like the steady state distribution of the ink blot.

And so that's sort of a diffusion-y way to look at it.

But let's look at this as like a physical hill.

So the z-score, the height is, not the statistical z-score, the height is like the concentration at steady state of ink.

So whatever the diffusion processes are, it's densest right in the middle, and then it gets less.

So we can think about that as being like the bottom of the bowl, and then it gets higher up.

So when you drop the marble in the bowl,

it's going to on average go to the bottom of the bowl and then if you were to think about that marble as like a control theoretic agent with its position which is initially not at the bottom of the bowl and then all of the higher order derivatives so initially if it's stopped on the side of the bowl it's like you're holding the higher derivatives to be zero

then you release it and gravity takes effect, et cetera, it would almost look like it was like a plane landing on the bottom of the bowl because it would like accelerate and then it would slow down its acceleration and the higher order derivative, it would act as if it were doing PID control to converge all of its, and then diminish all the derivatives so that it would end up with zero PID

velocity and the differential from the mean of the expectation of zero.

So that's like kind of an inanimate system, but that shows how this diffusion flow field, and then the free energy interpretation of kind of like the Gibbs free energy dropping into the bowl, finding yourself on the bottom of a physical bowl is also related to control theory.

So there's like so many of these important threads to connect together.

Any other general comments?

Otherwise, I think just because we love active inference, what is happening in figure eight?

Like what is happening on the right side?

And maybe why is it not a monotonic drop in free energy, which is what we saw in the other figures?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so this is basically the demonstration of what you just said, that on average, the system, and that's a very key point of just to add that onto what you said, on average, the marble will look like it's trying to get to the bottom of the bowl.

and minimize those deviations from the different set points for position, acceleration, velocity, what have you.

So this is basically showing that... So I'll just explain the figure on the left.

The white line is basically the most likely active state, which is one of the two blanket states, given various settings of the sensory state.

So the white line is saying for any given setting of the x-axis, what is the most likely setting of the y-axis?

But then we also show, overlaid on that expectation, which is just a linear line, a linear function of the sensory state, we also show an actual realization of the process.

And that's really the key thing to note here, is there's a difference between expectations, which are derived from the steady state statistics, versus realizations of the process, which are contaminated with all the

the nitty gritty messy things of the real world like noise and solenoidal flow and stuff like that.

So this also goes to answer your second question about the plot on the right is why is the system not doing monotonic decrease on free energy?

And the reason is because there's solenoidal flow.

So if there is no solenoidal flow and you average this descent across trajectories,

An individual trajectory, even without solenoid flow, might still not do monotonic free energy descent because of noise.

So the stochastic noise you're adding to these diffusion processes can temporarily drive it up the gradients of the free energy.

But if I averaged across 1,000 trajectories, it would look like a smooth descent on free energy because all the noise realizations would be averaged out.

And then there would basically just be a straight line going from wherever you started

this ensemble of parallel simulations to the bowl, the minimum free energy.

But because of solenoidal flow, which is this component of the drift that drives the system along the isocontours of the probability density, which is not pointing in the direction of the free energy minimum, because of that, even after you average across trajectories, the free energy will not monotonically go down, but it'll actually follow some average trajectory that has some curvature to it.

So that's an actually interesting interpretation in the active inference sense because it's showing that on the way to the free energy minimum, it's not necessarily going to take the path laid out by the most likely active state given sensory states.

It might actually take a more circuitous route, and it will end up on the white line by the time it's at the minimum, but its journey to that white line on average and in individual realizations will not actually be along the white line.

And that's a really interesting, there's a connection there to be drawn to the study of basically efficient diffusion processes that are used in things like Markov chain Monte Carlo.

So people basically design diffusions in order to accelerate convergence to a stationary target distribution.

This is used a lot in like stochastic distribution.

sampling based approximate Bayesian inference and there's actually a lot of evidence and there's mathematical proof behind this too that diffusion processes with this kind of curvature solenoidal flow are actually better at reaching the minimum and they do so faster rather than one that's just doing a direct descent on the log probability which is equivalent to the free energy.


SPEAKER_00:
nice thank you one one thing i'll point out about this figure on the left is that the x-axis has twice the uh scale as the y-axis so you can also this white line is like the y equals x line like it's right at zero zero is that that's the bottom of the bowl and then it's it's

it's just stretched out a little bit in one way, but it's kind of like, that's just the Y equals X line.

That would be if the, that's just the one-to-one.

And then it starts up here with the S of T, A of T, and then it kind of finds its way to the bottom.

And that connects to figure 10 with the Helmholtz decomposition where

just like Connor was saying, we can separate out into this solenoidal, which is going like around the isocontour and then this straight line component.

And so the extreme of one case, assuming that such a line of sight exists is like you're at the bottom of the mountain and then you just like straight line up to the top.

But then the kinds of systems that we're looking at here are where we can decompose their actions into an as-if straight line that's always going up the maximum possible elevation gain to the mountaintop or the maximum possible descent to the bottom of the bowl.

But also there's this wiggle with a solenoidal coupling that's guaranteed to be orthogonal to that first component.

And that was an interesting point about designing the kinds of diffusion processes that do help us find, whether you phrase it as the top or the bottom, but find the free energy optimal place on a landscape that might be very rugged.

So a lot of misleading elevation changes.


SPEAKER_05:
Hey Daniel, doesn't that just give another feather in the cap for interactionism over instructionalism?


SPEAKER_00:
Can you maybe explain that a little more and then we'll see if Conor has any thoughts?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think what Conor just pointed out was really critical.

If we're optimizing, we have to be willing to set up condition where we're not enforcing a linear path, that we're actually allowing for the...

what do you want to call it?

The degree of variability.

And that's what interactionism supports.

So I just, I was just listening to that going, yeah, there's another, there's another proof.

Now we've got the mathematical evidence.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

It's like work and play a little bit with the most direct way to get those instructions might be with a little bit of interaction along the way.

They're just, they're,

inseparable in the actual realization of the process.

Any thoughts on that, Connor?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think that's, I mean, I'm always excited when people kind of can connect solenoidal flow to specific domains.

I'm not sure what instructionism or interactionism are, but I'm assuming that it's basically saying that just a linear classic optimization taking the path of steepest descent is actually kind of maybe counterintuitively not always the best option.

And I think that's just what solenoidal flow captures in any stochastic dynamical system is the fact that there's some curvature

to the actual dynamics of systems where they're not always trying to go to the mode of the density, but they might actually get where you're trying to go by kind of taking an alternative route on the way there.

And it's just really cool that mathematically you can show that that's actually better than taking the path of steepest descent.


SPEAKER_00:
It's like the ball can't just go down to the bottom in a straight line and then put on the brakes.

The real path takes a little bit of a different route.


SPEAKER_05:
So, Stephen?

Oh, yeah.

Oh, I want to slip one more thing in because I want to give Stephen a boost before he speaks.

And that is that I've heard Stephen a number of times mention the word trust.

And trust takes time.

And I think, again, that interaction and that trust piece, this math confirms that we don't just have to intuit that.

there's actually now some support for what takes time and what will actually optimize maybe the most sought after outcome, not always necessarily the best, but at least it gives you a higher likelihood of achieving an outcome.

Because you can now say trust takes time, but there's sort of almost a mathematical imperative to give more time over to something to arrive at the best answer.

Sorry, Stephen, but I just wanted to, you know, sort of boost what you've been saying a lot, because I agree with it.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Dean.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's an interesting, yeah, I think the trust piece and what you could call real life, I don't know if we would talk about real life, but a couple of questions that sort of come from that is saying it's like, you know, if you're talking about this solenoidal flow, is that property or that, does that become a more optimal way of achieving success?

gradient descent when there's more noise or the more rugged the landscape I suppose that's my first question and the other question is I just wanted your thoughts you mentioned here like active states so this idea of like

almost like sensory data coming in on active states and we often talk about active states and action states i what's the states of action that starts the organism does but i suppose internally you've just got the active states which are kind of like almost mathematical codependencies so i'd be interested in

like I say, the amount of noise or ruggedness or approximation that has to happen and how much the solenoid or if it really makes a difference or whether the math just is the same if it's smooth and just your thoughts on how states are talked about in terms of active or action.

Or if that's something you think about.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Yeah, so for your first point, so when you say the ruggedness of the landscape, you mean like it's not just a quadratic single bump, but there might be multiple bumps.

Yeah, I'm actually not sure.

I don't have any intuitions about what solenoidal flow would do in that case.

I think like Daniel was kind of saying, it might actually be better at finding the global optimum.

The research I'm aware of is just saying that for even...

unimodal distributions like this sometimes the solenoidal flow actually gets you to the unique optimum faster even though you would think that direct descent should be fastest in the presence of noise in the dynamics so not a rugged landscape but just the dynamics are perturbed by noise the solenoidal flow will actually get you to the optimum faster but in the case of the actual probability distribution of the steady state is multimodal and rugged itself that's a very interesting question i don't know

I just don't know the research, what it says.

And I personally don't have any intuition about whether solenoidal flow would accelerate convergence to the global optimum or not.

But I would be surprised if no one's researched that because it's a very interesting question.

And then regarding the active states versus action.

Yeah, I mean,

I guess that I haven't thought that much about what semantically jumps out to me or what I associate when I hear active state versus action.

But I guess I think of fluctuations in the active states as actions.

So as the active state evolves, that's what I would call an action or a particular realization of an active state as an action.

And then the active state itself, we just refer to as the random variable.

That's a stochastic process that evolves over time.

And we refer to that as the active state.

So we have both the two-dimensional, in this case, two-dimensional blanket states.

One is a random variable that we call the sensory state.

Another one is a random variable we call an active state.

So that whole stochastic process is the active state and maybe individual realizations of it would be an action.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Connor.

Stephen, and then anyone else.

And then also in this last few minutes, if anyone in the live chat has a question, they can write it.

So Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, that's helpful.

I think, like you mentioned, I was thinking maybe particularly about noise.

So, yeah, that makes sense if there's more noise.

Whether there's more rugged landscape, yeah, that's an interesting question that maybe someone's worked on.

I was wondering what you're basically saying with active states is there are more flux.

There's a greater flux.

A bit like sensory state, like the information coming in is more fluctuating, i.e., like...

well, you could say lights going at billions of hertz, you know, or whatever.

And then the regularities are slowing down as it comes in.

The active states would be a greater flux compared to going through the blanket and the transfer to whatever the perturbations that are relevant to our model are on the outside.

So that's kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
One comment on that is the actual error dynamics or just baseline dynamics of each of these kinds of states, it's going to depend on the system.

But when we're thinking about biological systems, yes, the action states can be conditioned on what the system is.

Like if there's one degree of freedom on the elbow joint, then it's a dimensionally reduced action.

in comparison to the incoming sensory data, for example.

So active states end up kind of saving the day in a lot of ways, which is why it is such a clutch advance in the field to partition the otherwise just commingling blanket states into this kind of incoming and outgoing, because then we can assign those incoming states and the statistically causal chains coming inbound, we can associate that with inference.

and with everything related to predictive processing.

And then on the outbound, from the internal states going back out to the active states, we can associate that with cybernetics, control theory, and also planning as inference.

So the partitioning is an immensely important maneuver.

Stephen, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and also the active states become a proprioceptive form of, I mean, a proprioceptive form of sensory input in a funny sort of way, like in the sense that how much they change

So, for instance, I'm kind of curious where there's this blending.

You put your hand on a wall and you push.

You're sensing the wall, but you're also sensing your active states aren't changing as much, if that makes sense, because the wall's stopping them.

There's an interesting – but that all could be happening at this kind of –

fluctuating speed however like you just mentioned the system structure will the fact that you've got an elbow and the fact that it allows certain things to happen is going to make all that come into context of the system you know so that's quite cool


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Sorry if there's any noise there.

But yes, when the person is pushing on the wall, they might be getting a different than expected or less than expected amount of change in their sensory input.

Wow, it's really loud.

I'm just going to mute for a second.

incredible times so um both connor and lance have uh departed for today and i believe that we'll be talking with at least lance next week in the 26.2 so in this last 10 minutes or so let's look back over the paper and any of the other figures and let's think about what we want to ask or what we'd like to explore in that dot too so who has any thoughts of this


SPEAKER_05:
I have a thought.

I didn't raise my hand, sorry.

At some point, the 60-year-old me would like some of this to be brought down to six-year-old me in terms of the sophistication of the math and sort of maybe walk through some more of those

The ability to be able to explain to somebody that there is an underpinning of math that explains what this medium is about and why things pass through it and necessarily allow these two differentiated states to work.

I know that they have to be able to explain it

in on the level because it's it's complexity so they have to be able to use a certain sophistication of math but if there's some way for them to be able to bring that down to my pedestrian level my six-year-old level that would be fantastic because then i think it would be a lot easier for people to climb on board with the idea that some of this some of this

Bayesian mechanics stuff doesn't have to remain elusive or out there, but it's actually something useful that we can incorporate into a lot of the practices that we'd like people to adopt.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Dean.

Agreed.

Good thing to think about.

And also Dave wrote in the chat, we seem to be convinced that some kinds of partitioning simplify analysis.

Great point.

So internal, external, and blanket is not the only partitioning of how you can partition nodes in a Bayesian network.

And sense and action isn't the only partitioning that is possible for blanket states.

So different ways of partitioning the problem

are going to variously set it up in a way that's going to be confusing or impossible to solve or challenging to solve or potentially easy to solve.

And sort of the exemplar of the easy problem to solve computationally, not the only example, but just one example, is like, again, the ball rolling to the bottom of a hill.

Smooth ball,

perfect gravity, convex optimization.

It's very easy.

If you know that the shape of the bowl is a quadratic function, then all you have to do is just, yep, go downhill wherever you are.

Really simple heuristic algorithm for getting to the bottom of that quadratic bowl.

and then we look out on the ruggedness and on the changingness of the fitness landscapes or of the free energy landscapes for real systems and the entire question is again how can we partition nodes or take the derivative of sets of nodes or of different random variables so that we can make that rugged landscape and transform it or at least act on a smooth landscape so that's sort of the broad theme is can we just

cut things up and reframe them so that our challenge is more like the marble going down the bowl rather than bushwhacking, you know, and we're just totally lost and we don't even have a sense of whether we're going up or down and all of our emotion is for naught.

So Steven, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I suppose in a way our cognition is trying to help us make things look more and more like things are rolling down a bowl.

And it's a smoother, more clear picture of the world, you know, as we get older.

So it'd be interesting maybe to ask a couple more questions about how noise, I know how noise, I mean, often they use the Infomax term.

or softmax, the infomax function, I think, in a lot of active inference modeling, you know, to add some noise or to add some distributions.

So I'd be interested in how, where does the covariance break down?

Where does it start to become more coherent, smoother?

And just their thoughts on that seems to be quite, that seems to be relevant beyond this particular paper.

Thanks, Dean.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, one last thing.

So to me, what I see is the math now on paper talking about possibility, not talking about

I still think that what this does is it opens up the possibility.

This map opens up the possibility as opposed to arriving at a certain outcome.

I think all it does is open up that space.

That's what that Markov blanket to me essentially does is it keeps the door open.

I know it's described as a blanket, but I honestly think what it does is it creates an openness for more math to be able to flow in.

And so just, I know they're not philosophers, but I'd like to hear some of their philosophy around what that does, because I think if people want to say, oh, well, your math doesn't answer all the questions,

Fine.

But it does open up a lot of things that previously we couldn't even say were open, to your point.

So I'd like to find out what their philosophical positions are now that they've been able to sort of bring this math to a place where it does prove out.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, Dean, thank you.

And yes, what you said there about like from certainty into uncertainty, and of course, always leaving that room for the interaction, it puts everything on the uncertainty and the precision are, they're two sides of the same coin.

The precision is the inverse covariance.

So if two things are perfectly covariate, there's like a one or a high number in that matrix, then your precision is high.

So, or just, it's in the math, but yes, if they're variable with respect to each other, then knowing one doesn't tell you about the other.

If they're not variable with respect to each other, then knowing one gives you high precision on the other.

And it puts all kinds of state inferences on this continuum of precision.

So,

pretty awesome conversation really helpful that we were able to speak with the authors and yeah next week in 26.2 we'll look forward to maybe seeing some more of you on the stream having any people submit questions if they want to ask something or just have us digest it or modify a question at all

But as you said, very important contributions and scales beyond the paper.

So thanks again, everybody.

And we'll see you next week.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.

## SH2v6joMD4k

SPEAKER_00:
Hello everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We're here on August 17th, 2021 in live stream number 26.2 on the second discussion that we're having as a group on the paper Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams, so we can use the raise hand feature in Jitsi.

This short link has the upcoming live stream discussions.

Here we are on August 17th in our last discussion on this paper, 26.2.

Next week, we'll be heading into a new paper and we still have some openings in the coming weeks.

So if anyone has a suggestion or an author to contact or wants to discuss their own paper, just let us know and we can try to make that happen.

Today in Act Imp Stream number 26.2, the goal is to continue learning and discussing and unpacking this awesome paper that we've been thinking about for the last few weeks, Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes.

And we're really appreciative that the first author is here to join with us and co-learn with us, have fun with us.

and this video is just going to be wherever we want to take it so we have some questions prepared but especially if anyone in the live chat has questions that'd be awesome and we can definitely address them so we can just start with a quick introduction round and feel free just to say hello or to

answer one of these questions like what's something that you liked or remembered about the paper and what's something that you're wondering about or want to have resolved by the end of today.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoctoral researcher in California and something that over the last week made me excited to have this discussion was I was speaking with a physicist friend, someone who's

working with lasers and oscilloscopes and stuff.

And I brought up this paper and it turned out that they actually were using PID control in their research on a day-to-day basis.

But actually it was new for them to hear about how it was connected to some of these broader topics.

But as soon as I brought out the physical printed paper, then they were just so excited.

And it was cool to see how they had all this practical insight

experience working with pid and then they instantly just saw that there was kind of this crossover point into some broader questions that also they were curious about but the day-to-day practice actually hadn't brought them to those general questions so i learned a lot about pid control and about actually how it plays out with the knobs and everything like that i'll pass to dean


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, good morning.

Yeah, I came away from the paper, again, trying to figure out how to create some sort of a coherent narrative around the physical math and the statistical math.

That part for me really got me going away and thinking a little bit because I think they go in different directions, but I do think that they can work in concert.

So

Yeah, I'd be really interested to see how that might play out in terms of what our guest here thinks the directions this might be able to go.

I'll pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I work a lot with community development and sort of spatial meaning-making, so inferences of different kinds.

I'm curious how some of the ways that the mathematics have been done on this paper can help broaden some of the questions around ergodicity and non-ergodicity in science.

that's a bit of a thorn, sometimes a weapon in the inactivist, active influence dialogue.

So yeah, and that's something I'd be interested in.

And I'm going to pass this over to Dave.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think Dave doesn't have audio, but Dave, thanks for joining and any questions in the YouTube live chat is awesome.

So thanks to everyone who's joined and pass to Lance.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Daniel.

And thanks for inviting me again.

So I'm Lance.

I'm a PhD student at Imperial and UCL.

And I'm really excited to be here and to engage in this discussion.

I'm really looking forward to feedback about the paper, seeing what's interesting to pursue in future work.

So yeah, really looking forward to share this paper with you and talk about it.


SPEAKER_00:
So maybe one lead-in question before we jump to the content.

What stage in your PhD are you?

And is this like the meat and potatoes chapter one?

Or is this a little cul-de-sac that you found yourself having to explore in the course of another research project?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, great question.

So I'm right in the middle of my PhD.

I'm two years in.

I still have two years to go.

And ideally, I would like to pursue this work.

So I have two supervisors.

One is a mathematician.

Another one is a neuroscientist.

And so really the goal is to have some kind of mathematical theory of how adaptive systems work.

So I think this is really the first chapter.

I want to push that further.

But then there are also other projects that take up my time.

So I'm trying to make all that work together.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So for this dot two, we have some questions prepared, some topics that we know we want to talk about, but anyone who asks a question in a live chat will definitely have time to address that.

The paper that we've been talking about is this Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes paper.

And in the dot zero and the dot one, there's more information on the primary aims and claims.

So check those out if you haven't already.

We're just going to take one more look at the roadmap, where we've been, where we're going,

Remember, we were talking about Markov blankets and Bayesian mechanics.

How does active inference have similarities and differences from other ways to model dynamical systems?

And let's just go straight to the first question that we have, which is gonna help us review where we've been, and then also as a jumping off point for some of these extended questions that we've already written.

So a colleague asked me,

and said, I think it would be good to expand on the differences of the paradigms in section three.

And those are section B, C, and D.

related to a posteriori estimation after the fact, predictive processing, and variational base.

So perhaps Lance first, and then anyone else who wants to give a take or ask a follow-up question.

What are the similarities and the differences here, and why were they structured in this order?

Is this the chronological order?

Is this most specific to least specific?

Or what is the ordering and the meaning here?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

Yeah, so it goes from the simplest to the most sophisticated.

So a posteriori estimation is a special case of predictive processing, which is a special case of variational Bayes.

And so the idea is if you receive some piece of data, so for example, if you see an image,

with your eyes, you're gonna try to infer what's going on outside in the environment.

And so if you do a posterior estimation, what you're trying to guess is what is the most likely thing, like what is the most likely thing that's going on in the environment?

So it could be if you see an image of a chair, you would say, oh, it's a chair.

But you wouldn't encode any kind of uncertainty.

Oh, it might be like an armchair, for example, or something a bit different.

So in a posterior estimation, you try to guess what's going on outside, but there's no uncertainty.

Then predictive processing, you encode the uncertainty.

So mathematically, that's called the variance or the precision.

And then variational Bayes, it's more sophisticated.

So you actually encode an arbitrary distribution

on external states so it could be oh it's very likely that it's an armchair and it might also be very likely that it's a cat so that this example doesn't make sense but you you could imagine that there's two things that are very different that could be equally likely so for example if you see an illusion

It could be something, but also something very different.

So you would imagine these two things are having a high probability of being there, and then other things are having low probability.

So this is really the most general thing.

And also as a side comment, so variational Bayes, like a lot of machine learning algorithms, you can see them as special cases of variational Bayes.

So I think this is really the most general way to think about inference.

And this is really at the heart of the free energy principle.

And I think this is why people have been describing the brain as performing variational base, because it's really the most general way to think about this kind of problem of inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Well, before I give a comment on that, what made you say that it was at the heart of the free energy principle?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

So the free energy principle says that the brain is doing variational base.

And then all this work, I mean, this paper in particular, but like the last decade, people have been trying to justify why would the free energy principle apply actually?

And so this is part of a, this paper is part of a line of work where we try to examine physical systems or like adaptive systems and see whether we can describe them as performing variational base.


SPEAKER_00:
Great, so first Steven with a question and then anyone else with a question.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, that's really helpful, that explanation.

I was wondering, is it a case then that you can go only so far with, say, predictive processing, and then to get to variational bays and to bring in that uncertainty, you kind of need a free energy principle solution to be able to bring in these more unknown models.

And to go beyond variational bays at some point, that's when you'd have to bring in the active inference

Would that be the way you would think about it?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I would think about it like this.

I would say, loosely speaking, the term predictive processing I think is also meant to refer to variational base, but at least a variational base that's a proper mathematical definition of what it is.

And then predictive processing, it's more like, oh, we're predicting something.

So it's not that clear how.

I mean, there's no clear definition of predictive processing, but in this paper, predictive processing is meant as predictive coding, as in the papers by Rao and Ballard, where they looked at the visual system and then they looked at neurons in the cortex as forming predictions and suppressing prediction errors.

So yeah, if you only do predictive processing in this sense, I think you're limited.

And variational Bayes and active inference is really like the next generation because you can accommodate all sorts of models.

And yeah, I don't think it, I mean, I cannot see at least how you would go beyond that.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

So Dean with a raised hand and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, Lance, I was curious.

So it seems like the math is able to help us understand the difference between something that's really highly defined, so that kind of a posteriori, and then sort of the fuzzy, where the variational base part sort of gives us something a little less defined in terms of the edges.

And so I was just curious,

Does the brain kind of go back and forth to some degree, mathematically speaking, between that which is really clear and really has a hard edge mathematically and those things which statistically seem to distribute within the parameter set?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I mean, I think all these three, like a posterior estimation as well as variational base, there's plausible explanations for how the brain would implement them.

And so the idea for variational-based or predictive processing is that the brain would be encoding some kind of uncertainty.

And so in the literature, people say that the mean firing rate of a neural population would encode the posterior estimate, so what you think is actually out there.

And then the variance of the firing rates would encode your uncertainty.

So I think there's plausible theories for how the brain would implement all of these things.

And then I think that's the nice thing, at least with active inference, is that we try to develop models that are consistent with our understanding of the brain.

And as our understanding of the brain evolves, we kind of like refine these models.

So I think we're definitely working towards models that do explain, at least so far it's very coarse-grained and very simplistic, but we're working towards models that could be implemented in the brain.

So I think these very abstract, very general form of variational Bayes could be implemented in the brain.


SPEAKER_00:
One quick follow-up is you mentioned how the mean firing rate corresponds to this first a posteriority estimation, which is a mean estimation, and then there's the variance in the firing rate.

So what measurements or what does it look like to implement variational Bayes in the brain?

Like what measurements are we making?

What kinds of analysis would we make on those just like mean and variance?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, so the idea, I mean, the very simple idea is that you would get some sensory stimulus.

So you get some impression on your retina.

some neurons in your retina which fire into the visual cortex.

And then the premise is that your brain has embodied a generative model of its environment.

So it has learned how to recognize, how to infer things in the environment from its sensations.

And so the stimulus that would go into V1 and all these other parts of visual cortex, and then the neurons in the visual cortex would align their mean firing rates with respect to, oh, it's an armchair, or it's something different.

So maybe there's a neural population that encodes armchair, and there's a neural population that encodes something else.

There's also a lot of studies for specific neurons, like one neuron encoding one particular stimulus.

So there's these guys at MIT that show that there's actually a Bill Clinton neuron that fires whenever you see Bill Clinton.

So you can be very specific.

And yeah, so if it's uncertain that it's Bill Clinton, your Bill Clinton neuron would fire.

Yeah, I guess we'd have a lot of variance in its firing rate.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, awesome.

So welcome, Blue, with a raised hand.

Go for it.

And then we'll continue, and also Stephen.

So go ahead, Blue.


UNKNOWN:
Hi.


SPEAKER_05:
I am Blue Knight, and I'm an independent research consultant from New Mexico.

And I have a question on your paper, and it's kind of something that I've been questioning a lot lately with regards to the free energy principle and the requirement for ergodicity.

And my question is, in your paper, you said that the, you know, the outline, even in the outline, it says, you know, you partition the world with the Markov blanket, and then you equip the partition with stochastic dynamics.

So I'm wondering how these stochastic dynamics relate to ergodicity, if at all, and if that fulfills the requirement for ergodicity as necessary by then.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

Yeah, that's a great question.

Yeah, I think Stephen also wanted to talk about that.

So it's great that you bring this up.

So the idea of these stochastic dynamics is that we don't assume that dynamics are deterministic.

And it makes sense because you can describe planets as having deterministic dynamics.

But when you talk about biological systems,

things are a lot more messy.

And if you're not modeling them at the molecular level, which you never are, things are stochastic.

So then the assumption on our system is that it's stationary.

And this is really what it means to be adaptive.

So you're preserving some kind of steady state.

But we never assume ergodicity.

So there's actually a deep... So stationarity and ergodicity are not the same.

So we assume stationarity, but we don't assume ergodicity.

And so if, Daniel, you could go to Appendix B,

There's a figure I think which would be the best way to illustrate a bit below.

Yeah, perfect.

So here in this appendix we illustrate some dynamics that are ergodic and some dynamics that are not ergodic.

If you look at the top left and bottom left panels, these dynamics are ergodic.

And so I guess the intuitive definition of ergodicity is that here you have the steady state in blue.

So regions that are very blue are regions of high probability mass under the steady state.

So regions where your dynamic is likely to be in and regions that are less blue, you're less likely to be in.

now ergodicity means that if you start your dynamic anywhere and you and you let it run for a sufficient amount of time so like you observe your biological system for a very long time um your dynamic would basically sample the whole distribution so it would go i mean if you if you give it enough time it would go really far away and then it will come back and it will do all sorts of things as you can see in the bottom left and bottom right

So this is ergodic.

Now in the top left and bottom left, it's ergodic.

And then the bottom right, it's not ergodic.

And so as you can see, if you start the dynamic on the bottom right anywhere, it will go around an orbit.

They won't sample the whole distribution.

So it's still confined to a small region.

And so the paper still applies for these kind of dynamics.

So yeah, I don't know.

Does that help?

Or was that not very clear?


SPEAKER_05:
So to follow up, the paper does apply in situations where it's not ergodic.

That's what you said, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

Yeah, we don't need ergodicity.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, so even within a steady state,

Um, like, so biological systems, you know, operate within homeostasis, homeostasis, but it's a range, right?

So, so it's not like a constant, it's not like, you know, purely we're not at 37 degrees all the time, right?

Like, so there's some fluctuation all the time within that steady state.

And, and so I just was wondering kind of how you rectify those concepts, like, is it like a restricting of the state space or, or how does that work?


SPEAKER_03:
Um, so, so the, this idea of homeostasis, that's, that's really the, the steady state assumption.

So for example, um, in the state space, maybe you would have one, one, uh, one coordinate that describes the temperature of your, of your biological system.

And if it's a human, um, then it would have regions of very high probability.

So here regions in blue around 37 degrees, and then regions that are less blue

like a bit further away.

And so the dynamic, I mean, your system can evolve in all of these regions.

Just like on average, it will be more often around 37 degrees, just because that's how we are.

But sometimes it will be higher and sometimes it will be lower.

And so this is all allowed.

And so I guess this ergodicity assumption, so then if you assumed that the biological system was ergodic,

then this would imply that if you leave the biological system run for a sufficiently long time, like you reserve it for a very long time, it will basically sample your whole distribution of temperatures.

So maybe...

Um, so, so maybe like the, the temperature that, um, a human body is allowed to have are between like 36 and 39, let's just say for simplicity.

And so ergodicity would say, um, yeah, if I, if I observed my biological system for a sufficiently long time, um, I would see my biological system at all these temperatures.

And I think maybe.

maybe that would happen.

So maybe temperature is like we're ergodic with respect to temperature.

But maybe there's other things in which we aren't ergodic.

And I think the previous papers on the principle, for simplicity, they always assumed some kind of dynamic, and it turned out to be ergodic.

And so in here, we're not making that assumption.


SPEAKER_05:
Sorry, I'm going to just follow up with one more question, Daniel.

Is that okay?

Yeah.

So, you know, it's great, right?

If you're talking about one human system, right?

Like my Markov blanket, the partitions, like internal and external states.

And so I have my one human system or even multiple human systems.

Like we will operate in the same kind of steady state based range.

But if we're talking really about, you know, collections and how kind of

collective dynamics and overlapping Markov blankets.

Do you think it's mathematically possible to extend the state space?

Like I can operate, you know, from 35th to 39th.

That's an okay temperature for me, but like a reptile has a very different kind of temperature range, but clearly like we have some interaction.

I have interaction with the reptile.

And so there's some, some emergent dynamic between me and some reptile feature.

Right.

Right.

Like, so,

can we define a state space, would it be mathematically acceptable, or is it offensive, mathematically impossible to define a state space where I'm allowed to sample all of these temperature ranges with my markup?

If it's some other feature in some kind of collective dynamic, it's not, they have a different range.

Is that still organicity?

Because it's not, clearly, I'm not sampling the entire state space, I'm sampling my state space, but is that,

confounding in some way?

I mean, it is in my brain, that's why I'm asking.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's a really good question.

So this is all fine.

So we can do everything you just said.

And so when we, so actually when we say, so we always sample a distribution.

We're not, I mean, and then the distribution is on the state space.

So we're sampling the state space.

But if your distribution is confined to a region of state space, so let's say as a human, I cannot possibly have any bodily temperatures below 36 degrees.

then you would sample only things that are above 36 degrees.

So I think you would have your own steady state, your own stationary distribution with temperatures around 37 degrees.

And then if there's a snake also in this environment that you're modeling, then we'll have another very different steady state.

And so I think your question really speaks to the possible extensions of this work.

Because in this paper, we just say, oh, there's an internal state space, which would be what's inside.

And then there's an external state space, which would be what's outside.

but then really what people would need to do now is to say oh but my actually there's a lot of very interesting things in my environment there may be snakes there may be other kinds of animals and they all have their own mark of blanket and they all have their own steady state so then what you can do is to partition your external state space into all of these things that might be around you

And then instead of performing some kind of simple inference, as we have in this paper, you would have some more structured inference.

Because part of your inference would be about what's just in front of you.

Part of your inference would be about your dog that's right over there.

And you would have a lot of, by carving your external state space into different things with their own steady state,

you would actually have an inference that's much more structured because you would infer all these things, all these different things that are in your environment.

So this can all be accommodated in this paper, but it would definitely need another paper to make that explicit and say some really interesting things because, yeah, this is really the way to go.

But the mathematics doesn't need extension.

It's just like...

Yeah, it would just be like partition the state space, and then we can have all that you spoke about.


SPEAKER_05:
That's really helpful.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

And also one piece of then Stephen's question is, it's not as if something being ergodic or not is equivalent to it being easy or simple or tractable.

Like looking at these distributions or trajectories here, the one that you characterized as non-ergodic, not sampling basically across the state space, the bottom right, this one is the one that in the caption, it says,

Purely conservative dynamics, lower right panel, are reminiscent of the trajectories of massive bodies, whose random fluctuations are negligible.

So, it's actually not like it's, um, maybe this will speak to Stephen's questions about what is a thorn and what's a rose, because this is a non-ergotic system that's massively predictable.

You can do it with a gear.

So maybe that relates to some of these criticisms about, well, we're only working with a limited set of ergodic processes.

It's like, okay, but that's the squiggly one that's dancing everywhere, the stochastic process that we care about.

Whereas including non-ergodic processes, some of these non-ergodic processes might just be going around in an oval.

So it won't be a challenge for the math at all.

Something that works on a stochastic squiggle is going to have actually an easier time on this oval one.

So, Stephen, and then anyone else with a question?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thanks.

Yeah, I suppose actually tying into what you just said there, Daniel, that there's this question with...

how much we need to be able to sample over big state spaces.

So it might well be that, I don't know, the chemicals of a cell with molecules vibrating millions of times a second, and there may be a quick...

ongoing way to sort of get a feel for the ergodic state space now if you watch a cricket ball come towards you um you know you don't get that chance to do that so but you might want to sort of maintain a trajectory some sort of trajectory um that can still be um tractable i suppose so i think this is this is actually quite quite useful

I suppose the question then comes in is what's the sort of in-betweens?

Where does approximation science come in more and more to allow us to sort of work with not knowing and work with something like these solenoidal flows in a more fuzzy way?

Because I'm assuming that if you've got less chances to sample your state space,


SPEAKER_03:
solenoidal might be more useful to get towards something tractable or maybe i'm wrong but i wonder what your thoughts are on that right um so actually solenoidal um i mean so in in this figure here uh on the bottom left you have like no solenoidal flow and then the bottom right there's just solenoidal flow um so i would say

All of these two very special cases, they don't look like biological systems at all.

And they're also the simplest ones to understand mathematically and to study mathematically.

And actually when it gets really interesting and when it looks a lot more like a biological system is on the top left.

And that's harder to assess mathematically.

And so as you can see, it's quite, I mean, I think the dynamic on the top left is quite nice because on the one hand you have dissipation, like you have some squiggly lines, you have randomness.

on the other hand thanks to the solenoidal flow you have some kind of exploration and also some kind of like circular patterns so for example in um and this is actually how you characterize what's called a non-equilibrium steady state but without without going into the details um as humans as and as animals we have a lot of circular patterns that are not purely deterministic so for example we all have a circadian rhythm

And we all have all sorts of other circular patterns.

And I think to account for that, you really need to be on the top left.

So I think the, I mean, one of the next steps to this research is right now we just assumed that the dynamic is stationary.

And so all this applies to like a humongous range of dynamics.

And a lot of them don't look like biological systems at all.

And I think the next step would be to restrict ourselves to dynamics that look a lot more like biological systems.

and then see what else can we say.

And I bet there's some dynamics that look a lot like very intelligent systems, and some that also look like maybe lifelike systems, but they are not so intelligent.

So then the question is, what kind of parameters, what kind of dynamics do you need to characterize something that explores its environment, something that makes decisions, and all sorts of things?

yeah um and and that's going to be a challenge and also i mean just speaking about biological systems i think biological systems have a lot of solenoidal flow and they do have dissipation but they don't have so much dissipation so you would have something like the top left but with like huge yeah huge like a lot of exploration like you would go a lot further than that in your state space

And then you would have a bit of, I mean, you would have a lot of squiggly lines, but it would be, yeah, there would be a lot more like exploration than there is dissertation.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, and you have both can combine, can't so gradient and solenoidal flow can kind of be playing at the same time.

I'm wondering if someone was to bring attention to a goal or a type of attention, maybe a more pragmatic attention or an epistemic attention or a risk averse attention.

whether it might be that rather than trying to deal with the whole state space, maybe that general process carries on, but it tries to introduce a solenoid or...

you know, type of flow, which in some ways you could imagine being more tractable to a biological system if it's like bioelectricity, you know, the types of dynamics which maybe are more tractable around a certain trajectory than some.

So you've seen these dynamics could combine in different regimes of attention.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, yeah, definitely.

And I think, but I think to properly account for attention, we need to go beyond these continuous state spaces and do what people, and basically extend to these standard models of active inference, where in addition to have some continuous state space, maybe like for movements and this kind of thing, you also have a discrete state space.

And then you would have a dynamic evolving in your discrete state space.

And maybe some state would be, oh, I'm attending over there.

And some other state would be, I'm attending over there.

So I think attention is really something that can be modeled with a discrete state space.

And then it would, I don't think it would be so hard.

I mean, at least seems doable to extend all the math here to like models.

Yeah, that have some like continuous state space, maybe for movement or other kinds of things.

Like maybe like blood glucose concentration is also something that evolves on a continuous scale.

But there's also a lot of things in our mind that are discrete.

So is this red?

Yes or no?

Is it raining?

Yes or no?

And to account for all that, we need a discrete state space as well.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you, Lance.

Welcome, Scott.

I see your hand raised, so go for the question, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

I came in a little late.

My apologies.

This is fascinating.

The solenoidal flow, when that gets set up,

Is it possible that he had multiple state spaces and might, because of the solenoidal flow, might it have a periodicity in each of the state spaces so that you might be able to use Fourier transforms to unpack multiple state spaces in a biological system?

So could you start having that periodicity?

Does that allow for a Fourier type analysis to start to unpack state spaces potentially when you have multiple state spaces and you're trying to distinguish them?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's a really good point.

So I know a paper actually that analyzes the Cernodo flow in terms of the Fourier transform.

I haven't really thought about it.

I think, I mean, if you get rid of the dissipative part, if you get rid of the squiggly lines and you're just in the bottom right, then you can definitely use Fourier transforms.

But then also the dynamic on the bottom right is not representative of biological systems.

So then what you can do when you're on the top left, which is really the interesting case,

is analyze the time-irreversible part, so the sonoidal flow with the Fourier transform.

And then, so you do this Hemp-Holmes decomposition that we're talking about in the appendix.

You decompose your dynamic into, yeah, so it's the equation A2.

Yeah, yeah, perfect.

So you decompose your...

your drift B, so B is the direction in which your dynamic is moving, on average, into reversible and irreversible parts.

The irreversible part is the solenoidal flow, which you can analyze using Fourier transform.

But then you need to figure out how to accommodate the reversible part with it.

So I can share the paper if you're interested.

But yeah, it seems...


SPEAKER_00:
like they're they're able to to like do do some things with that technique uh but it's also pretty pretty involved to be honest a question on the time reversible and irreversible what does that mean and in a world where it seems like we're moving forward through time only what exactly does that mean that there's something that's invariant under time reversible

versus something that changes sign under time reversal?

Like if we can't get in the time machine or put the process in a time machine, why does it matter that it's time reversible or how does that fall out of the equations?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

Well, yeah, so all this is really to emphasize that we're not assuming the dynamic to be time reversible.

And as you say, everything in the world around us, I mean, most things are time irreversible.

So if you go back to the figure just below, so the movement of planets is really something that's irreversible.

I mean, the Earth turns around the sun in one direction.

And if you are to rewind time,

it will turn around the sun in the other direction.

So in this case, you can really tell the difference between as time goes forward and as time goes backward.

And that's really what's meant by time irreversible.

But now, if you look at a cup of coffee and the coffee is still, the molecules, the coffee molecules or whatever molecules you have in that cup, they're still bouncing with each other.

And that's something that's time reversible because if you look at the cup of coffee, if I give you a movie of the cup of coffee sitting still,

You can watch the movie as time goes forward or backward and you wouldn't be able to tell the difference.

So that's something that's reversible.

And so as you can see from this example, actually things that are reversible aren't interesting at all from at least a biological perspective.

And there's so much literature about, yeah, about one of the, I mean, one of the fundamental things of being alive

is being time irreversible it's about like eating and producing waste um it's about yeah consuming energy all that kind of thing all that kind of stuff um produces entropy and is time irreversible um but then time so time irreversibility it's something that's necessary to be alive but it's not it's not sufficient um so for example if i give you

a convection cell that would be time irreversible but it won't be alive so any kind of cycle that's more or less periodic so maybe if you see like a cyclone a cyclone is time irreversible because it's like spinning one way and not the other so if you run out of time it would be spinning the other way so it's different so it's time irreversible but that's not alive

Um, and so there's many, many things like that time irreversibility, um, yeah, creation of entropy.

Um, there's, there's a few things like that, that characterize biological systems.

And I think as we, as we go on with this work, we'll, we'll try to like specialize to only those dynamics that satisfy all these requirements and eventually things like, oh, we need systems that are able to reproduce, for example.

like a Markov blanket that is able to divide into two Markov blankets.

For example, when a cell decomposes into two cells.

So this is really the beginning.

And yeah, in the next years, I think this community is really going to be able to address all these challenges and all these characterizations of living systems to gradually evolve towards models that are

Yeah, more realistic, I would say.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So I'll have more to say on it, but Scott, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
So a couple of things.

There's a book called Life's Ratchet, which is kind of interesting just on that idea of that irreversibility and that value of that.

The idea is that life kind of ratchets in these forms that work with the externality.

I haven't revisited that since I've been exposed to active inference, but

It might be interesting to take another look at life's ratchet.

Also, one of the things I like that discussion of living forms and what's necessary prerequisites to living forms.

One of the working definitions I'll share that I'm using now, and I think, let me tell you why I'm using it, is that life is autocatalytic and entropy secreting.

Now, my kids claim, I just wanted to say secretion in my definition because it's gushy.

That was what my kids used to say.

But autocatalytic and entropy secreting.

So notice I didn't say it had to be embodied in a specific form or specific matrix or context.

It could be a market.

It could be a Markov, you know, a lot of different things.

So the reason I share that here, it's interesting because active inference, we have this definition of life like Carolus Linnaeus.

You look at it and you see if it has feathers and you see if it has blood and stuff like that.

But now we're going towards mathematical definitions of living things.

And that's going to be very interesting because I think when we have a working definition that works for biologic forms.

So, again, my working definition right now is autocatalytic and entropy secreting.

Then I can start to say, OK, if that worked for biologic forms, let's say that did work and maybe there's problems with whatever.

But if it works, then you can start to say, OK, what other systems happen to be autocatalytic and entropy secreting?

And therefore, we shall now call living.

And maybe we can start to look at them and make observations about those systems.

And what I'm thinking about, I'm a guy who's a lawyer and in finance for years.

So I'm looking at this and saying, OK, you look at these systems, biological systems came up with these markets and these other systems.

in systems that we have to do things in the world maybe these systems are describable with biological framings and so that's why the kind of work you're doing feels like as it starts to reveal some more general definitions of living forms taking those definitions and then reapplying them back out into the world and saying okay

Are there living forms that have escaped our detection as living forms?

And basically, is there scale independence?

Are there fractal elements?

What are the things that we can now describe in those things that we previously had not thought of as biology, but in fact are describable as biology?

That's very exciting to me.

So I just wanted to say that the kind of things you were describing there and that kind of working way back down into a model of life based on time irreversibility is very interesting, I think.

Thanks, and a very interesting paper overall.

I'm looking forward to diving into this and the other paper you were mentioning also.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool, yeah.

Yeah, thanks a lot.


SPEAKER_00:
That's really great.

So to tie this from some of the physical examples we've been talking about, like the diffusion processes to the physics of information and information flows,

The big thing we've been talking about is this statistical physics and this Bayesian mechanics.

And we heard a little bit earlier how we could talk about the moments.

Like the first moment, the simplest form, the a posteriori estimation was the mean.

And then the second moment of a statistical distribution is the variance.

And there's also higher statistical moments that describe higher and higher aspects of an informational distribution.

there's also the concept in physics of moments like the position and the velocity and higher and higher physical moments.

And so the mapping is that potentially these physical moments that would describe components of a physical flow that could also be decomposed using the Helmholtz decomposition might also apply to some of these informational

flows and decompositions.

So we could use those analogies like the coffee mixing and the steady state of the coffee, and then think about how a statistical distribution is playing by similar rules.

And so it's also interesting, Scott, about instead of going from the non-living systems and then looking for that pattern and pattern matching to biological systems, we can kind of start up on the top left with, or something even more biologically fleshed out, and then look for those patterns and pattern match outside of systems that have a vertebra and a central nervous system, because that shouldn't be the...

the card to get into the club of information processing systems, or entropy secreting systems.

So any thoughts?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I mean, yeah, I think I think that's, that's really interesting.

I mean, the real challenge here is to is to make the link between the physics and the information.

And

The more I've been working on this, the more I realized that actually a lot of physics, or at least a lot of statistical physics, you can explain with properties of information.

So for example, entropy increasing is also information being lost.

Not stochasticity.

Stochasticity, so the inability to predict the future exactly,

is exactly the same as entropy being lost over time.

Information being lost over time and entropy increasing.

So I think there's...

there's very deep connections between information, physics, inference, and some of them have been fleshed out, but it hasn't really been put together, at least as far as I know, in this context, in the context of Markov blankets, in the context of how can we have a theory of how adaptive systems work,

can we describe adaptive systems as performing inference?

So I think this is really exciting.

And also, as you can see from this paper, so the dynamics that we're considering, they're extremely general.

And for these dynamics, for all of them, we're able to derive some kind of inference.

So this is to say that this inferential description, it applies to many systems.

And so it means that on the one hand, it's very ubiquitous, but then on the other hand, it's not that useful because maybe the things that didn't look at all like biological systems can still satisfy this kind of free energy principle or Bayesian mechanics.

So I think what's really exciting is to be able to, in the future, to specialize to those dynamics that look more like biological systems and then really look at these informational properties.

And I think a big one is how much exploration do we have?

And exploration is really something, exploration and curiosity, it's really something that characterize intelligent systems as we know it.

And yeah, so there's some discussions in the literature of how we would be able to use things like information length and concepts for information theory and information geometry to quantify things like memory and itinerancy, curiosity, and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
So one question from the live chat, before we continue.

The question is, what is the explicit definition of information flow?

And also maybe in that, if you want to describe a little bit about this other paper, like what is information flow?

What is information geometry?

And how does it relate to what we're talking about here?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

So this is all the idea of...

As an organism, you're always encoding some beliefs about your environment.

So we talked about maximum a posteriori and variational inference.

So the idea is that we're always receiving sensations and then making some inferences about the outside.

Now, if you're making some inferences about the outside, implicitly or mathematically, you're parameterizing a distribution about things in the environment.

And so information geometry then comes into play.

Information geometry quantifies the extent to which beliefs about the environment are different from each other.

So it doesn't make sense.

So for example, let's say that

I think Daniel's eyes are blue.

Let's just say.

And then I have some uncertainty around the real color.

So that would be like one kind of belief I could hold.

And then another type of belief would be Daniel's eyes are brown.

And then I would have some other kind of uncertainty.

Now, a question you could ask me is, how different are these two beliefs?

And if I had a different belief about the color of his eyes, would that belief be more different than the beliefs I initially had?

So then information geometry enables you to answer these questions.

It enables you to say how two beliefs are different from each other by quantifying the distance between them.

but also even more interestingly as i um let's say i i've never met daniel before like let's say i haven't seen his picture before now you give me a picture of daniel um i'm gonna make an inference about the color of his eyes so from being initially completely agnostic

I'm going to move my completely agnostic belief to a belief that says, oh, maybe he has brown eyes.

So this is to say that as we make inferences and sample the world, our beliefs evolve.

And so information geometry enables you to quantify how much your beliefs evolved and what kind of trajectory did they take.

Because, I mean, I'm assuming at least our beliefs, they evolve in a continuous manner as we sample more information.

And then it becomes interesting to see what kind of trajectories did my beliefs take and was that trajectory efficient?

If it wasn't efficient, maybe I lost some energy there that I could have used somewhere else.

So my inference wasn't very optimal from that perspective.

And then there's a paper about this actually on active inference that uses information geometry to see whether inferences in active inference are efficient from a metabolic point of view.

So that's something that you can look at with information geometry.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Just to follow up from the chat, and then we'll return to our colleagues here.

Do we have, or more precisely, do we hope to have a definition like an electromagnetic flux in field theory for information flows, information flux?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Yes.

So information flux is the movement of beliefs.

And so you can write that down mathematically.

So, yeah, I mean, a belief is a probability distribution about things that are going on in the environment.

And as you sample information, you would change probability distribution.

So it would be like a motion on the space of probability distributions.

That's really the meaning of information flow.

But maybe the question was about, can we derive some kind of like Maxwell's equation, some kind of law about how...

about how information flow happens, like maybe an equation for information flow.

And I would say that that would be the aim.

That would be what people are working towards in theoretical neuroscience, like some kind of equation that explains how we make inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So a few raised hands.

Scott first, then Blue, then Steven.

So go ahead, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
A couple of things.

That was fascinating little bits there.

So on that last piece on the information plus two points, the embodiment, I'm thinking of embodiment of information.

So I'm thinking of a farmer that's deciding what crops to plant.

So they look and they get information from the newspaper and they look at weather reports and they gather information.

Then they decide on what seeds to plant.

The seed itself is an embodiment of information.

They put the seed in the ground.

They get results with their farming.

The markets then respond.

So there are seeds as information, farmers processing information, markets processing information,

And one of the things that's kind of interesting here is a lot of the work I'm doing now is in food chains and trying to figure out how to de-risk food chains and just food generally.

And that efficiency question you just asked is really interesting.

What are the losses and conversions that happen when information is embodied in those different

aspects of that decision process through which something gets converted from a need of society to have a certain amount of corn at a certain time of year to through all those chains of seeds and selections and farmers and processing it's kind of interesting to look at this system as both each piece of it is living the seed is arguably living although there's a question of whether seeds are living among people who are biologists but anyway and then because they're not actively doing stuff

but they're kind of stasis.

But anyway, that embodiment question, that's one.

And let me ask, I'll ask both and then turn off my voice here.

So the embodiment question is one kind of, that notion you just talked about, about an overall formula, maybe there's an overall embodiment characterization that's made possible using those landscapes and looking at kind of a multi,

faceted landscape and looking at those conversions that happen from one embodiment of information to another and efficiencies there.

That's an interesting kind of possible thought.

The other one is you said something about curiosity before, maximum exploration, maximum curiosity.

That really struck me because one of the things we've been advocating for, I did a lot of cybersecurity work a number of years ago, and people were coming out of the military and we were saying, oh, hey, you ex-military guy, you got to learn more critical thinking.

And that was kind of insulting because they were senior people.

They're like, hey, we're critical, but really they didn't.

And one of the things I started saying is don't tell people they have to have critical thinking.

That's not what I'm talking about.

They probably have to be more curious.

And it's kind of interesting that we're getting now to these systems having a map.

exploration possibility a maximum efficiency in some ways with curiosity to me that really informs a lot of teaching because if you have people who develop a curiosity over their lifetime they take care of being educated they continuously are learning and so that notion of exploration and curiosity seems like it could fundamentally through active inference

affect how we do teaching and much less of rote teaching and much more of a curiosity-based teaching because of the power.

You'll never know what you're going to encounter out there in the world.

And so telling your children, hey, be curious, will intrinsically serve them versus teaching them a rote series of things to respond to their environment.

So just a couple of comments on those last two things I thought were fascinating.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's really interesting.

So as you said, and I think we all agree, information, or maybe 70 years ago or 80 years ago, we didn't have any kind of information theory.

Information theory wasn't a thing.

Computers weren't the thing.

And we didn't really think about information, even though it was there in books and everywhere around us.

And I think with the advent of computers and information theory,

just information became a big thing and people realized that it was important.

And now everyone thinks about everything in terms of information.

And I, and I think that's the right way to look at things.

I mean, it seems to be, um, yeah, information can encode just about anything by, by definition.

Um, and so physics, uh, or at least our, our descriptions of the world there, the, um,

Matter was the most important thing, matter and the waves.

This is how it all started.

And then.

And then information geometry and information theory came into play and people started looking at these things in terms of information as well.

But I think matter remained the big thing.

But more and more people are looking at information in terms of like the

the most important concept, at least the root concept from which, um, from which you can like encode or explain everything else.

And, um, so, so yeah, information geometry came around and it enables you to see how, how information is flowing over time and, uh, how that relates to heat and things like that.

And now, um,

People are looking at how information may be encoded by things about other things.

And this is really Bayesian mechanics.

Bayesian mechanics, the root of the word is beliefs about things that are held by other things.

And I think this is, yeah, I mean, Bayesian mechanics, I guess, started out, I mean, in a way, it started out long ago with like Bayesian inference.

But Bayesian inference started out as an abstract statistical concept, and now people are trying to relate that to physics.

And yeah, so I think we're moving towards a physics that's information-based and based about beliefs about things, encoded about other things.

So this is really Bayesian mechanics, information geometry.

And then what you said about curiosity was also really interesting.

And so, yeah, definitely.

I mean, in AI, people are tuning curiosity.

So, yeah, they're trying to optimize curiosity of agents with respect to different environments.

In a paper that we have called Active Inference on Discrete State Spaces as Synthesis,

we, in one of the appendices, we justify the expected free energy objective that people use to explain decision making and biological agents.

And we actually show that

We could have, so the expected free energy for those who don't know, is basically ways exploration and exploitation.

So exploration is really the curiosity.

So he has these two terms.

And in general, I mean, these two terms are put on the same footing.

But actually in the appendix of that active inference synthesis paper, we show that you could weigh them in a different way.

And I mean, yeah, the agent would still work somehow.

It will have a different behavior.

So it could be a lot more curious or a lot less curious.

And that would be really interesting to quantify in terms of concepts of information geometry.

So this is to say that you can actually tune that and have agents that have different curiosities.

And also it made me think about what you said about things from computational psychiatry, where people explain diseases, like computational diseases, as people having different priors in their genetic model.

and seeing how that would affect behavior.

So you can explain suboptimal-optimal and suboptimal behavior with the same principles just by changing the model.

And we also have a recent paper on Bayesian brains and the Rennie divergence, where we're basically showing that by doing variational inference a bit differently,

You can actually account for agents that are optimal, that make the right decisions, and agents that maybe are a bit suboptimal in terms of curiosity and so on.

So I think there's a lot of exciting computational work to be done in terms of characterizing different behaviors.

And I think we're really at the beginning.

And ultimately, all these things will be able to, I mean, people will be able to account with information geometry.

I think that's the right framework.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Lance.

Just quick follow-up, Scott, go for it.

Yep, quick follow-up.

Two things.

One, the Bayesian mechanics, when you say beliefs about things that are held by other things, that feels nice with my example of the farmer and the seeds because it's an embodiment.

Each thing that embodies something is, the embodiment is a belief in a sense, right?

Because it's holding, a seed doesn't have a belief itself, but it's embodying information.

And so it's interesting to think about belief itself

things and then the embodiment of information in the thing intrinsic affordance that the thing offers right that is that was a relationship between belief and

an intrinsic physical affordance that's in a system that is the result of an earlier information system.

That's one follow-up.

Then the second follow-up is the way I soften people up when you talk to older people and you're like, oh, it's all information.

It's not physical.

We're information beings.

The way I soften them up just to share is I say to them, do you have a 401k or retirement plan?

Most older people are starting to think about that.

And then they say, yeah.

And I say, do you think it's a pile of groceries waiting for you to retire?

Because it's not.

It's just data in a system.

And if that system goes away, you got nothing.

So it's that idea of getting people to understand how much we depend upon information.

And then people start thinking, oh, wow, I guess I really do depend upon all sorts of other systems in my life.

It's something that as physical beings, it's hard for us to realize how much we are information beings.

And that's, again, just part of that rhetorical exercise to get people in a headspace of saying, wow, maybe things really are information that I thought were solid, like my retirement plans.

But really, they're just totally dependent on systems and the information output of those systems.

Thanks.

Nice, Scott.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
So, Blue, with a question, go for it.


SPEAKER_05:
So you mentioned a paper that you, well, I don't know if it was your paper, but about information geometry and active inference.

Is it this one that's Markov Blankets, Information Geometry and Stochastic Thermodynamics?

Is that the paper you're talking about?


SPEAKER_03:
No, that's not this one.

So if you're referring to the one about how inference is efficient, like quantifying efficiency of inference and how much energy you need to do a kind of inference.

So that's not this paper.

It's another paper called Neural Dynamics Under Active Inference, something like that.


SPEAKER_05:
So I have some questions and I don't know anything about information geometry.

I mean, just a little tiny bit.

So it's something that I'm definitely starting to get very interested in because I think that it's going to be maybe like the next level of where active inference goes.

Maybe, maybe.

I mean, I just have the suspicion.

So when you have information and in an information geometry, like in an information flow,

I've been reading other papers about information flow in channels, right?

So like when you, and I mean, it makes sense because when you have, when you know something about the current state, I mean, it's just like based in inference.

Like your belief about the next state of the world is based on the state of the world right now, right?

So, I mean, it doesn't make sense that you would think, you know, all of a sudden I'm going to be like on Pluto based on my current information.

And so,

Does information geometry, do the channels appear when you look at inference and information geometry?

Does it appear to be like a trajectory?


SPEAKER_03:
That's a good question.

So I think information geometry is more general.

You don't need to have a channel.

It's really about, at the heart of it, it's really about having different probability distributions.

And these are actually beliefs about stuff.

and looking how they differ from each other and like movement, how probability distributions change over time, these kind of problems.

But then, so you're right to say that information theory started out with the study of channels, communication channels between different things.

and you have a Yeah, there's a lot of work on information theory and channels and still today with in engineering So I would I would guess there's a lot of work also on information geometry with channels but that would be like a subset of the whole field of information geometry and I would say it's it would be

Yeah, I would say that people contributing to that literature would be mostly from engineering or around engineering.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Blue, anything there?

Yeah, go for it.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, if I could just follow up really quick.

So I know about information theory and the flow of information in the channels, say like a telephone line or whatever, some direct method of communication.

But the way, I don't know if I'm thinking about it in the wrong way, because when I try to search for information flow in a channel, and maybe it's the same, but I think about it in a different way.

I think about the channel flowing from

like the present into the future, right?

So like there's only so many like next states that are possible, right?

Like based on my present state.

And so is it incorrect or is it correct to think about like not a direct channel as in I'm speaking to you over this internet information channel, but like the channel from now into some future state?

Is that the same kind of like mathematical engineering information channel?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

Yeah, that,

Yeah, you're catching me off guard because I don't know about channels.

So, I mean, what you say sounds plausible and I would say yes, but I wouldn't be able to say for sure just because I don't know that literature.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Well, I'm sure I come back to this in the weeks and years to come.

So, Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I'm really interested by these different, tying these bits together in a way, I suppose, that sort of come up.

We've got this sort of,

information geometry that i suppose can come from an ergodic space or kind of a state space and then you've got solenoidal flows within maybe an isocontour of that or potentially i suppose it doesn't have to be solenoid or it could be like an isocontour flow if it was more complex so i mean um and when you've got that potential to um

go and have a solenoidal-type flow to sample, would that be a slightly more of a second-order sampling approach that something might use?

So you've got, you know, the distribution could just emerge from a steady space, steady state sort of ergodicity process, and you would maybe...

somehow systematize a flow or way of engaging that information.

And I could imagine that would then

make sense of some of the entropy consuming potential of a living system, which is that it can kind of go upgrade in descent.

And the solenoidal flow then gives Scott's sort of entropy secreting option.

It seems a bit more viable then, because maybe I could choose multiple solenoidal samplings of information geometries and

secrete the ones which aren't as good, if that makes sense.

So I'd be curious in terms of how the ability to go to more second order understandings within a system and within the dynamics might be offered by the solenoidal sampling, maybe even taking into account things like the landscape used on the mountain car

problem.

You know, that landscape, if you can't sample the whole landscape ergodically, could you have lots of solenoidal samples or something like that around the landscape?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, it's a really good point.

So there's deep connections between solenoidal flow and information geometry, and mostly in the context of the, as you pointed out, the sampling literature.

So the idea is that if you start a stochastic process somewhere and you have solenoidal flow, it will converge to its steady state a lot faster than if it didn't have solenoidal flow.

So then you can quantify that in terms of information geometry, maybe taking a shorter path to the steady state and things like that.

So then there's also a really nice new paper actually called, is there an analog of Nesterov acceleration for MCMC?

And so that paper really does a nice job of illustrating some deep connections between stochastic processes and information geometry.

And so the idea is that if you start with a very simple process called overdamped Langevin dynamics, then you can show that

actually the the dynamic in information space is doing um so like the process is doing a gradient descent on kl divergence

to reach the steady state, so the target distribution.

So this process is exactly doing like standard variational inference.

But then if you add some solenoidal flow, you actually make that convergence happen faster.

So it's like an accelerated method.

And so in terms of biology, you can say that if you have solenoidal flow, your inference happens faster.

So you're able to infer things a lot faster.

So you're, in a sense, more intelligent.

I think we talk about it in one of the figures in the part of the paper.

And so in that paper that I just mentioned, they show that with a particular stochastic process actually implement some kind of accelerated variational inference.

So yeah, there's some literature about that and it would be interesting to see those processes that perform inference very fast

whether when we put them in the basal mechanics contest, whether we can say, oh, these actually can be seen to correspond to biological systems that we've been studying, things like that.


SPEAKER_04:
Can I just ask one quick question on that?

When you say adding solenoidal flow, is that adding it in the sampling methodology, or is it somehow maybe, I suppose it's a bit, could it be thought of physically, or is that, how does that work?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, definitely.

So the solenoid flow is really this time irreversible part.

So intuitively, it's this kind of like stirring or mixing the system.

So maybe if you have a really nice example, actually, is if you have a cup of coffee and you pour milk in it.

Now what you could do is just wait for the milk and the coffee to mix together.

And this would be no solenoidal flow because you're not mixing anything.

Like it's just happening on its own.

And you have a dynamic like in the figure that we saw before, like on the bottom left.

So it would be time reversible.

Um, and this would like actually converge to the steady state pretty slowly.

So in terms of information geometry, you would have a slow dynamic to the steady state.

In terms of statistic, you would have a slow variational inference because you reach your target distribution very slowly.

Now what you can do is adding in solenoidal flow.

So this would be, I take my spoon and I'm going to stir the coffee and the milk together.

Then we all know then.

that this is going to allow the system to mix and to actually become uniformly mixed a lot faster.

So mathematically, it means that we reach the target distribution of the steady state faster.

So the information geometry, we're also faster.

And in terms of statistics, you can interpret that as doing variational inference faster.

Now, this interesting thing about adding insulinoidal flow

is that in physics, it's called breaking detail balance.

And breaking detail balance is about you actually provably need to input energy from the outside.

So this is the physical meaning of the time irreversible part of the dynamic.

When there is some time irreversible part, it means that there is

actually energy coming in from the outside.

And this is also like, it ties in nicely with biological systems, we know that biological systems consume energy from the outside.

So we know that they have to be that they need to have some kind of this irreversible dynamic.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Lance.

So anyone else in the live chat who wants to ask a question, this would be a good time to go for it.

And then Dean, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_02:
Let's be gentle on me when I'm about to put it out there.

I just feel really vulnerable, but I'm going to throw it out there anyway.

So lots of chatter about the encoded aspect of this, and I think we all kind of understand what that means.

So I'm going to raise a metaphor kind of around negative space and the idea of threading a needle.

which is, if you think about it as a distributive exercise, is plenty complex.

Like there's a lot of math in terms of being able to just do that thing that's hard, hard enough.

So if I'm trying to explain to somebody else a Bayesian manifold and what that represents, can I say that it's both a barrier and a filter at the same time?

Can I say that it acts kind of like a sieve?

Meaning that its mathematical structure kind of acts as a ground to the physical things that we are inferring are going on in the world.

So I guess what I'm asking is, is statistical mechanics serving to allow us to understand what negative space is as a non-form within all

as part of all the forms that we're seeing the edges of and having a liminal understanding until we get to the very limits and the high definition of what that means.

does the statistical manifold allow us to go in around and pass through zero?

It doesn't allow us to reverse the spin of the solenoidal, but it does allow us to get away from zero and move closer to what the known is.

Because if we continue to kind of go back and forth between the physical math and the statistical math, I know why we have to kind of talk

both at once like we have to have two hands to clap but i think it's i think what ends up happening is in this conversation the encoding and the physical piece tends to dominate and then and the non-physical stuff the statistical stuff maybe that ground that the statistical manifold allows for doesn't it hasn't maybe been fully fleshed out

in a way that helps me help explain it to other people who aren't as far along in this journey as you are.

And I'm hoping to get to a place where I can translate it for them.

So maybe you can just talk to that a little bit about what is the statistical manifold?

Is it just the hard stuff that we see or should we be paying attention to maybe the spaces between all of those data points?


SPEAKER_03:
Right, yeah, so,

That's a really interesting and actually a hard question to answer.

But just to start with the easy part, the statistical manifold is the mathematical object that says these are all the beliefs, all the different beliefs that you could hold about your environment.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.


SPEAKER_03:
And so as time evolves and you're gathering new information,

your what your brain is doing is moving on this statistical manifold your beliefs are changing over time and then in terms of um explaining it to people so the always the the way the way that i try to explain it is that this um this like in information talk um things encoding things uh things encoding information about other things

It's just a different description of the world.

So we have a description that takes like matter and waves and forces and things like that.

And then we have a different description that looks at information.

And I think these two descriptions are equivalent.

It's just two different ways to talk about the same thing.

Um, on the other hand, this, um, way, way of talking about the world in terms of, uh, information flows and information processing.

I think it might be more general in the sense that instead of needing to have like matter and all these different concepts, different kinds of particles, and it gets really messy.

Um, maybe it would be possible to unify more with the concept of information.

Because with information, you can explain what a photon is and what a proton is and you name it.

So it would be more unified and maybe more mathematically simple at the end of the day, but that remains to be seen.

Interestingly, so does this guy, the computational engine, evolve from alpha?

So this guy is actually a physicist.

I didn't know that until very recently, but he

He's been doing some really interesting work over the past few years, working towards a theory of everything that is based on the concept of information.

So information and computation is the thing he starts with.

And I think he's managed to... He basically postulates that the world evolves in time

according to some kind of computation that's recursively applied to itself.

So you, you can think of it in terms of a dynamical system, but so it's like the way he thinks about it is a bit more general, but it would be like maybe, um,

you give a number to a program and then the program outputs a number.

And then, so that would be one time step.

And then you reapply the program to that number.

That would be another time step.

And so he kind of, he, and so he postulates that the universe works in that way.

It evolves according to like discrete steps with a repeated program.

And the program would be the laws of physics.

It's like kind of an abstract informational way to look at it.

And so the.

So, yeah, so he makes this this very abstract approach to physics and and also very simple, I mean, very kind of unified approach to physics.

And I think he's managed to derive approximations to the equations of relativity just with that.

So with a certain kind of program, I mean, anyway, he's been doing some really interesting

work trying to unify known physics with the concept of information and he's written a very nice uh article like a blog post about it i think if you if you google like uh wolfram theory of everything you might you might come up you might come up um but yeah it's um i mean it's not it's not technical

I mean, it is technical somehow, but it's not like there's no equations.

It's conceptually, I think, conceptually hard what he does, but the way he explains it is nice.

So, yeah, I think we're moving to this kind of information-based physics, but it doesn't mean that the physics that we know would matter and so on should be discarded.

uh it's just like different different levels to talk about it just like we have um psychology that talks about the brain uh from a like very overall perspective and then we have like yeah talking about like maybe biases uh our biases decision making so that would be one description of the world and then we have molecular dynamics that will look at the brain from a very

from a basic molecular level.

And all these descriptions have to fit together somehow.

And I think depending on what we're trying to ask, one description would be more fit than the other.

So if I'm studying a human psychology is probably much more useful than molecular dynamics.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Lance.

One quick comment on the information is it allows us to drop into a mode of matter and organization as information, which is still within the objective stance, but also it allows us to model ourselves and our beliefs and thinking about them informationally about other beliefs or about matter, which is a way of mathematically complementing the relational stance.

So it also moves us towards Wolfram's vision of what new science would look like, because we actually have quantitative relational techniques that help us deal with our uncertainty and about the way that we interact with the world, actively interfering and measuring and manipulating, not just like us walled off as the investigator trying to get to the most exact answer.

framing of a system.

So it's really interesting developments.

So we have time for some more questions.

So Scott, and then after that, we'll go to Stephen.

So go ahead, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
A couple of little thoughts on that last bit.

So that multiple dynamics that you were talking about, very interesting.

It got me thinking about that coast of England problem.

from fractals where if you measure the coast of England with a one-mile yardstick versus a one-inch yardstick, if it's a one-inch yardstick, the coast of England is longer.

right?

It's because you're measuring more of the nooks and crannies, right, in the fractal coast.

So that scale dependence, when you're talking about the dependency, we see nature and see biology through different lenses.

It's kind of interesting.

If we have a unifying lens, maybe you start to have a fractal and scale independent descriptors then will pop out of that because you'll start to have things that'll

Anyway, it feels like we're coming at descriptions of systems, as you were saying, in different ways.

They're the same system, ultimately.

And so there'll be an interesting analysis on the way in which they come together, I guess, is that this one piece.

Another thing, the mention about information and the...

that kind of Wolfram idea, that expansion.

One of the things I had a conversation with a couple of astrophysicists, and I was talking to them about Seth Lloyd out of MIT, part of his book called Programming the Universe.

He talks about

the idea that all interactions since the Big Bang have increased exponentially, just the number, the volume of interactions.

And I was talking to somebody about it, and they said, well, if the universe is made of information, then the exponential increase in information, maybe that's what dark energy is.

We perceive dark energy, that expansion force, as being something, but really what it is is the universe expanding out exponentially.

Because it's made of information.

And so it's something just to think about.

It kind of leaps around there between physics and information theory.

But that's one other piece of it.

And then the other piece of it was this idea of the outside energy you were talking about before, the need for outside energy.

One of the things that I've been fussing around with is whether, in fact, and in 2013 I did a presentation at MIT called Entropy Accounting.

and then the year after they did something called entropy engines and the idea that was that was that in information theory in carnot's equation you need a hot and cold differential to perform work um carnot's equation those differentials are identical to arbitrage differentials you need for a market to perform to move if there's no information differentials you don't have trading in markets and so one of the questions is

Roger Penrose wrote a book recently about the time before the Big Bang.

What he talks about is we have the yellow light of the sun come in and the infrared light go out.

We don't overheat except for climate change and carbon dioxide blankets.

because the net energy gain is zero, right?

Energy in and energy out, otherwise we'd overheat.

He said what we gain is negentropy because the yellow light of the sun has a higher information carrying capacity than the red light that goes out.

Plants construct themselves from the yellow light of the sun, create negentropy, and then we now, projecting forward, are now burning that fossil fuel that stored up that negentropy and releasing disorder in the form of

now climate change, disorder, political and social disorder.

So where I'm jumping around there is suggesting that disorder, accounting and entropy accounting, when you have von Neumann and Shannon's link of physics and information and other links like we have here,

that maybe when we're talking about entropy as disorder, we can talk about it not by analogy, but by direct application to social contexts and start to use information and understand disorder in society and in markets as amenable to the same kind of math that we find in some of these biological systems.

Thanks.

Just a few thoughts.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Scott.

Lance, do you want to add anything?


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

Yeah, that was very interesting.

And yeah, so I want to add actually that all this, the thing that we talk about, about like reality can be described at different scales.

And I think there's a nice extension to this work that speaks to that.

If you look at a human, I mean, it's composed of a lot of cells and each cell has its own boundary.

And then these cells form organs that themselves have their own boundary.

So there's really this recursive aspect of like Markov blankets being assembled together at different scales.

And I think

I think it would be interesting to unpack that because I think that's how biological systems are formed, but also societies are formed as collections of multiple different individuals that themselves form organizations that talk to each other and form together a society.

So it's really this recursive aspect and being able to hopefully use the same kind of math to talk about all these different aspects.

And also, I mean, people, it's true like a lot of people in the past, maybe 10, 20 years, maybe more, they've used the same kind of dynamical models that we have in this paper.

I mean, so very, very standard models to model, for example, interactions between people.

and in particular models of opinion formation.

So for example, maybe let's say we're in the US and some people are Democrats, some of our Republicans, some cannot really make their mind yet.

And so they would talk to each other, they would interact.

And then they would converge into a steady state where some, yeah, some people would be diehard Democrats in that state.

So they would kind of stay in that area.

Some people would be diehard Republicans and some people would like,

fluctuate in the middle.

So I think we can use, I mean, this math about stochastic processes and information is really the, yeah, the ground, I mean, the

a good framework or useful framework to model many kinds of things.

But then I think what a lot of these models are missing is really this belief-based aspect.

So a lot of these models of opinion formation, they just say, oh, I'm a particle, you're a particle, and we...

interact, just like particles in physics will interact.

So it's quite simplistic.

So I think once you, I mean, things are very small, maybe we can describe them in a very simple way.

But as you, as like Markov blankets self-organize at different scales, and as you go to larger and larger scales,

things become a lot more complex.

And I would say maybe we are the scale at which things are most complex.

Molecules tend to be quite simple.

We tend to be quite complex.

And then if you go up and up again, maybe to planets, then things start to become really simple again.

Because all these random fluctuations are kind of averaged out.

And then we have Newtonian mechanics where everything kind of looks deterministic.

So I think there's this sweet spot we're in where we're not too big and not too small, and interesting things happen there.

And that's where I would say Bayesian mechanics is hoping to fit in, in terms of explaining and describing what's going on.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that idea, again, that brings us back to embodiment, I suppose, because we're embodied at a particular size and scale.

And they sort of say if you go right down to the smallest scale and then right up to the biggest scale, we are kind of in the middle.

um ironically but so i was wondering how sort of following on from what you're saying and bringing in the computational psychiatry piece that you sort of alluded to to this is if we if we say that we've got

everything that we perceive, even the physicality of the world, we actually only have access to it through information anyway, even if we are actually accessing the true physical world.

So we've got this process of sense-making that we're doing to make that idea of what is our consensus reality.

So if our kind of working space that we're in is our consensus reality, what's interesting is that

With psychology and social sciences, you could almost say psychology is a bit like the predictive processing model of the world.

It's like these are predicted ways that are out there that have been chosen as the models within a particular sort of discrete spaces.

And those are externally managed.

So it's like an externally managed model.

system entry percent there could be an entry repeat secreting system where it looks like there is although entropy is not actually a substance to secrete per se and you could say that it's externally managed information geometry that the social science as well with their averages and the psychometrics that they reference to they're all kind of housed out there in the world and you've kind of got

the kind of what we see as our reality and the phenomenology of our experience is kind of the boundary but what your work's doing and what computational psychiatry does and which we're not able to do without those tools is it allows us to go into that neurobiology and the actual like the internal

internally managed stochastical dynamics of our own models so to speak so not the ones that we make out there to be our perspective on which we try and reduce free energy around but just what is the models that we're doing what you could call entropy consuming i we're actually just swimming in that entropy and finding the variations right we and so i'm curious like

That ability for this type of work to contribute to a new kind of way of knowing about what it is to be in the world and go into our internal models rather than be reliant on these external psychological and social science models.

What's your thoughts on how this might link into developing that field?


SPEAKER_03:
So are you talking specifically about the link between all this physics and the psychology, or is your question a bit more general?


SPEAKER_04:
um well maybe the the boundary between the kind of like the scales of basically the boundary of going for externally making models of the world and standard models like psychologists are doing and social sciences are doing and psychometrics and the ability to actually go into our own models our own phenomenological neurobiological models and just say okay what are the dynamics

that are alive, not what, and how, how are we actually managing not how do we manage our models of what we think they are, which is kind of what happens in our kind of niche, but we're able to probe our own phenomenology.

So I was wondering how you see that tying into that.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Um, yeah, that's a, that's a really good point.

So, so as you, as you point out, I mean, now models in like psychology and

And computational psychiatry, I mean, they're driven by intuition, they're driven by experiment, and they're driven also by our own biases and our observations about patients who suffer some kind of...

Yeah, some kind of, let's say, schizophrenia.

And so we know schizophrenic patients behave like this and like that.

And so we try to create models that kind of reproduce that.

And then we try to validate these models by saying, oh, maybe I can simulate some kind of action potentials of some neurons.

And then I'm going to check whether actually these organisms that I'm studying have this...

same kind of action potentials or same kind of electrophysiological responses.

So I think that I mean, I think that's really good.

And the research is doing a lot of progress.

But then this kind of work, not this paper, but this line of work would be able to to like go the I mean, I mean, takes a different perspective.

and would be able ultimately hopefully to describe mathematically what thinking like a human is what what is being human mathematically and of course there won't be like a definition of this is a human but there would hopefully be in the future a mathematical description of how we make decisions and what class of models are we implementing to make sense of the world

um and how can we characterize these models um in terms of and and hopefully um the community will get to that through through physical experiments but also through like just mathematical conceptualization um i think you see using mathematics you can you you cannot get you cannot just get there without any like kind of experiment but you still can

There's still quite a few constraints that we know that humans have.

For example, breaking detail balance, creation of entropy, all these things.

We know humans satisfy like... I mean, they have a lot of characteristics and we can incorporate that in the physics.

And I think this really constrains the model space.

that then people in psychology can go and look into.

So it just feels like when you're digging a tunnel and psychology would like kind of dig in one way and Bayesian mechanics would be digging from the other direction and at some point they will meet in the middle, hopefully.

But I don't think they have met really yet and it will take a while.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome um what a fun discussion and it's so cool how this paper it's almost like there was a few stairs we we explored some basic ways to frame how nodes on a bayesian graph insulate other sets of nodes and then how that conditional independence can be finessed for these increasingly developed and elaborated

networks that do, as we talked about, expectations over external states all the way up to variational base.

And then it's like we, at the top or at the middle of that staircase, started taking it in a lot of other directions.

So this was really a fun discussion.

Just in the last few minutes, maybe we can, any and all of us think like, what are we gonna continue working on?

For some of us, that's probably a research project.

Others, that's, I don't know, lunch or something else.

Just how are we going to keep on learning about this and start to apply it in our own work or research?


SPEAKER_05:
So I have a really quick question.

Lynn, are you working on the next paper where you're going to partition the external database?

Or have you started or it's just like clicking on a back burner somewhere?


SPEAKER_03:
It's not cooking yet, so you can...

you're more than welcome to go ahead and start plowing.


SPEAKER_00:
It's at the farmers markets.

The ingredients are still out there.

And Dave also raised in an email some really interesting questions about other partitionings and

basically philosophical threads that might be translated into different possible partitionings within internal states or other ways of partitioning because it was the partitioning of the blanket states from kind of one set of blanketing states into incoming sensory and outgoing action active states that allowed for this perception as inference action planning as inference

step and it's not that that's the end game of node partitioning so there's so many ways that these partitions can continue steven yeah i'm gonna be i'm trying to see how i like that analogy the two tunnels or whichever way the


SPEAKER_04:
Maybe it's a whole load of insect warrens or whatever it is trying to meet.

So psychology and bringing together some of these processes.

So I'm going to try and bring that together.

Maybe more actually, not so much from a clinical perspective, but maybe more from a community psychology and psychosocial methodologies that might be used.

So I'm going to be chewing on that as best I can.

So maybe if I ever stuck, I might fire you an email if that's okay.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah um there's many ways we can continue and also i think all along our trails we dropped a few little notes for some other pieces that could come into play if anyone else wants to raise their jitsi hands we can take a last thought

Otherwise, though, just in closing, Lance, this was awesome.

And Connor as well for joining the first live stream.

This was a great development.

We all learned a ton.

So I hope those watching live or in replay also got something out of this paper.

You're always welcome back.

Anytime you want to jump on a guest stream or be a participant, just always welcome.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you so much, Daniel.

And thank you everyone for the discussion.

I really enjoyed it.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
See everyone next time.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.


UNKNOWN:
Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
Great times.

Thanks, everyone.