## XnOfWFnN2iI

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome everyone to the active inference live stream i believe we are live it is active stream 9.0 and it is november 18 2020 i am daniel friedman and i will be doing a solo active stream today so welcome to team com everyone

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active, at ActiveInference at gmail.com, our public Keybase team, at our YouTube channel, or through any other mechanism.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And for video etiquette on live streams, make sure to mute if there's noise in the background, raise your hand so that we can hear from everyone on the stack, and use respectful speech behavior.

So just a quick announcement before we jump into the paper discussion.

You can find on our Twitter information about the rest of our discussions for 2020.

We have six more group Act Imp streams in 2020.

On November 24th and on December 1st, we're going to be in ACT-INF 9, discussing the Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood.

And that will be the paper that this ACT-INF Stream 9.0 is context for.

In Act Inf 10 on December 8th and 15th, we'll talk about the paper, A Variational Approach to Scripts.

While in Act Inf 11 on Sophisticated Affective Inference, we'll talk about more modeling and math again, and that will be on December 22nd and 29th.

So that will close out 2020.

And then we look forward to a whole new panel of events and projects, collaborators for 2021.

So find out more on our Twitter that way.

Let's talk about what we're going to do in ACT-INF Stream 9.0, which is right now.

So the goal of ACT-INF 9.0 is going to be to set the context for 9.1 and 9.2, which are going to be the group discussions that we have on these papers.

And the paper that we're going to be discussing for 9.1 and 9.2 is called The Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood by Willa Ford et al.


UNKNOWN:
2018.


SPEAKER_00:
And there's a link that people can see.

The video that we're about to jump into right now is an introduction to the context of some of the ideas presented by the authors.

It's not a review or a final word.

It will contextualize some of the ideas, math, and vocabulary that might be interesting or important to know for reading Williford et al. 2018.

And the punchline that they're going to work their way towards is that we might be able to combine fields such as geometry, cybernetics, and neurophenomenology using the framework of active inference and the free energy principle to potentially understand or explain consciousness.

So that's going to be up to you, up to us, how we feel about these kinds of claims that they're going to get to in the paper, but that's where we're headed.

And the sections of 9.0 will be as follows.

First, we'll go through the keywords and hopefully provide some background on the different keywords, whether it's your first time hearing one of these words or whether you're in one of these fields.

And then we'll talk about the aims and claims of the paper, go through their abstract and the roadmap, the sections.

Then we'll talk a little bit about consciousness from the author's perspective.

Just what do the authors say is important about consciousness and what do they think are invariant aspects of it?

We'll then walk briefly through the figures, just try to understand what are these figures even doing?

How are we going to get a first pass on understanding what these figures are all about?

And then in 9.1 and in 9.2, we're going to stay with this exact same paper.

So save and submit your questions and feel free to get in touch with us if you'd like to participate, whether that's in 9.1.2 or in a future endeavor.

Let's talk about the keywords.

The first keyword is actually not on the paper keywords, but is what we're about here is active inference and the free energy principle.

That's what we'll try to tie so much of this back to.

And here were the keywords that were listed, cybernetics,

projective geometry, consciousness, neurophenomenology, first person perspective, and perspectival imagination.

So cool terms, maybe it's your first time thinking about math and geometry in the context of consciousness, maybe it's not, but hopefully as I go through these following keywords, I hope that this is interesting and exciting, whatever level of familiarity you have with these concepts.

So first keyword is cybernetics, and it's also written there in Russian as Kubernetes.

And there's many resources to read on for the history of cybernetics, some of which we're going to talk about here, because in a lot of other active streams and other locations, you can probably hear about the mathematics underlying cybernetics

and about how it's related to control theory both things that we've talked about on this stream but let's talk a little bit about just more historically or from a cultural perspective what is cybernetics what is it trying to do cybernetics is a school of thought tradition of action however you want to think about it that's related to the action policy selection and control of goal-oriented systems

Now, there's various orders of cybernetics, which we can sort of walk through here.

And I'll go through a couple of different resources on cybernetics, and hopefully you'll see soon why I put a history citation on the bottom left and a little bit of Russian on the top.

And it's not just because we have great Russian colleagues in TeamCom.

Here are the orders of cybernetics.

There's probably different ways to state them or think about them.

First order cybernetics might be thought of as self-regulation without detailed observations.

So this could be like a negative feedback system that is able to maintain a semblance of homeostasis,

in virtue of being an isolated or a closed process.

Like there's something that gets triggered when it's too hot, and then as soon as it's triggered that it's too hot, it instantly kicks in a cooling program.

Second-order cybernetics is self-regulation that can be influenced by observers within a domain of control.

So that could be, for example, a continuously varied thermometer that's able to enact different kinds of control policies as a function of continuous inputs from the thermometer.

Third order cybernetics is self-regulation that is influenced by observation with a relational basis or an ecological grounding.

So the system in this third order cybernetic loop is able to acknowledge its surroundings and learn, develop, and evolve

And fourth order cybernetics is when self-regulation involves the enactment of multiple different realities or adjacencies, affordances, counterfactuals, a lot of ways you can think about that in terms of a functioning creative observer.

So these are deeply contextualized and integrated systems that are doing higher orders of cybernetics.

And I'm not a stickler about which order is which number.

I also on purpose drew the parallel with the one, two and three loop

which is related to some decision-making theory from innovation and the entrepreneurship space, but I just thought it's interesting.

Here's a figure from the book chapter, Cybernetics in the 20th Century, on the bottom left there.

And it shows a map of concepts and how they're related to cybernetics.

So on the left are sort of two inputs to cybernetics, which are control theory and the idea of control, and then communication theory and the idea of communication and information.

And so those are two branches that we've talked a lot about on this stream and we will continue to be talking a lot about because control of action and communication and message passing, these kinds of things, inference is the thread that runs through them all, these kinds of things are critical.

for control theory, for cybernetics, for the kinds of systems we want to get into working with.

On the right side, we see cybernetics branching back out into the machine area with the engineering sciences and the planning of, for example, complicated factory operations.

but as well as into the animal and the social levels.

So the animal cybernetics is about, for example, the self-regulation of behavior, and the social cybernetics could be about the way that our governance is run.

And there's a really interesting book, Red Plenty, that's kind of like historical fiction about cybernetics.

speaking of history this is such an interesting plot and it was in the cybernetics book figure one six it is the usage of the term cybernetics and control by years in the text of populations publications indexed by google scholar so caveats maybe people are speaking about it with different words or it's being used a different language not english or there's some other way of saying it

But look at how similar these things are in terms of their trends, where both of them ramp up gradually, leading to, in early 2000s, a lot of discussion of cybernetics and of control, potentially looking backwards a couple years.

So think about these peaks in the early 2000s as potentially reflecting something at the close of the 1900s.

and then how they both start to drop off.

And this is consistent with something that a lot of us have experienced, which is that cybernetics is a term that a lot of at least English speakers may not be too familiar with.

But we can look at the journals that Fristin and others have published in.

We find a lot of connections to cybernetics.

what is going on there so to get a little sense of what is going on two other resources to look into would be this big history understanding of complexity information in cybernetics and then this book which i'll read a quote from right now which is called from newspeak to cyberspeak a history of soviet cybernetics by slava garevich and the author writes in this book from 2002

the history of soviet cybernetics followed a curious arc in the 1950s it was labeled a reactionary pseudoscience and a weapon of imperialist ideology with the arrival of khrushchev's political thaw however it was seen as an innocent victim of political oppression and it evolved from a movement for radical reform of the stalinist system of science

pretty interesting.

In the early 1960s, it was hailed as a science in service of communism, but by the end of the decade, it had turned into a shallow, fashionable trend.

Using extensive new archival materials, Gerevich argues that these fluctuating attitudes reflected profound changes in scientific language and research methodology across disciplines, in power relationships within the scientific community, and in the political role of scientists and engineers in Soviet society.

His detailed analysis of scientific discourse shows how the newspeak of the late Stalinist period and the cyberspeak that challenged it eventually blended into cyber newspeak.

So maybe there was a book summary of this work, but pretty interesting how that plays out.

And so definitely we'd love to learn more about this, whether we have Russian speaking colleagues who could fill us in or anyone else.

Next keyword.

Projective geometry.

What is projective geometry about?

Well, of course, you could go down the rabbit hole with this topic, but let's just try to keep it constrained to what the authors are going to use it for in terms of the paper.

They write, the concept of a 4D, four-dimensional, projective transformation is central to the model as it yields an account of the link between perception, imagination, and multi-point of view action planning.

Great, okay, so what is happening here and how can we understand this and its relationship to projective geometry?

I'm gonna introduce just two ideas here with this visualization.

The first by looking at the bottom is the distinction between the Euclidean and the non-Euclidean types of spaces.

And then the second idea with a purple arrow is this idea of a map or potentially you could call it a mapping because it's actually a process and it's actually a certain type of process, it's a projection.

So when we're talking about projective geometry, we're talking about geometry, which means the shape of things and the spaces that they're existing in.

So as opposed to topology, which is how things are connected with nodes and edges, geometry is about things and their shapes and their spaces.

We're going to talk about projections amongst different geometries, specifically, potentially this one between Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries.

And here's a quote that they write, authors do.

They write, this perspectival phenomenal space, so the space in which they're going to say that experience occurs within, phenomenology occurs within a space, allows us to locate ourselves and navigate in an ambient space that is nevertheless essentially Euclidean.

However, in a Euclidean space, there are no privilege points, no points at infinity, no horizon, and an arbitrary origin.

They say there's no non-arbitrary origin, same thing.

This very strongly suggests that a non-Euclidean frame must be operating in the phenomenal space with the help of sensory motor calibrations to preserve the sense of the invariance of objects across the multiple perspectives adopted

and relate the situated organism to the ambient euclidean space so what is it that allows me to continue thinking about this as a pen even as it comes very close to my face and looks very weird so what is that generative model that allows me to act like everything's normal as objects maintain their invariances as the eye travels through the space

And so we can contrast this Euclidean space that they're supposing that we exist in.

They're saying we exist in a space that doesn't have privileged points of access, no points at infinity, et cetera, et cetera.

And they're saying the space that an organism, for example, moves through is Euclidean, while the space that their consciousness is being projected into experientially is non-Euclidean.

What about it is non-Euclidean?

Well, let's just take the opposite of what's in red and put it in blue.

So there are privileged points,

from the point of view of the observer.

That is the privilege point of view, quite literally.

There can be points at infinity.

There can be points that sort of just like, they're so far away, they're infinitely far away.

And not just from an affordance point of view, but from a perception point of view.

There can be a horizon.

In fact, we see it every day.

And there can also be a non-arbitrary origin, which is a little bit of a restatement, the idea that there could be a privileged point, but basically it's privileged.

It's a non-arbitrary origin.

These are pretty similar concepts.

Now, non-Euclidean, it's like saying non-linear.

And the joke about this is things that are not elephants.

That's the non-elephant class.

You'll know it when you see it.

So that's about how helpful it is to say it's non-Euclidean or it's non-linear model.

Okay, we get it.

It's not a linear model.

It's not Euclidean geometry, but there's many choices.

And the reason why, even though it sounds like, wait, you're barely ruling anything out, we're actually ruling out very specific parts of the geometry of the Euclidean space.

So in the Euclidean space, parallel lines don't intersect, but that's not necessarily the case for certain types of geometry.

Or a triangle with three edges and three angles is 180 degrees from the sum of the angles, but on a sphere, it's not that way.

So that is what is happening with these geometric projections is we're going to be projecting from sort of the grid they want to think about.

Now, you might want to ask Bucky Fuller if we're actually in a Euclidean space or if it just seems that way because of public education.

But for the purposes of this paper, we're in a Euclidean space as action, and that's the space we want to be making our perception simulate, so to speak, and to act like everything is normal and to decrease our uncertainty about a Euclideanly mapped space.

while also relating it to, through a projection, something that does have a privileged point of access and something that is, as they put it, informed by sensory motor calibration and relates to our action affordances.

So that's how you can have a Euclidean concept of, for example, a gap in the ground that you can't jump over.

So it's a very complex estimation of what you can do and how big the gap is and where you are, how much run-up you would need, etc.

All of that is going to come together by doing what they're going to talk about here.

Now, consciousness.

It's great to talk about consciousness and I'm gonna go into a little bit of detail soon about some of my own thoughts on the issue.

But when talking about consciousness, it's important to be really clear.

Even though it's something that we're not always sure about, it's always important to at least use language very carefully and use our scholarship and our intercultural respectfulness very importantly.

Because as I'll hopefully come back to a few points soon,

it's just a critical issue and we can't think of it um just flippantly the authors write when talking about consciousness because i want to just go with what they think about consciousness for here they write we might divide contemporary neuroscientific and psychological theories of consciousness into three main types the biofunctional the cognitive neurofunctional and the information theoretic

As should be clear, the projective consciousness model, the PCM, incorporates the emphasis on self-awareness common to many approaches to consciousness, as well as an emphasis on the biological functions of consciousness.

So they're defining the space a certain way.

I'm going to define it a different way soon, but they're defining it that way.

Then we're going to insert the PCM here.

And then they write at the end, the PCM thus subsumes and unifies the main insights in all of these approaches to consciousness.

Above all, what we add to pre-existing theory is a geometry, the thesis that projective transformations and projective frames necessarily subtend the appearance and workings of consciousness.

So whatever we're going to learn in this Actim stream or whatever we think the PCM is doing, and we want to evaluate it not by what it doesn't do, but what it does do and what it claims to do, what it sets out to do, that's where they're trying to step in.

their understanding of literature and consciousness is that they broke consciousness down into these three kinds, which citations exist there, you can read the paper, and then they're going to step into that gap, and then they're going to make the claim that they're subsuming and unifying the main insights from these approaches.

Where does that leave these approaches from a theory perspective?

Question for another day.

But that is where the authors understand their work to be fitting in.

So if you don't know what the PCM is, or it's kind of trippy to think about what it means to do mathematics and geometry of consciousness, that's perfect.

Here is the blank that they're going to fill in with their work.

what do i think about consciousness though and i want to be clear about what my stance is or at least just give the tip of the iceberg on my stance because this is a first person active stream and there's some relevant research i'll discuss in a few minutes and also i've just for a long time been interested in the science of consciousness but also this second layer of how it's communicated especially from scientists

So there's a lot of places to go here and a lot of places to start.

I'm just going to walk through a few general thoughts and raise a few questions, really more questions than answers.

And then I'll discuss a paper from the last couple of years with a colleague, Eric Sobik.

All right, so there are many ways to think about studying consciousness, and one path that you could go down, this is sort of, you know, across cultures through the time, one path you can go down is thought experimentation.

So this could look like meditation, it could look like a specific thought experiment, or some other sort of insight approach or a Gedanken approach.

And whether it's culturally called one thing or another is not as much my concern here.

The thought experiment approach doesn't involve making interventions, for example, in the outside world, just thinking about consciousness, you know, hearing TED talks and stuff like that.

So the issue is that whatever is actually happening, if that's what we're pursuing, we could just be led to the wrong conclusion.

And then if there is some element of free will or interventionary role of consciousness, then we could intervene to end up believing that we couldn't intervene or any of these combinations.

never quite understand the relationship between what one directly feels convinced about with respect to a thought experiment or a thought or an idea and how that might relate to how it actually is for people who aren't that person.

And one aspect of this is that it's really impossible to know which aspects of thought experiments can be transferred to other situations.

So for example, one of the most famous papers in this area, most cited papers, is a 1974 paper by a philosopher named Nagel.

And that raises the question, what is it like to be a bat?

I don't think he invented that question, but he's the one who got famous for it.

And in that paper, it's written, an organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism.

Something it is like for the organism.

Now, you might think,

what are philosophers doing?

Because it sounds like a sort of a weird question.

And I understand that many careers and a lot of good thinking has come out of this question.

So I want to optimistically see it as a catalyst and a seed.

It's always good to have simple questions to return to.

It's good that it's such a simple question and it opens to so many perspectives.

It initiates students into our knowledge traditions.

There's so many advantages to having these kinds of classic works.

But to be blunt, I guess, I find the phrasing of this question of consciousness to be quite unhelpful because it is so informal, it's so hypothetical, it's untestable, it's ambiguous, but it's specific.

It brings a bat into question.

And then you can imagine, oh, it's a dog.

What is it like to be a dog?

Now, these are all good things to imagine, but again, they don't really bring us closer to addressing real frameworks for consciousness.

And the reality is there's been now a vast wasteland of literature that's just not comparable to other work in the same exact space across different species that

essentially amounts to speculation and appealing to what it might be like to be a certain type of animal, thinking, well, if I was really a bat and I grew up as a bat, would I ever thought what it was like to be a human?

So it ties up to all these second level questions that aren't super relevant.

We've always wondered through time, every culture, everyone has wondered what other systems experience, whether that's in a person or an animal or a fictional character or a physical object.

So the speculation and the think pieces, they don't really add something substantial to the literature, which is what the scientific literature is about for me.

So the bigger issue though,

with thought experiments of any kind is that we can always imagine things that are just not making sense within a framework or any framework, or just don't relate to the world that we live in.

We all know that we can be wrong about an idea, but believe that we're right.

And so to kind of rephrase that in an active inference framework, we can say that these are situations where the precision parameter is very high.

There's a belief, a metacognitive belief that the precision is high, that some question has been resolved.

This represents that, for example, someone's model of consciousness, whether it came from a knowledge tradition or their own thinking, they believe that they're onto it.

They got it figured out, it's resolved for them.

But that doesn't mean that your S, your estimate, is related to S hat, the actual state in the world.

And I'm not passing judgment on being overconfident or being wrong, because sometimes it can be very important and powerful to have these kinds of beliefs.

But that's not what being correct is about.

And so if you actually don't care about being correct, being right, going towards the truth, and you really don't care about that, then I'd love to hear where you're coming from.

The rest of the scientific literature, although with many...

shades and many differences is moving towards what actually would be general as generalizable through truth so let's go back to consider experimental approaches which is something that comes up a ton in the philosophy and the science of consciousness literature now it would be awesome to do experiments on consciousness and in some way don't we all we could study humans as they behave and sleep and daydream take psychedelics or they wake up for anesthesia and they develop and there's so many things that could be exciting to learn about

Also, if we can do experiments on consciousness, we could do experiments on animals.

Now, we could do experiments that are interventive, like manipulating the brain of an animal or the body or the situation of an animal.

These experiments might be seen as inhumane or just to massively violate ethical standards for humans.

And so there's a bit of irony in doing these potentially invasive non-consensual experiments with captive or wild animals when we're studying potentially their capacity to not consent to our discussions with them.

It's an interesting question.

I won't go down the ethics route here, but a non-ethical question that's related to experimentation is that we just don't know which systems to study or what observables to measure for experiments.

And so we're studying something that isn't really measurable or observable, but we'll come back to this idea of observability in a few minutes when we're talking about neurophenomenology.

And the reality is no matter what you do measure, even if you come up with this one special measurement that hasn't been done before, all experiments are interpreted within a cultural and a scientific milieu in terms of what measurements, conclusions, interpretations are ethical, correct, accepted, valid, discussed, all these things.

And

Even going another layer back about experiments, even assuming that we can measure what we want to know and measure and everything.

Experiments, especially if they're disconnected from grounding in theory, it's difficult to know what is really being uniquely tested or demonstrated or falsified by different kinds of experiments or what we can learn from different kinds of measurements.

there's a lot of ambiguity a lot of levels the ambiguity can enter into but just to give a few examples an experimental result could be consistent with many different frameworks or potentially all frameworks or a set of frameworks for consciousness so when we really want to be identifying what frameworks we're wanting to work with

it doesn't narrow the space as much to do experiments, which we'll return to soon.

And that's kind of related like the neural correlates of consciousness debate, which is, do you put somebody in a neuro imager and then have them do a no report paradigm where they don't say, yep, I heard the sound.

So you play sounds of different notes, but what if it just subconsciously

influence their brain there still could be a neural signature of that how would you know they experienced it well that's called a report paradigm you ask them did you experience it but in some sense you're just asking them if they remember or if they hit the button so it gets messy but that really gets into some of the weeds about what you're measuring and another

example or area where we see limitations on experiments related to consciousness is in animal behavior so animal behavior seems naturally like it'd be adjacent to human consciousness studies and we see a wide variety of things being used here like pulley tests can two of the same animal pull a pulley so they get a reward looking in a mirror can one recognize themselves and take an action pattern to clean themselves in the mirror

And the first thing to note is that whatever kind of setup you're dealing with, a visual illusion, a cooperation task, a recognition task, memory, planning, they're always going to be based upon the affordances of that animal.

And again, it might be ambiguous as to whether they're using some cue that you actually expect,

or if it doesn't see, it's not going to be able to be in the mirror test.

So at the very least, these tests for consciousness, which we'll get back to, don't help us really study the ground rock of this frameworks for consciousness question, because all you could say is, okay, this bird can do the pulley test, but we don't even know what that means.

And then of course, if we find out that potentially experience isn't related as much as we thought to behavior, or one has a model that it's not related to behavior,

then you can say, yeah, it's a robot that just acts like it's a crow.

All right.

I think I'm still streaming, but it looks like my camera froze.

I'm going to just re-plug it in.

Yeah.

Actually, I'll just see if... I don't know what it's about, but that happened last time as well.

But c'est la vie.

I'll just close the camera for now.

actually let me just see if i can remove the source and then add the camera back in we're going to find out live whether it is obs being weird or whether it is um the actual usb connection and turns out it was obs we now know and we're right back in it so

to the point about potentially robots or zombies, as Dennett might put it, doing complex behavioral tasks.

You wouldn't know whether the experience was being had even if the behavioral experiment you had lined up for this animal was enormously complex.

And robots might be able to do things that we might not expect them to be able to do already, such as learning language or being culturally embedded.

And so yet another point here is that before you get too excited about any single experiment that might prove or disprove a model of consciousness,

consider it just another grain of sand on a sand heap.

And any single grain of sand that you're adding to this heap now could be the one that sets the whole cascade in motion.

So by all means, I encourage experimentation.

But that being said, let's not fool ourselves in pretending that many of the data points we already have are out there in the world already, and that just one more experiment is unlikely to provide any type of knockout evidence for or against a model of consciousness.

so to kind of um recap there there's the thought experiment branch the philosophy meditation insight route and there's the experimentation interpretation route and uh those are connected of course experiments are ideas too but that being said they both have pros and cons and people will often argue one or the other as if they have um the answers from one branch or the other i hope i've demonstrated that that isn't true and

one reason i think that it's important to have this viewpoint is that we're living in a world just as a prima fascia observation where there's some people humans who say that they think all things are consciousness or that all things are consciousness in their own special way or that nothing is conscious including humans

And of course, there's many flavors to each of these viewpoints that could be held or at least communicated.

And there's many things about beliefs about consciousness that might not be verbal or expressible in a certain language.

So the point is we're in a total state where the evidence in the world has resulted in people believing different things through time, different things, even within the same family.

and so let's be humble the table has mostly been set for us in terms of observations about ourselves and about our world though it doesn't mean we can't reimagine much of our own experience or the world but um it would really have to be quite the thought experiment or quite the experiment uh in the real world if it can resolve these long-standing and philosophically grounded differences in worldview between schools of thought and between people

And even if it did this, even if the experiment were so good that it just convinced everyone, it wouldn't even mean it was right.

It would just mean that it was convincing as a meme.

And so if we're really trying to find out what's right rather than how can we shape our own reality and other people's, which isn't always the worst task, if we want to be right, then as far as I know, it's not going to be the experiment or the thought experiment route alone.

And

One last point on this slide, because there's a lot to say here is that there's academics who believe different things and you can see these slides and citations and see that they cite different work that says one thing about the global workspace or another thing about information theory.

There's also different views on consciousness from different world traditions, from artists, from practitioners, from non-scientists, from non-philosophers, from all kinds of people, children, adults, everyone.

This is just to say that we should be very cautious about any kind of hegemonic, especially scientific, effort

Define consciousness whether it comes from academia or from some other source There's just way too much on the table here for people to be making sweeping claims about what is or is not conscious And there's a lot that is downstream of that It's really a personal and a cultural thing what somebody believes about consciousness what they want to say or what they want to commit to and

Also, while some people might find these topics exciting, I think they're exciting.

If you're listening, you probably find them to some extent exciting as well, but many people are not interested in considering it and don't,

perhaps want to be told this is how their consciousness or experience is.

And other people are simply okay not knowing whether they're curious about it or not.

And so I'm always skeptical about science says type thinking, which can be often how scientific papers are written.

Even if it's written in an author's say type thinking, it's about how it's communicated.

We've all seen the misuse of science says policy related to everything.

And consciousness would be the next level on that, wouldn't it be?

So fill in the blanks.

Think about what kind of power is held by the people who can say what or who is consciousness or evaluate conscious states such as suffering or pleasure.

So there's just a lot to it.

And then the last point really here is that people can change their beliefs during their own lifetime and go deeper and shallower into different ideas.

And that probably doesn't change the underlying nature of consciousness.

So it will never be enough.

how we think at one moment, or for a group of people to believe something.

I've gone down these discussions and roads many times with people alone and in conversation.

And people will tell me, well, you know, we're working with our best possible understanding of consciousness given the research at this time.

And it's just simply not true.

There's so much to know and respect in terms of the research and also the non-scientific literature on consciousness that there is just a lot more to the discussion than, well, let's just tell the kids something simple to it.

Now, to go beyond that, and thanks for bearing with me, it was just, I wanted to say a few of those things because a lot of times consciousness papers are approached from non-scientists with excitement.

So I wanna provide a little bit more of a nuanced scientist's take here on how we can really respectfully study consciousness, because this isn't just like Fristin at all figuring it out in a paper, but I love the paper and it's interesting.

So how do we hold this yes and perspective?

through nuance, hearing multiple people's perspective, having participation.

So what I'm going to talk about here is this paper that I worked on with my colleague Erik Sovik, who's a professor in Norway, and the paper is called The Ant Colony as a Test for Scientific Theories of Consciousness.

So this is how I came to be thinking about a lot of these topics.

Professor Sovek's background was in neurobehavior and in genetics of the honeybee.

Mine was in similar areas, but related to ants.

Eric is also a very pragmatic and a philosophical thinker.

His PhD advisor, who is Andy Barron, at Macquarie University in Australia, is a honeybee biologist.

And Professor Barron has also written philosophy papers that are related to entomology, as well as to experience and consciousness.

Uh, on my side, my PhD advisor, professor Deborah Gordon at Stanford is an ant behavioral ecologist who also wrote a lot of philosophy works broadly construed.

And so both Eric and I had really positive mentors and role models for how we could combine entomology with philosophy.

So that's where we were coming from with this paper was how could we combine our direct ethological, behavioral ecological experience with the social insects, with what we knew about neurogenetics and molecular biology, and then tie that

through respectful engagement with some of the philosophy of consciousness literature.

Here's what we didn't do in the paper.

What we didn't do is make a claim or a bet on whether ant colonies are conscious or not, whether ant workers are conscious or not.

If people have feelings on that, let's hear about them on the ACT-M stream.

Let's find an ant stream.

Let's do something fun.

Let's hear about it.

But that's actually not what we did in this paper.

We do a few things in this paper.

The first thing is that we proposed this terminology of a forward and a reverse test for consciousness, which I'm gonna return to in a second with this image.

The second thing we did was to review the literature on consciousness from scientific literature and make classification schemes for different kinds of theories of consciousness.

So you can see why I was interested in the breakdown of this paper's understanding about the fields of different scientific studies of consciousness.

and then the third part of the paper we used empirical findings from entomology so observations of morphology or of behavior of individuals or of colonies from entomology and we asked whether different frameworks for consciousness that we found during the literature review might come to the conclusion that ant colonies and or workers had consciousness or awareness

and we as authors remained neutral on the issue to the extent we could as far as just presenting hypothetical evaluations of colony consciousness from the point of view of these different frameworks which is something that's so intrinsic to consciousness so it's kind of fun and it turns out that frameworks just simply wildly diverge in their claims about ant colony consciousness and it's really not a surprise that it turned out to be that way

because the same frameworks uh diverge in their claims pretty plainly and people diverge in their opinions and so if the frameworks are going to disagree about humans being conscious or electrons then they're going to disagree about ants and um

It was just interesting to experience this, though, and ask how we could have a reconsideration of what we're really doing here with the consciousness studies area, because there's thousands of speculative papers about consciousness and animals.

But are we moving the needle?

And if we are, in what direction?

Is that where we want to be moving it?

What did we do in the paper?

So we introduced this idea of a forward and a reverse test for consciousness.

And we thought about forward and reverse just from the point of view of the observer, the experimenter.

So that's very related to this phenomenological invariant idea that the PCM model is going to return to in a little bit.

And this idea that everything in consciousness should be relational.

Let's take this perspectival and this relational approach very seriously.

So what is a forward and reverse test?

A forward test is when you trust your test and it describes the mode of usage of a tool where you're measuring systems and drawing conclusions.

So for example, in the figure, it says, I trust my test.

How heavy are these boxes?

And we have this gray test.

It says it is an unknown whether the box is conscious or not.

We put it on there, it says, yep, one.

And then we go out in the world and we investigate whether different boxes are different weights or I have consciousness or whatever.

And that is for validated, calibrated instrumentation.

And it's important for the normal in a paradigm vocabulary, the normal science, which is advancing science.

and a reverse test is a different phase a reverse test is when you don't trust your test yet and this is like calibration and calibration is when you take things that you do know about like we know that the meter is this much relative to this and we know that the wavelength of this is going to help us calibrate this tool but really just when you use a scientific instrument it has to be calibrated and

If we want to have a science of consciousness, we have to have a calibrated instrument.

And so the reverse test is when you don't trust the test and you don't know what the machine is going to read out, but you put on the one pound block and you say, I'm going to fine tune this machine so that it comes out with one when I put the one on there.

And then we'll know that this scale or this spectrophotometer works.

And it's kind of this back and forth, this two stroke engine.

that we've seen so much about.

And we've been talking about the back and forth between action and inference, of course.

We've been talking about that from the framework of computationalism, from the Bayesian perspective, the Bayesian structuralist perspective, in activism and ecological psychology, and just cognition in general, agency.

How do we do this forward and backwards of more tool-like based upon affordances and more inference based upon observations?

Okay, so it's kind of a two-stroke engine for studying consciousness from a field perspective.

So this is like, what should the field of consciousness researchers be studying?

Now, wouldn't it be great if we had a forward test for consciousness?

If we had a scale that we could go, yep, we hooked up this person's brain or this Wi-Fi router or this beetle.

And yeah, it's a two out of four.

It's a 2.9 out of whatever it is.

Yeah, sounds great.

I understand why people want to mathematize and why they want to measure a consciousness.

But if you meet somebody who has a good test for consciousness, then, you know, get the Tesla tech, get the perpetual motion machine, get everything you can from that person because we don't see it within the current space we're in.

we want to have this test, prefrontal cortex, language, whatever it happens to be, no caveats, just a test.

Of course it doesn't exist.

And so that's kind of what this issue is about.

And so when we don't have a forward test for consciousness, even though people might think they locally have one, I hope I've sort of dispelled that with a previous slide.

If we don't have a forward test to operate in the action mode, do we have a reverse test to help us work in the inference mode?

So that is where Professor Sovik and I wanted to think about different kinds of forward tests for consciousness, and then how could the ant colony be a reverse test for consciousness?

So here's the framework that we loosely organized into for our literature framework.

in terms of forward tests for consciousness.

So this is like what other people might call frameworks for consciousness.

We said, look, all these models, what they have in common is that there's some measurements, some tool-like intervention or intervention into the process or measurement that could be done that would help us have a forward test.

So like, is this system conscious?

Does it have X?

Does it have language?

Does it have a prefrontal cortex?

Okay.

Now the reverse test for consciousness would be like, we know humans are conscious, right?

So any theory that says that is fine with me.

Or we know humans are not conscious.

So I rule out any theory that says that, right?

Whichever one you think you believe, fine.

So we separated into a few different categories.

The first one was neurobiological.

So remember that they had three categories, biofunctional, cognitive neurofunctional, and information theoretic.

What we did with our slightly different breakdown of the categories in the space, not a final word, this is just what we had found out about,

is we divided neurobiological models into the following categories which were structural models that were based upon macro or micro uh structure so macro structure would be like the cerebral cortex is this size or it has this brain region so gross anatomy macro structure

microstructure is like wow there are so many connections on the dendrites or this cell type has this shape so things that you'd need a microscope to see macro macro to micro so you need the microscope for the micro histology or oh the architecture of these neural networks is a feedback that means that it could be implementing something so macro microstructure of the brain neurobiology or of the brain in the body for that matter because it's not always about the brain so

functionalist models for consciousness would be like there is a function that does egocentric navigation in crawfish and crows and humans so these are conscious entities so because there's a functional element of something that's being done even if it's being done in non-homologous brain regions or two different ways by two different species or in somebody who is born with vision or who wasn't born with vision it's the function that matters

And then another neurobiological assessment that people often make in terms of forward testing is dynamical features of brain function.

So they'll say, well, because the brain is a complex adaptive system with winnerless competitions and leaky integration and action policy selection and lock and Voltaire, you know, predator prey type dynamics or chaos and landslides catastrophes.

power tail of noise, all of these dynamical features coming from usually a complexity or a signal processing perspective.

So those are the kinds of appeals that people make to the brain and the body.

There's also the egocentric and relational frameworks for thinking about what counts as a model of consciousness.

And in this category, there's a bunch that we could go into, but just to make it kind of clear what I mean by egocentric and relational, which is actually the first invariant principle of the PCM.

So totally agree, it's critical.

it's um the idea of spatial awareness and perception which is um whether it's the lived experience or just the acting as if of things being closer to you being more accessible but everything in consciousness is experienced in relation to something that's agreed upon even when people don't even agree what that relationship is or what that something is so that's kind of cool

Then there are cognitive and behavioral frameworks.

So these are cognitive being broadly understood as like things that computers might be able to do or computer networks or extended cognition, embedded, enacted, and cultured, all this stuff that we talk about every week.

Let's take that broadly to cognitive.

So here by cognitive, I don't just mean what people think of happening between the student's eye and them filling in the multiple choice test.

That's not just cognition.

We want to have a broad understanding of cognition, multiscale, message passing, Bayesian nets, et cetera.

And the categories here are, there's multiple, but examples are like emotional or affective states, kind of foreshadowing the sophisticated affective inference, which will be Actim 11.

but emotional states like regret or optimism bias and cognitive biases more general.

So everything from visual illusions to other types of illusions that are not visual, but can be related to the order of things being presented.

These are sort of cognitive effects that potentially like a neural network might fall victim to.

And so what we've experienced is that there's this runaround and people will say, well, this bird has this brain region.

So it's a macro structural claim.

So it's conscious.

And then somebody brings up a shortcoming of the idea of macro structuralism.

like well does it really mean that it's aware just because it has this brain region what about sleeping people or what about you know daniel dennett or something like that and they go well right it's actually the brain region and the microstructure okay so it's microstructural great well then would anything with that microstructure have that kind of a characteristic um like if you made a model in a computer would it have awareness well no it has to be evolved or it has to have language or it has to be implementing something ecologically great so we want to chase that rabbit down

because we're serious about answers here.

And so we want to chase it down.

Someone says, oh, well, when I said language, I didn't just mean a chat bot.

I meant they feel emotion.

You say, well, but what if the chat bot says it feels emotion too?

What are you going to do?

And then all of a sudden that whole feeling emotion, communication of a feeling emotion, all of a sudden they have a new explanation.

So let's keep on chasing down these rabbit holes.

And one other category that is closest to what is described in this paper is,

is the mathematical framework.

So we took a step beyond the authors in the 2018 paper, the projective consciousness model, where they said there's the information theory category of consciousness models.

We actually separated a few of these models of mathematical frameworks.

So we have decision-making and long-term planning, as well as information theoretic and geometrical.

So there have been some, maybe it was published similar or slightly after this paper, but there have been some geometric theory of consciousness, info theory, and then also a lot of times the information theory approaches deal with information geometry.

So which one is it?

I agree that it's enough to call it mathematical and just say it includes topology, information theory, thermodynamics, geometry, just a lot of math stuff.

Another area of mathematical frameworks for consciousness could be like cybernetics, which is why it was one of the keywords for this paper, because a mathematical framework for consciousness might involve

decision-making or agency or ability to plan at a certain level of coherence.

And in fact, in the 2018 interview that was with Carl Fristin, myself, and our passed away colleague, Martin Forger, in the last question of that interview, I asked him,

whether he thought the ant colony was conscious, because I was working on this paper with Eric, and I was writing the interview with Carl, and then I just thought, wow, we could figure out what Carl thinks about ant colonies being conscious.

And if you're interested in either Fristinology or in ant colony consciousness, then definitely review Carl's answer on that.

But just to kind of close this slide off,

we're committed to long-term clarity on these issues about the study of the science of consciousness so we really welcome collaboration or improvement on these questions let's work with it let's make an ontology for consciousness or how are we going to get organized on this issue because as i said there's just too much on the table to let this one slide and we have to enter this space and do it right because otherwise just it goes off the rails

Okay, let's get to neurophenomenology, which is one of the keywords of the paper.

Oh yeah, the paper.

And on the bottom here, I have a couple just fun images.

The left side is the book GEB by Douglas Hofstetter, 1979, but reads as crisply as ever.

and uh really an insightful book and then on the other side uh of uh is the tree of knowledge this yellow cover by varela and maturana and that's a book about autopoiesis and a few other topics that are really cool related to complexity and just very deeply related to the ecological and activist semantic

Biobehavioral, a lot of great stuff.

Also, potentially the work of Fritjof Capra is one thing to look into here.

But then some images, because it's not all about language.

So here's some images by Magritte and by M.C.

Escher that have to do with sort of what is this self.

Let's look at how the authors define neurophenomenology.

they define it as one observation and description of the phenomenological invariance at the appropriate level of abstraction so maybe the appropriate level of abstraction um for the experience of drinking water is not uh you know a throat cell maybe it's uh not a whole nation maybe it's a person the classification two classification of the behavioral cognitive and biofunctional aspects of consciousness so some drugs like you know you take

acetaminophen and it doesn't make you feel that different.

There's other drugs that are psychoactive or that have long-term changes to your brain, whether you experience it in the short term or not.

So how are we going to get a behavioral, cognitive, molecular, genomic understanding of that mechanism?

Three, identification of the neuroanatomical and neurophysiological correlates of consciousness.

So I see neuroanatomy as the structural, whether it's structural at the macro or the micro, neuroanatomy is what Sovic and I called structural.

Then neurophysiological is referring to the dynamics and the processes, molecular, informational, whatever they may be that are in the brain.

So those are the functionalist models to me of the brain.

four development of mathematical and computational models of consciousness which i would consider to be in the mathematical category that a faithfully integrate all the invariants described in one which we'll get to soon b provide unifying explanations of intestinal hypotheses about the biofunctional aspects of consciousness described in two

all on board.

And C can be physically implemented in the hardware identified in three, as well as perhaps in non-biological hardware.

So I don't subscribe to computationalism.

I don't believe in a hardware software distinction, except as a useful metaphor in biology.

I think the book Wetware is pretty interesting on this topic.

and the reason why i intervened right after the mathematical and computational models is because i think it's actually a different domain i think there could be a mathematical model that's extremely agnostic to the biology or our biological model could just be like it is what it is and it doesn't matter what the math or what anyone thinks the math is it is what it is because of evolution or um because it passed through some sort of historical filter and any equation you put on it is just like a linear regression it just it doesn't matter

so those to me they they can kind of fly together and that would be great or not it could be something totally off base which is why i think again it's important that even though we have the citations and the ways that we can sort citations into keyword clusters let's not think that we've mapped out the space of the possible in consciousness because there's people in other cultures who don't feel the same way as scientists

First-person perspective is, I think, the last keyword.

And they write about that in the paper.

They say, ideally, this method of the PCM would give us a theory of consciousness that intelligibly links the phenomenology of a first-person conscious experience with its realization in the brain or other substrate via mathematical and computational model simultaneously accounting for its biofunctional properties.

So the biofunctional properties is kind of where you got the neuro part.

mathematical computational model they're saying wouldn't it be good for purposes of describing it predicting it controlling it designing it um explaining variance reducing our uncertainty why not that's the mathematical computational side and then pull it all the way back phenomenology so computational neurophenomenology we're going to be doing mathematical computational neurophenomenology in this paper and we're going to be using geometric tools like projection mapping to think about how cybernetics

and active inference are related to classic work in neurophenomenology.

okay one more um keyword perspectival imagination so they quote on this one they write this perspectival space of the field of consciousness foc is organized around an elusive implicit origin or zero point and includes a horizon with vanishing points at infinity that mark its limit so right there there's the two of the violations of euclidean geometry point of privilege that's the point of view and then the vanishing horizon points out infinity

The FOC embeds vectorized directions that frame the orientation of attention and action along three axes, vertical, horizontal, and sagittal.

So like, you know, this one, this one, and then that one.

These are given in perspective with respect to these same points at infinity.

So pretty interesting stuff.

They continue and they write, since we are dealing with a 3D perspectival space with an elusive origin, point of privilege, point of view, and vanishing points at infinity constituting a horizontal plane, a horizon plane that happens to be in the horizontal axis.

It doesn't have to be.

If you're on your side, it's not.

The PCM postulates that the field of consciousness has the structure of a 3D projective space in the sense of projective geometry.

Nice, thanks for giving it as a keyword too.

It helped me learn about it.

The FOC can thus partly be understood in terms of a 3D projective frame.

Let's look at a few just kind of cool examples related to perspectival imagination.

So this is an example of a non-Euclidean geometry.

It's an Escher artwork.

And it's like these bats that kind of fractal off.

And sometimes this could be related to hyperbolic geometry or other geometries.

But the point is like each bat might be flying off.

And so that kind of maps onto our experience of a bird or a bat flying away from us and slowing down perhaps.

But how is that going to get mapped onto another space that may or may not have three dimensions spatially?

Again, Bucky Fuller might claim there are four spatial dimensions.

So let's not assume there are three spatial dimensions and that the fourth one is time.

That being said, it makes sense to talk about XYZ coordinates from a Cartesian perspective.

Another example about this perspectival imagination is Vanishing Point.

So everyone who's done a fun drawing course or just looked down a city road or looked out of a car that was driving through fields, everything kind of vanishes.

And so you can see the rows of a field and you know that they're all in parallel, but then you can see really deeply down one, other ones like kind of move towards it.

And another way of seeing it in a cityscape is like,

you can conceptually know that the street is straight but if you look at it it looks like a triangle that's disappearing from you with a point at the top so what is it that allows us to be like oh yeah buildings have 90 degree angles and they're going upright even though all the actual angles are kind of wacky so that's this perspectival imagination and that's what makes an artist who can make a lifelike drawing especially like an architecture or something look

lifelike because they capture these extremely subtle features about vanishing point and perspective and all these different things.

So one drawing that I love on this is this one.

And it's like, for many people, it's like, okay, do a self-portrait of what you see when you are on the couch.

And one approach might be like, I just, you know, draw like, okay, I see this, you know, here's this piece of art, here's my bookshelf, here's, you know, my bike.

Then the next layer back is like, oh, I'm going to include my feet in the drawing.

Like the kind of, you know, I'm on the beach, here's my legs type thing.

Like taking a picture from right in front of you with a phone.

Something that we actually have an affordance to do now, but other people may not have seen in such a direct way, which is why they didn't take selfies.

For example, oh, hey, here I am.

This drawing takes it back another layer.

Now this is actually, where are you really seeing from?

Not what is canceled out with a binocular vision, but what happens when you look with one eye really, really far to the side.

well you see this curving and it's just like a little bit beautifully accentuated but of course we're seeing that as a two-dimensional projection so that's just so cool and uh styles that play with our perception like optical illusions or cubism or abstract art they often incorporate some invariant features

of perspectival imagination but then violate expectations on other ones so like um half of the person's body is as if they were lit from this side and half is after if is as if they were lit from a different side that was a classic technique of the cubists and so

very rich space very open for honest collaboration with artists and philosophers and practitioners so we hope that this is kind of an opening for those who might have thought active inference okay it's an engineering framework we're talking about optimization we're talking about socio-cultural things but kind of from an abstract point of view how are we going to take this into our experience of consciousness and of perspective so

I'm going to return to this slide again and again, which is that it's a question.

What does free energy principle and active inference say about the relationship between the world and agents?

So that's this feedback between the world and the agents and the nested agents.

And here we're adding on this level of the agent is having conscious awareness.

It's thinking I am a strange action perception loop, or at least it's acting like it says it or it's thinking that it's saying it.

And just as we've talked about before with this slide, we want to be building on the fields of action, of inference, of physics, of experience.

We want to be tying these threads together while also being aware that just being convinced will never be enough.

So that's why it's such a fun area, why it's so great to do research in this area and to learn about it and also to welcome collaboration and to welcome people sharing their perspective.

Because I really believe that no matter how many papers you've read about consciousness,

it does not make that opinion any more valid.

There's other topics where potentially you couldn't say that as flippantly, but in the area of consciousness, it can't be a counting game.

It's just not.

It's something that is so essential to our experience.

And so it's such a deep area, a perfect area for transdisciplinary synthesis.

Cool.

Let's get to the paper because it's also all about the specifics.

We want to be really specific about what the authors say and do so that we can build off of it with other specific work so that we can actually use their perspectives as catalysts for our own development, not push ideas out of our head and replace it with the Fristin update, but rather be catalyzed and spurred to new culturally informed creative states

by reading and by discussing.

So that's why really, especially for 9.1 and 9.2, for the last home stretch of 2020 and for 2021, just if you're listening to it, we want to know your experience and we want to hear your questions in the YouTube chat or have you on live, however it has to be.

This paper is called

The Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood.

It was published in December of 2018 in the Frontiers in Psychology Journal in the Division of Theoretical Philosophical Psychology.

And the authors are Williford, Benequin, Friston, and Rudroff.

So that's kind of giving you some information on when this paper was published and on what areas the authors want to place their work within.

Let's take some quotes from the paper and look at the main aims and claims of the work.

They write,

can we describe this integrated multimodal and centered spatial structure of conscious experience in a rigorous way great question i love the setup and they write and can we give a good account of why it should be thus organized here we answer both questions in the affirmative great questions i love the setup and it's something we can evaluate whether that's a hearty affirmative or a half-hearted or a overly confident or underly confident or okay it's affirmative but then what do we do

These are all great questions to have.

And I just love that the authors can be really clear about this great research and also a great suggestion by a community member to read this paper.

Overall, the PCM delivers an account of the phenomenologically available, generic structure of consciousness, and shows how consciousness allows organisms to integrate multimodal sensory information, memory, and emotion in order to control behavior, enhance resilience, optimize preference satisfaction, and minimize predictive error in an efficient manner.

Sounds chill.

If we could, we should.

Great.

way that i would rephrase it without any of the jargon of act inf is how can we apply active inference to the study of consciousness in all of its unified yet coherent mysterious dynamic and profound facets

So there, for the purposes of scientific writing, highlighting a lot of the vocabulary, keywords, and research fields related to control theory, information signaling, geometry, math, computation.

Those are some heavy-hitting ideas, but let's also not lose sight that some of the other heavy-hitting ideas include the mystery of consciousness and why we're the one that we are and whether cells have consciousness and...

whether ant colonies do and whether colonies do but not nest mates and nest mates but not colonies or ecosystems but not colonies.

Just let's be open-minded.

So let's answer questions in the affirmative and be open-minded.

Let's have yes and and let's accomplish yes and with everyone's participation.

The abstract begins with saying, we summarize our recently introduced projective consciousness model and relate it to outstanding conceptual issues in the theory of consciousness.

pcm combines a projective geometrical model of the perspectival phenomenological structure of the field of consciousness with a variational free energy minimization model of active inference yielding an account of the cybernetic function of consciousness viz the modulation of the field's cognitive and affective dynamics for the effective control of embodied agents long sentence double double points for um using uh affect and effect uh

Long sentences, but slow it down, unpack it.

I think that we've gone through the keywords well enough, at least a first pass to show you why it would be great to connect across all these areas.

Abstract part two.

The geometrical and active inference components are linked via the concept of projective transformation, which is crucial to understanding how conscious organisms integrate perception, emotion, memory, reasoning, and perspectival imagination in order to control, behavior, enhance resilience, and optimize preference satisfaction.

So sounds cool.

The PCM makes substantive empirical predictions.

We'll see about that.

And fits well into a neurocomputationalist framework.

Of course it does.

It also helps us to account for aspects of subjective character that are sometimes ignored or conflated.

Pre-reflective self-consciousness, the first person point of view, the sense of mindness or ownership and social self-consciousness.

and close the abstract with saying we argue that the pcm though still in development offers us the most complete theory today of what thomas metzinger has called phenomenal selfhood now i don't know metzinger's work

incredibly well or what this topic bridges out to kind of an interesting way to end the abstract but so it goes um that's what we might be getting to how are the authors going to get from all of these keywords like cybernetics and geometry to getting to potentially the most developed framework to date in their opinion of what is called phenomenal selfhood so phenomenology experience selfhood having a self

Well, they start in section one with the introduction and go pretty directly to section two methodology.

I think this is great because it really gets into the details quickly.

You could philosophize for a thousand books people have.

So what's the methodology?

How can I identify what you're actually doing in this paper as a researcher without hearing 30 pages about your understanding of what Descartes did or didn't say?

Three, they're going to talk about phenomenological invariance and the functional features of consciousness, which are also, we're going to go into them later.

And they talk about the phenomenological invariance, what they are, the five of them.

We'll go through them.

And then talk about how they're related to projective geometry in the PCM.

So basically, they're going to start with their invariants, and if you have a qualm with an invariant, you want a sixth one, you want to collapse to four, great, let's write another paper.

But they're going to start with these invariant features, and then they're going to introduce that plus projective geometry to say, projective geometry is the bridge we're going to take to get these five invariant features.

We see figure one, which has an account in the PCM model of psychological phenomena, and figure two, which shows projective geometry in relationship to the Necker cube, which is like kind of a cool illusion that I'm looking forward to showing you.

Then they go to the five functional features of consciousness, which are also what we're going to address.

And they talk about the projective consciousness model, which is, remember, the phenomenological invariance plus projective geometry equals...

part of the PCM.

Now we're going to talk about the PCM and the functional features of consciousness, the functional cybernetic functions that they talked about earlier, and fuse that in the capacity of using active inference and free energy minimization to get some of these functional dynamics.

Then they'll show figure three, a simplified 2D projective consciousness model based simulation of a pit challenge.

And then figure four, give a overall sketch of the projective consciousness model.

In section four, they talk about the hard problem of consciousness, representationalism and phenomenal selfhood.

The hard problem and computational functionalism is variously phrased by Professor Chalmers and others as basically being about what the substrate of consciousness is.

Why is it that when you hit your hand, it hurts, but when you hit some brain regions, it doesn't hurt.

And when you hit some other brain regions, you just pass out, but you come back or you die or something in between.

How is that happening in the brain?

or is it an antenna is it a generator these are the questions then they go from the computational functionalism to talking about the pcm and representationalism now all these terms computation function and representation are pretty loaded we've gone into them on a couple of other discussions but

be open-minded as to how they could recombine in the context of PCM.

And then they're going to take those kind of more quantitative terms, computation, function, representation.

Representation is a little bit of a bridge, and they're going to bring that into the projective consciousness model's phenomenological components.

So that's going to be about subjective character, subjective character being what it is-ness, the what is it about to be about, etc.

And also the phenomenal selfhood of the philosopher that they concluded with discussing in their abstract.

And then they conclude, so looks like a great roadmap.

Let's, in this introductory video, in the time that I've left here,

let's go through the functional features and the invariances of consciousness, because we're not going to have time to go through them in 9.1 or 9.2 with all of you contributing your perspectives.

And it's good to get them out here because these are kind of like the big five for the functions and the big five for the invariances.

And if you have a qualm with the model, you should first ask, is there a function or is there an invariant that I think is extraneous?

Is there one that I think is missing?

Is there one that I think is just off base?

So if you have a question about one of these five things, you think this doesn't go far enough or this goes too far or, but some conscious systems don't have that.

Great.

That's the question you want to ask.

So there's five in each category.

If you think there should be more or less or a different one, that's one entry point.

Now, if you agree with all of them and you say, yep, those are the perfect five in each category, then you can evaluate, given what projective geometry is and what the PCM is, do they address the functional and the experiential invariance of consciousness?

So that's how we're going to read this paper.

And that's where I hope there's a lot of footholds for people who

maybe have thought about consciousness, but this is a new way to hear about it for them, it would be great to have their comments.

What are the five functional features of consciousness according to the authors?

and the way that they sort of justify this is by saying um we claim that the overall function of consciousness is to address a general cybernetic problem or problem of control control theory consciousness enables a situated organism with multiple sensory channels to navigate its environment and satisfy its biological and derived needs efficiently this entails minimizing predictively erroneous representations of the world and maximizing preference satisfaction

A good model of consciousness must be able to explain how this is accomplished.

The PCM thus emphasizes the following interrelated functional features of consciousness.

Here's why I paused before putting it up, but after justifying it.

Because even things that do control theory might not have consciousness.

Full stop.

That's the whole thing that I was getting into with the ant colony test is...

Okay, so then if I have a robot and it has something that allows it to do multimodal integration across sensors with a generative model, with a deep, with a counterfactual, whatever it is, does it have consciousness?

And then that's where the person goes, oh, well, it needs a brain.

And so then they go down the rabbit hole a different way.

So the function is important, but again, it's not the whole story, especially yet.

Here are what they characterize as the five functional cybernetic features of consciousness that we'd want to at least explain.

So maybe just passing these five is necessary, but it's not sufficient, but it's important.

One, global optimization and resilience.

Consciousness helps the organism reliably find the globally optimal solutions available to it given competing preferences, knowledge base, capacities, and context, making the organism more resilient.

This is a mechanism of global or subjective, here in the sense of subjective Bayesian optimization, which does not always entail objective optimality, though it must approximate the latter reliably enough, or you die.

If you don't objectively enough figure out how to walk down a staircase, you're not going to walk down many staircases.

Now, a few things on this.

First, many people think consciousness is epiphenomenal.

So whatever's happening in our awareness is not going back to guide.

So this plays a little fast and loose because it's saying, well, consciousness helps your organism reliably find.

It sounds like consciousness is coming back.

And this is the whole Cartesian dualism paradigm.

It's like...

I know that Carl Fristen and others have many more nuanced works, including I Think Therefore I Am related works.

So I'm not going to go into it, but it's like, if consciousness is something that reaches back into the physical, how is that?

Or if consciousness is purely a descriptive epiphenomenal, epiphenomena above the phenomena of mechanistically or materially defined components like neurons, message passing, whatever it has to be, ants,

No matter how emergent their properties are in the weak emergent sense, do they ever amount to strong emergence and actually cause the system?

Even the downward causation and causal entropy and the renormalization group, that still is a very philosophically agnostic with respect to whether it's causal.

So...

another thing to say here is that global optimization given the preferences knowledge base capacities affordances and context so so it's not global optimization so it's local optimization or it's global exploration of a conditional space conditional upon the things that we want it to be conditional on like how far you can reach but then

I don't know about you all, but my consciousness doesn't always help me get to the globally optimal points unless that global optimum is defined as this not objectively best space of like, well, you just didn't go the right way, but it seemed optimal given what you knew.

It's like, okay.

And then, okay.

And it has to be reliable enough.

So I'm on board.

Two, global availability.

The contents of consciousness must be generally globally available in the sense of poised to be treated of, by, are effective cognitive and perceptual systems as the occasion requires.

So for example, you know, here's idea one, idea two, memory four, the color, you know, the number, all these things are just apparently one layer away from accessing the workspace.

This is drawing heavily on the global workspace theory, attention schema modeling of some other researchers.

I would just point out global doesn't make sense to me.

The brain isn't the globe.

Cognition isn't the globe availability.

It's like, yes, but then again, you define available as like, I knew it yesterday, but I don't know it now.

So it's not available.

Um, or what if it's part of my extended cognitive process and it just takes me five minutes to find it.

So, okay.

Relevance, but globally available.

Um,

And also our awareness is hardly the tip of the iceberg.

Or maybe it's a whole iceberg and a half.

So I wouldn't even know what it would mean to be globally available.

Motivation of action and modulation of attention.

attention schema theory.

Consciousness is generally implicated in the motivation of action based upon affective dynamics in memory.

This drives the modulation of attention, though consciousness is not to be narrowly identified with attention.

So that's kind of attention schema theory breaking upwards out of the just like LSTM, like a neural network that has an attentional parameter.

We want to go into the experiential dimension, not just the, oh, well, it's a laser that spends a lot of its time here.

Or, you know, it's a camera that autofocuses on this level.

We want to go beyond that and say whether or not it is getting input like a camera in some of its sensory organs, the experience is somehow generated.

But I'd also point to this motivation of action and modulation of attention.

It's very, very important.

These are phrased as if consciousness functionally, functions of consciousness, right?

Motivates action and modulates attention, right?

Or it could be epiphenomenal consciousness, that is.

And so it could be the experience of motivation of action and the experience of modulated attention.

So in that framing, we made consciousness epiphenomenal and we basically said, yeah, attention is something that happens with all the neurons and the firing patterns and whatnot and the drugs, everything that happens.

And then it gets to some synergetic compromise where it's like looking at this thing at this time and then you're just experiencing it.

It's not simply a Cartesian theater model.

It's still a bottom-up, top-down situation, but there's no simple outs here.

It's neither that consciousness is reaching back and motivating action, neither is it that it's modulating attention through what dials, you know, show them to me.

Oh, well, that's what meditation is.

Yeah, but then all of a sudden you're getting into this area where I think a lot of stuff that's not related is pretty important.

And then the fourth one, oh, whoops, I said big five.

Well, let's just think of it as the big five.

The big fifth function is going to be the secret function.

But the fourth function is simulation enhancement.

Maybe that gets us two.

Consciousness facilitates the use of simulation in the broad sense of imagination, not the narrow sense like simulation theory.

But maybe that's a direction to go.

in the service of solving cognitive, perceptual, and affective problems, and more generally, in the anticipation and programming of actions and the response to their outcomes.

So simulation enhancement could be, for example, I wake up and it's very dark in my room, but I have a generative model or an accessible model, not

being too formal here, of my room.

So even with my eyes closed or with very dim light, I can enhance my simulation and think, oh wait, if I open the door this way, it's going to wake up my roommate.

Or if I do this at this time, then down the road, this is going to be a different sensory input that I don't want to experience.

So that kind of rich,

mechanistic understanding of the world is what humans excel at.

And it's what the current machines that we deal with do not deal with well.

You can ask it a question like, could this building wear ice skates?

And it might be able to parse whether those terms mean different things and whether they're keywords used by the same people or not on Twitter.

But

will it be able to understand and address that question and that's kind of what the geb book really is fun to think about so again four functional features for consciousness should there be a fifth one are one of these extraneous do you have a different function for consciousness what is your understanding is consciousness have function or is consciousness something else how would it affect things if it had a function how would we measure the function what is dysfunction

All these questions, any questions that people want to have, maybe be cool for people who watch it, like to post questions they have.

And we can have a norm of just asking the questions that we have out loud because let's ask the questions we have.

I don't know any other way to say it right now.

second thing that we'll talk about is the um invariance of consciousness the phenomenological invariance and here i believe there are five so these are the things that are really what their model is going to come down to with respect to phenomenology and philosophy

So this is what they're going to focus on.

This is what the mathematical model needs to aim for.

This is what their formalisms should explain, predict, integrate, encompass.

So this is like the big core philosophy idea that we want to do all of the math and all of the computational stuff to get at with some type of bridge.

The bridge is projective geometry, perhaps.

So what does it mean to be a phenomenological invariant?

And they write,

The following are the deeply interconnected invariants that we think characterize consciousness.

We take them as postulates for mathematical treatment, citation that you could follow up on, and construct the PCM on their basis.

So it's kind of like axioms, like they're taking these as like root statements that kind of don't need to be justified.

They're kind of like observations.

But of course, this is something that we all want to know is,

Could there be another one?

Could one of these be redundant?

What if you have four out of five?

Do you get 80% on consciousness?

Or what if we figure out or imagine a system that has three out of five?

Is it, you know, what does that mean for that system?

What are these phenomenological invariants?

one relational phenomenal intentionality so break it down by the words all consciousness involves the appearance of a world of objects properties etc in various qualitative or representational worlds representational ways to an organism

So again, they're not thinking too much about worms and fruit flies and ants and ant colonies.

Maybe they are.

I'd love to hear it from an author or from a colleague if they are.

But these are the debates that we're having, which is like, right, if you observe the worm moving away from the gradient as if it had a representational, relational, phenomenal intentionality, is that evidence enough?

And that's the question.

Two, situated three-dimensional spatiality.

Of course, also there's time, sometimes called the fourth dimension.

The space of the presented world, like objects or et cetera, is three-dimensional, again, big asterisk, and perspectival, unfolding in an oriented manner between a point of view and a horizon at infinity, where all parallel lines converge.

The origin of this point of view is elusive, though normally it seems to be located in the head.

The space is normally organized around the lived body.

So this is like bringing us to embodiment, to inactivism, to ecological psychology, to intercultural and developmental psychology, to Ken Wilber's integral theory.

also connecting us to lived experience and to spatiality and to the ways that the spaces that we live in influence who and how we are so all of the awesome active stream participants who have taught us so much about embedded systems and embodiment we'd really love to hear what is work in this area that impinges on one of these invariants multimodal synchronic integration synchronic means at the same time

Consciousness involves the synthesis or integration into a unified whole of a multiplicity of qualitative and representational components from sensory modalities, memory, and cognition.

So diachronic means at a different time, synchronic at the same time.

So memory is diachronic.

but it's of sensory modalities.

So it could be a hearing event from six months ago.

And there's the whole question of imagination, obviously a big question, but just to a first pass, events from the past that influence us in the future are diachronic.

or another way to think about it is they modify the system or they put it onto a different trajectory that's different than if that difference making cause to use the waters terminology hadn't occurred consciousness seems to be both diachronic and synchronic like when we're listening to music and seeing flashing lights there's like synchronization in the same moment that's also multi-sensory but there's some really interesting work about the time durations of different kinds of experience

so clearly something is happening there with sight and sound and just people who are born with or without hearing and born with or without sight all these different people can navigate in the same world so that says something about sight you know it's not just us watching a projector if there's people who can navigate without sight so that's kind of what they want to bring it back to

Four, temporal integration, which I just hinted at before, but this is a little deeper level.

Consciousness involves at least the retention of immediately past experiences and pretension of immediately future experiences as integral elements of its specious present, the ever-present now, as it were, and the foundation for more expansive forms of temporal integration, such as distant memories and long-term planning.

distant past, distant future.

Now, just to give one kind of funny note, when I was reading this, I thought, what is protension?

What does it mean in this context?

So according to Google, protention is a philosophy word that means anticipation of a future event.

So I dug a little deeper into the Merriam-Webster definition of protent, P-R-O-T-E-N-T, protent, like a professionally set up tent.

It's an archaic transitive verb, meaning to stretch forth or to extend.

Now,

Nowadays, one might hear about portending future events, not protenting them.

And the words actually have different meanings.

So to portend, P-O-R-T-E-N-D, portend, is to convey something through like a symbol or an omen, like the owl portended difficult times or something like that.

But portending...

is something that the agent does in response to the symbol.

So upon seeing the owl, the farmer portented that this was going to occur.

And so I would just kind of bring up this idea that maybe they're so similar sounding and they're so kind of close in their word usage that the English language just couldn't tolerate

that much ambiguity because portenting and portending, they sound like 99% identical.

And so then maybe portending took popularity over protent because it removes agency from the actor.

And so it's one way to remove action from language.

And so now protenting or portenting...

It's now a philosophy word.

It's archaic.

It's an old word because we can't have action in speech, right?

No, but non-ironically, it is really interesting to think about how these words change in meaning.

And the more action we can embed in our speech patterns and our interaction patterns, the better.

Subjective character.

So subjective character is defined by the authors as involving a pre-reflective non-conceptual awareness of oneself and their individuality.

Now, one could be totally off base, so they could be wrong.

Is that part of consciousness to be wrong about your individuality or is it just that you're having an individuality?

Hard to say, but the authors have it as an invariant.

They write also that two to five are in fact implicated in one.

So relational, phenomenal, intentionality is really the most important key invariant.

So that's the relational thinking.

And that's why I feel like the active inference and free energy principle communities are very adjacent to complexity thinking, to systems thinking, relational thinking, design thinking, as well as team collaboration frameworks.

because so many of these social work and team relation frameworks, as well as other types of thinking, including complexity, they all deal with this relational insight.

So there's so much to learn and to do here and to understand about what are the implications of relational thinking on consciousness, on our own experience, if not on actually making claims about consciousness.

cool.

Let's just kind of close out by going through and looking briefly at a few of the figures and just what they're about.

Take a 30,000 foot view so that when you're reading through the paper, you kind of know where you're coming from.

So figure one has A, B, and C. And A is a projective solution to a VR mediated disassociation in phenomenal selfhood.

So this is kind of like...

from the experience of the Euclidean view.

We're looking at Minecraft here.

And then the person, their head is in this block in the lived space in the right side of figure A. But they're imagining the space as if it were on the left side of A. So I can imagine my office right now in terms of the right angles.

Again, even when I look out, I don't see right angles.

If I were to...

Combined like this, and I look back down and I look at the angle that the room was just making, it's a not 90 degree angle, but it looks normal within my generative and usually verified experience that it is 90 degrees, because why?

Projective geometry.

So what do we have to do?

Well, it turns out to add in this element of the visual field in the projective geometry in B,

we're going to show this like sort of, they call it an anti-space beyond the plane.

I'm not even going to go into what that may or may not be because I don't want to go down too deep, but it's kind of like there's some mapping reflected in B and C, what they call God's eye vantage point.

There's certain mappings from B and C, just like there's a mapping between the understanding that I'm in a Euclidean office and then my lived experience

where apparently wherever my eyes are or something like that, right?

A little bit behind there, a little in front of there.

How are we going to square the circle almost literally with the generative model of the Euclidean office with my lived experience of the wacky angles?

And what's interesting here is the visual focus.

And so where are all of these different centers?

Is this kind of related to like, what if we feel like our emotional center is somewhere else in our body?

Or what if we have the experience of not just a simple out of body, like floating above your body, looking down, but more expansive experiences.

So we'd love to go into that phenomenology with someone potentially from Alias or any other colleague.

And so there's certain mappings, just like Euclideans, non-Euclidean office, there's this like God's eye mapping.

can evaluate for yourself whether you think that's god's eye figure two is a projective solution to the necker cube and so here's what's happening in this image on the left side is like two versions of the so-called necker cube illusion so it's a cube visual illusion and it turns out it's illusion um first off just looking at these two for one or for both just ask yourself do i see them as um

How should I even say this?

The biggest side that's close to you, is it on the top left of each square or is it on the bottom right?

And you can flip sometimes, some people, different people in different ways can flip in their mind, seeing it as if the biggest side of the box were coming down to the right

or whether the biggest part of the box is kind of going up into the left, okay?

Now, here is why they are suggesting that this visual illusion exists.

Because there's no perspectival cues, we're looking into a projection on a flat plane,

And so there's sort of like two optimal solutions to the perspectival question.

And so because there's two such similar evidence competing models, free energy minimizing models, it's not, they say it's undecidable free energy based inference, which is to say that in our optimization perception, we continue just oscillating.

It's like, you know,

it's the old woman it's the young woman it's the old woman it's the young woman okay that's a visual illusion but this is one that has to do with projective geometry where it's like it's coming towards me like but i'm getting sensory evidence that's going that way in a different simulated frame and then you perceive it that way now it's top down so it's like this um back and forth resonance and there's a lot of interesting research on this

what breaks the symmetry quite literally and the answer is lived experience from the point of view simulation so here if i'm closer to one side of the square i don't have any little squares to pick up but it resolves it not absolutely you still know that square has a different side or the cube has a different side and you can even imagine what it might look like like oh i'm seeing the six is on the die it's closest to me

if i were on the other side i would see a one and it would look bigger and i wouldn't be able to see the six but where i'm at i just see a big rectangle six or something like that and so that kind of captures a lot of these aspects of the geometry of consciousness where you can simulate being in different places but you're always in a certain spot visualizing it what is that spot that's the privilege point of view that's the point of reference

What about it is special?

Well, it's like a non-arbitrary point in a projective geometry.

What kind of projective geometry?

Well, something that takes our allegedly Euclidean world and maps it into this like vanishing point experience.

I think I got some of the main threads to link there, but that's kind of what they're suggesting.

And free energy is gonna be the optimization and action and inference paradigm within a simulation, broadly construed understanding about how symmetry is broken in terms of experience.

So big stuff, interesting topics, to be wanting to address this is big by the authors.

Figure three is a PCM-based simulation of a pit challenge.

And on the very bottom, you'll see this is like from another paper.

So if you're curious about this simulation, definitely go check out the other paper that they reference.

But what we can look at here is starting on the left side.

So there's like a bunch of...

barbell shapes and basically the barbell uh has to do with it's like a map they can walk around in so they can wander around but they kind of have to make it across this pit to get to like a rewarding place um so there's an anhedonic uh in a safe space a challenge room and a goal room i believe is what they call them and then they're going to be thinking about that that moving circle like let's see if i can do this there you go this moving circle

is like the agent moving through the map.

Here's its expectations and where its prior beliefs are.

And then here is it resolving its uncertainty in a, it's kind of like, looks like a radar dial, but that white spot in the middle is like the non-arbitrary origin.

That's like the consciousness zone.

And so from the POV point of view of this organism in its FOC, its field of consciousness,

which is like some geometry mapping from the experienced space into its generative model.

It's navigating that mapping somehow through consciousness.

And then that's also able to bear on the difference between like having a weaker imagination and a stronger imagination.

They have this active inference engine with multi-sensory integration.

And this looks like something definitely to go into for the 9.1 and for our own future research.

But basically we can...

run model scenarios, we can say, yeah, I guess if it,

It's a funny thing to say.

I can imagine that if you were to do this experiment, you might find informative results suggesting that enabling an agent to have imagination in an action-oriented geometry might enable it to do better than a model that doesn't.

Therefore, spending most of its time learning about relationships that may or may not be relevant in the geometrical frame that sensory data actually occur in.

Again, long sentences abound, but I think that there's a lot there in figure three and also a lot to learn about how they're framing free energy.

All right, last figure, figure four.

Figure four is an overall sketch of the PCM, the Projective Consciousness Model.

And I think there's a few different dimensions here.

So one is the observer at the center with their lived space, Steven.

This really reminds me of the Perry personal space.

So I hope that you'll have a lot to teach us in this domain.

and within this domain this field of consciousness field of affordances let's think about it from many different perspectives just by saying one thing i'm not always meaning to limit i'm just saying that this is one way we can think about it let's imagine that there are perceived and imagined events now observations are just models of observations so maybe there's less of a distinction there than might be seen but

In this geometry, observer-centric, with all of this projective geometry mapping happening, can we think about aligning your vector through time

down a gradient that goes from red to green so it's funny because it's a gradient that colorblind people of certain types may not be able to perceive which just so perfectly entails everything we're talking about here which is that um action in some like absolutist sense is moving downhill thermodynamically there's very few people who would say that action moves uphill thermodynamically bring them on the stream

but it has to go uphill conceptually or symbolically in certain cases if not just simply logistically in terms of going uphill to go downhill later and so here we see a gradient reflecting the free energy going um from a culturally based green is okay and low surprise and then red is high surprise high alert high attention where have we seen that before

Taking that kind of a culturally imbued color scale and then aligning a time vector as a dimensional projection onto that figure as a way to say that actually through space and time in the context of the projected geometry and affordance capacities of the organism, it is still downhill in a sense.

So I don't know where this necessarily fits in with all the mathematical formalisms.

Here looks pretty nice to talk about like the action, perception, prediction, imagination loop.

This is another loop we might want to learn about.

We've talked a lot about loops related to like agent and environment, but now we're almost thinking like the agent within the agent is going from action, perception,

prediction imagination so that's something happening inside of us potentially and then um again on the right side is looking at time series that's the directions we want to take all free energy research is like through time through space

any other dimensions we come across we'll go through those too but that's definitely the cool dimension to think about is deep causal inference with a sound and what's visualized um in the figure so other people may see very different things in this figure and we welcome hearing about it

Let's close with some just final thoughts and questions to end on, which maybe we'll start ending with questions more.

They write in their paper, Computationalist a posteriori, that means after the fact, identity theory allows that apparently contingent processing constraints may be essential to real consciousness.

As long as the computational model captures the phenomenological invariance, meets the functional constraints, and survives the tribunal of prediction and experiment, we should happily accept that some apparently contingent and only empirically knowable constraints pertaining to the physical realization of consciousness are actually essential to it.

So that is basically like saying, look, if we can explain and predict the invariance, the five invariants,

and we can capture these functional attributes there's four of them but again both of those sets the invariances and the functional attributes anyone is game to add remove or change it just needs to be justified and understood so they're saying look if it does both of those things which is why i spent so much time on it in this talk was because that's their claim it's not just broadly we could do active inference and think about consciousness it's saying

If we make these invariances part of our model and we at least get all the functional attributes that we want, then any model that is surviving unique explanation and predictions, the tribunal, the troika, as it were, if it does all of that, then it is basically going to come along with some wacky baggage, like a parameter we don't understand or the God's eye view.

And then they're just saying, you're just going to have to accept that as contingent.

So fun thought by the authors, just a really well-written and conveyed paper.

And I hope that it broaches onto many areas that we've talked about in other act in streams.

Here's my closing set of questions.

One, how would we recognize a framework for consciousness?

And a related question is what might a framework for consciousness be?

What if it's a poem?

Oh, well, it can't be a poem.

How do we know?

Or what if it's a drawing?

Or what if it's a set of ontologies, narratives, formal documents, and tools?

Could it be that, ONFT?

Could it be bolts, business, operational, legal, technical, social?

Could it be acceptance?

Could it be fundamental agnosticism?

Could it be free energy principle?

How will we know?

and that is really the key question for theories of consciousness is not do you feel right it's how will we know and do you hold yourself to that standard because we can do a lot better in this area and this paper is an example of great work in the space

A next question is what might a framework for consciousness enable?

And that's pretty broad.

What would it change in our action practice?

Would we put more people in fMRI scanners or less?

Would we communicate with people who we don't think of as being able to communicate with at this point or not?

Why not?

How might it change our legal systems or our social systems?

What if we could measure different kinds or types or levels of consciousness?

And then that's really why we need to get down to the brass tacks on what it might look like, what it measures, and what the predictions are.

Because if we don't know the unique predictions or experiments, and this is alluding to earlier when I said that there's a lot on the table, someone's going to say, well, I have a consciousness o-meter, and this is a 2, and this is an 11, and this type of object that you care so much about is actually not conscious, so I'm just going to unplug it.

But this other one that I care a lot about, I measured it with my device, and it was very conscious.

It's very worthwhile to save.

And

Where will people make a stand?

And the stand has to be on the common ground and the space of recognition of frameworks for consciousness, in my opinion.

I'm open to changing my mind on that, but I think if we don't meet at how we'll recognize such a framework, what it might look like, and start with respecting world knowledge traditions and by respecting differences in our opinion, and we stay in a hegemonic mode,

in an absolutist mode, in a non-pluralist frame, culturally, methodologically, if we don't go down the pluralistic route, it's going to be, I think, very bad for practical implications.

And then lastly, what are the next steps for active inference in this domain?

What do we want an active inference conscious agent to do?

Or how can we build on active inference now?

Do we want it to go deeper into consciousness, deeper into action?

We spoke about action policy selection and machine learning.

Could we put consciousness in machine learning?

What would be the philosophy and the implications of that?

These are all big questions, but how are we going to take this paper and develop in the directions of active inference?

even if only making educational content.

And then lastly, maybe always a good question to address is what is the goal of this research?

Sure, we're curious about consciousness, but aren't we curious about so many things?

What makes it worthwhile to do this research?

Why are we doing it?

How have we selected or how?

Why have we selected or how?

How have we selected or why?

Every one of these combinations we really need to keep in mind, especially if it's about us, about our experience, about consciousness, about people.

It's just, again, can't be said enough that there's too much on the table to not have this be participatory, inclusive,

cross-cutting, intercultural, the list just goes on.

So everybody who's listening and thinking about it, thanks so much.

This kind of, I guess, went a little bit longer than one might have predicted, but c'est la vie, right?

When active streaming, why not?

Thanks for participating.

We will provide follow-up forms to the live participants.

We actually will, believe it or not.

we will request your feedback, suggestions, and questions.

So if you have any thoughts, again, I tried to drop a bunch of times, really specific moments where somebody could just pause the video and say, yes, this thing right here, I do or don't agree with, or this does or doesn't resonate with my experience.

That would be epic because let's hear from a lot of perspectives on consciousness.

It's important to hear about that.

And then also just any feedbacks or suggestions or collaboration offers for the ACT InfoStream, always welcome.

You can stay in communication with us, any of our channels or means.

But thank you all for listening.

Those of you who were listening live or those of you who will listen in replay because the future is always now, isn't it?

See you later.

## pSWRTkmR8eg

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference live stream.

It is ACT-IMP Stream 9.1 and it is November 24th, 2020.

So welcome everyone to the ACT-IMP stream and welcome to Team Calm.

Today in the ACT-IMP stream,

we will be talking about a really interesting paper, so I'm quite excited.

Team Calm is an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us at our website, our Twitter, at email, our YouTube, or our public Keybase team and shared Keybase username.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And also just as far as video etiquette for live stream, remember to mute.

If there's any noise in your background, raise your hand so that we can hear from everybody on the stack and use respectful speech, behavior, et cetera.

Just to quickly go through the rest of the meetings that we'll be having for 2020.

Today on November 24th, we're talking about the Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood.

Next week in 9.2 on December 1st, we're going to be talking about the same paper.

So anything that gets raised today, whether you're participating live or watching a replay, let us know about it so we can cover it in 9.2.

On December 8th and 15th, in 10.1 and 10.2, we'll be discussing the paper, A Variational Approach to Scripts.

And then on December 22nd and 29th, we'll be talking about Sophisticated Effective Inference.

And that will be another more on the modeling side paper to discuss.

Cool.

Today in Act ImpStream 9.1,

the roadmap will be as follows.

We'll start off with some introductions and warmup questions, and then we'll get to 9.1.

We're gonna be talking about the paper called The Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood by Williford et al, 2018.

And the punchline of this paper is basically about the combination of a few different fields, geometry, cybernetics, neurophenomenology, et cetera.

and by combining these fields under the framework of active inference there might be something there to understand or explain about consciousness so we'll go through the aims and the claims of the authors the abstract and the road map and then at multiple points here and throughout we want to take time for questions so really anyone who raises their hand will just as soon as we can cut there because it's so interesting what people have come to mind during these provocative topics

Then we'll go to the author's study of consciousness and talk about the two lists that they make and what those lists do for the paper and do for their theory.

And those are the functional features and the phenomenological invariance of consciousness.

And then at the end, we'll go through the figures and with however much time we have, we'll go into thinking about what each figure might represent or invoke.

And as stated in 9.2, we're going to be discussing this same paper again.

So save and submit any questions you have and get in touch with us if you want to participate.

Great.

For the introductions and warm up, please just introduce yourself and your location, say hello and as short of an intro as you'd like, and then pass it to somebody else who hasn't yet spoken.

So I will go first.

I'm Daniel.

I'm in California and I'll pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_06:
I hope I'm audible.

My name is Alex.

I'm also in California.

And I will pass this to Shannon.


SPEAKER_04:
Hey, I'm Shannon.

I would be in California normally, but I'm in South Dakota.

So I'll pass it to Lee.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Lee.

I'm in London.

And I'll pass it to Mathis.


SPEAKER_01:
Rick, currently muted.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Hi, I'm Mathis.

I'm currently in Germany, in Osnabrück, and I pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, my name is Ivan.

I'm from Moscow, Russia, and I pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, my name is Sasha.

I'm also in California.

And I'll pass it to Alex V. Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia.

And I pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_07:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm in Toronto in Canada.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

That is everyone.

So great.

Thanks for these introductions, everybody.

Let's do some warm-up questions.

And there'll be a few of them.

And anyone who would like to talk, just jump on with raising your hand.

Let's try to hear from everyone as well.

The first question, and I'll do actually the first and the second question together since I think that they're very related.

The first question is what interests you about studying consciousness?

And the second question is what are some ways that we can study consciousness?

Maybe someone's a skeptic.

Maybe they don't think that we can study consciousness or maybe they have a really awesome idea about how we could do that.

So Lee, go ahead.

What's your first thought?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so,

I mean, I primarily come from the phenomenological angle and particularly kind of neurophenomenology really.

And what I'm really interested in is agency.

So can the models that are coming out of neuroscience, can they help us to increase our agency?

So for example, if you can become reflexively aware of simulations, modal simulations that are going on in your system,

then do those become affordances for actions that we can take?

And so you increase the scope of agency.

So that's kind of what really interests me about this.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thanks, Shannon.


SPEAKER_04:
I love that you bring up agency right off the bat.

Something that's really interesting for me about consciousness, which I don't study at all, is when we lose our sense of agency, like when we're in flow states, if we're making music or

I guess people get in flow states if they really like exercising and we're completely immersed in the experiment experience, but not consciously aware, or we don't have the same kind of intentionality that we do as if maybe we're, we're like writing down a math problem or trying to speak over a live stream and thinking very carefully about each of our words.

And I,

guess just the phenomenal quality of those two types of experience is really interesting to me.


SPEAKER_01:
I agree.

And it's part of this, what is consciousness question and what is the role of awareness?

So when we're really paying attention to doing a task with our hands, when we're really paying attention to balancing on a beam or something like that, are we truly at our most self-aware at that moment?

Or are we at our least self-aware or in which ways are we self-aware?

We're not thinking about our biographical history per se, but in another sense, we're the most embodied and an active sort of circuit for action.

So where is that going to fit in with active inference and with this idea that we are embodied in an environment?

So what is really more experiential of the self?

Doing something that might take up your whole body or bring your full attention to bear or doing something that asks you to write a personal statement, something like an autobiographical or narrative self.

Cool.

If anyone else wants to go on the first two, those are good questions.

Or the last question here is just like, what is another theory or framework for consciousness that you know of or have heard about?

Doesn't need to be your theory to support or deny here.

Just like, what is something else that is in the space of this paper?

And then what's just something that you liked about it or found absent from that model?

So...

all just starts with something that I found missing from a lot of models.

And I really want to know where agency and where a lot of other topics fit into play here is it's often a little unclear whether consciousness is something that reaches back into the system and intervenes or whether it's something that's just purely epiphenomenal or kind of just there could be awareness, but awareness may not have causal power.

So is consciousness something that's just getting spun off to the side and produced, but not reaching back into the system?

Or is it something that's actually essential, potentially even in an evolutionary or adaptive context for maintaining coherent behavior?

Stephen?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I'm interested in this question of self-consciousness that seems to be, and I like just the idea of general consciousness being thought about, because I think in psychology, this idea of the self,

And the idea of the individual has become so dominant.

And the idea of broader consciousness was kind of left a hundred years ago for the, the philosophers to deal with.

So this idea of I have a self and I have this, um, idea of a psychology and this perspective on the psychology has become kind of all encompassing, but now this,

ability to bring consciousness in more broadly sort of dissolves a lot of those problems because it kind of stuck psychology is single scale of analysis.

So that's one of the things I think that is quite exciting by all of this.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, Sasha.


SPEAKER_03:
One thing that I find missing, I feel like a broken record sometimes, is the developmental side of consciousness.

And even if we're thinking about humans...

you know, our favorite species.

How does consciousness develop across a lifetime and what are the different stages or versions of consciousness that we pass through?

And is there a sort of a developmental trajectory?

Because I tend to think it's not like flipping a light switch.

Like it's not that we are born and we're immediately plugged into this same consciousness that we're experiencing today.

So, yeah, that's kind of what I would like to see from a consciousness model is different levels or versions of it that we can start to describe, like much like the flow state or sleep.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, Shannon.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I like both of those points that Stephen and Sasha brought up and not just how does our personal consciousness develop over time, but how does our consciousness like our group consciousness

develop.

So like as an infant, a lot of your conscious experience is really coupled with the mother or the caregiver.

And like slowly, you might develop a sense of yourself as an individual separate from that caregiver.

But also when we gather in groups, you know, when we gather at concerts, or we gather at protests or in events where we're

A mix of explicitly or implicitly interacting with each other, we start to behave like like one group.

And in some sense, we start to really feel like one group rather than like just myself in a room full of other people.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Cool.

And it's something in the ant literature people have wondered about is the nestmate conscious, is just the colony conscious, but not the nestmate.

Then what is really happening with this transition from individual to group and the development of that?

Also interesting, the formation of group, is it kind of like how many sand grains make a heap?

You know, once there's three people, it's a collective consciousness or do they have to be doing contact improv or do they have to be rhythmically synchronized?

What are those dynamics?

What might be metrics?

What might be things that we could come to the table and agree on as far as measurements are concerned so that we could kind of move the needle forward in research?

Or is this a question that because of its maybe fundamental difficulty in measurement, is it a question that's sort of forever going to be in the speculative domain?

I think that the authors of this paper would suggest that scientific study of consciousness is meritous and that there's value in approaching with even a mathematical bent

approaching how we could study consciousness though it's by no means obvious that mathematics is the way that we're going to express the language or the structure of consciousness especially when we start to think about all these different dimensions like group versus individual and what you know who is individual we were never individuals that type of thinking what does the brain region know that the neuron doesn't and the brain know that the region doesn't

All these questions are going to come into play and a lot of the neuro and social parts are going to get a little bit, not swept under the rug here, but this paper is clearly a little bit more on the cut and dry projective geometry side.

And there's a lot of discussion of neurophenomenology, but you don't see any pictures of cells.

You don't see any actual details of neuro mechanisms.

It's just assumed, well, you could wrap mechanisms and mechanisms kind of close to the end to get this type of a systems behavior.

And so we'll get a little bit more into it.

So at any point, of course, people are welcome to raise their hand.

We'll just try to immediately, whatever springs to mind in a relevant moment.

So no worries about these prompts.

Let's talk about the paper, which is The Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood by Williford et al.

in December 2018 in Frontiers in Psychology, Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.

The aims and the claims of the paper are basically as such.

They ask, can we describe this integrated, multimodal, and centered spatial structure of conscious experience in a rigorous way?

And can we give a good account of why it should be thus organized?

Here, we answered both questions in the affirmative.

Great, big if true.

Let's see these be answered.

Overall, the PCM delivers an account of the phenomenologically available generic structure of consciousness, and that speaks to Steven's point about the general consciousness, and shows how consciousness allows organisms to integrate multimodal sensory information, memory, and emotion in order to control behavior, enhance resilience, optimize preference satisfaction, and minimize predictive error in efficient manner.

And this is, again, to my earlier point about does consciousness get spun off of the system or does it reach back in?

So does consciousness control behavior and enhance resilience?

Or is it that systems with controlled behavior and enhanced properties like resilience, do those systems spiral off consciousness as an observer?

That's vague here, but the way that we phrase these sentences is essential.

It's like active versus passive.

Mistakes were made versus I made a mistake versus you made a mistake.

Pretty different.

And the non-jargony way might be to ask, how can we apply active inference as this unifying framework to the study of consciousness in all of its unified, coherent, mysterious, dynamic, and profound facets?

And we'll see when they get to the functional features and the phenomenological invariance, which aspects of consciousness they think are sort of the key features to explain and really integrate across consciousness.

into one common framework.

So that's what we hope to be getting at today.

Even though this paper is not the whole citation network, we're definitely going to be exploring a lot of the key ideas and questions about how and where active inference and the free energy principle could link back to consciousness.

So here's the abstract briefly.

They write, we summarize our recently introduced projective consciousness model, PCM, which is Rudroff et al.

2017, and relate it to outstanding conceptual issues in the theory of consciousness.

the projective consciousness model combines a projective geometrical model of the perspectival, that means from a perspective, phenomenological, that means what's experienced, structure of the field of consciousness with a variational free energy minimization model of active inference, comma,

yielding an account of the cybernetic function of consciousness, viz., the modulation of the field's cognitive and affective dynamics for the affective control of embodied agents.

Another plus one for affective and effective in the same sentence.

Abstract part two, the geometrical and active inference components are linked via the concept of projective transformation.

So we'll definitely have a slide where we look at what a projective transformation is, which is crucial to understanding how conscious organisms integrate perception, emotion, memory, reasoning, and perspectival imagination in order to control behavior, enhance resilience, and optimize preference satisfaction.

The PCM makes substantiative empirical predictions and fits well into a neurocomputationalist framework.

It also helps us to account for aspects of subjective character that are sometimes ignored or conflated.

Pre-reflective self-consciousness, the first person point of view, the sense of mindness or of ownership and of social self-conscious.

So maybe we will get to some of these social topics.

And they close by saying that we argue that the PCM, though still in development, offers the most complete theory to date of what Thomas Metzinger has called phenomenal selfhood.

So that's combining this phenomenology component with a selfhood element.

Any thoughts on the abstract or we can move forward?

bring them up during the roadmap.

So the abstract is just the header of the paper.

It's kind of like the metadata for the in-group and out-group discussion.

The roadmap is how they're actually going to implement these kinds of claims that are suggested in the introduction, in the abstract.

So first with a more formal introduction to the topics they discussed in the abstract, and then they went straight to methodology, which I think is very important, especially when discussing something that's abstract like this.

Then they talk about the phenomenological invariance and the functional features of consciousness, which we'll go through on separate slides.

And specifically, they talk about these invariance in terms of a projective geometry feature of the PCM.

They talk about the functions and then talk about how the PCM links the functional features of consciousness within an active inference and a cybernetics framework.

So they're taking some of the invariance, combining them with projective geometry.

They're taking some of the features and combining that with cybernetics in the sense of active inference as a modern phrasing of cybernetics and free energy minimization as an optimization process.

And they're kind of connecting experience, cybernetics, projective geometry, all these different things together.

and asking whether it makes sense.

They then have all their four figures, which we'll go through today, that range from sort of sketch-like accounts of psychological phenomena to some early solutions to otherwise challenging ideas like illusions, Necker cube.

and then they sketch out a few different representations and simulations that they run or ran elsewhere.

They then return to this question of the hard problem, representationalism, and phenomenal selfhood.

So the hard problem is the hard problem of consciousness attributed to Chalmers and others that relates to basically where the rubber hits the road

how does consciousness arise or what is it?

I think there's many hard problems and who knows which ones we think are easy, but actually are hard.

The point is they're gonna come at that nexus from a computational and a functional angle.

Then they talk about representationalism in the PCM.

And I feel like representationalism, we've heard about a bunch on ActiveStream with a Bayesian structural representationalism.

And now we're gonna come at it from a different angle, from a geometric and a cybernetic angle.

They then talk about how the PCM is linked to subjective character as well as phenomenal selfhood, which is clearly one of the things that they're out to describe, and then they conclude.

So they're going to go from taking a few different threads of phenomenological neuro research

and tie that with some more mechanism agnostic control theory approaches like cybernetics, active inference, and optimization approaches like free energy minimization.

They're going to bring in this projective geometry bit to tie it all together, and then we get to the conclusions and also some of their thoughts on where to go next.

so let's just pause there i've written out a few questions but does anyone just have a thought or a question or when they read the paper like what was the first thought was there something that resonated a lot was there something that seemed ill-defined or you would have defined it a different way or just something you were curious about stephen


SPEAKER_07:
Well, one thing I thought was interesting was this idea of perspectival consciousness.

So this idea that when you're consciously taking a perspective on your situation, which you normally might think of as seeing it, but it could be some sort of embodied sense.

So I think that was kind of important and how that differs from maybe the unconscious

dynamics that are just going on that they don't necessarily deal with.

So it's somehow sitting, I don't know if it's sitting on top or sitting alongside it, but there's somehow this perspectival piece that somehow kicks in.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And we often think about vision

in talking about how active inference is to be differentiated from, let's just say, a sensory relay model where, you know, photons come in, your brain categorizes them and makes an image and then you act.

And here it's like, it's a generative model of the world that you're experiencing.

That's why there's color and good resolution around the edges and no blind spot.

And then it's like, well, then why do we see what appears to be coming from our eyes or from a position that's right there?

And that's where we're going to come back to with a lot of these questions about the projection itself and why we appear to be situated.

Lee?


SPEAKER_05:
Sorry.

Yeah, hi, I don't know if it's relevant, but I was just thinking about, so the discovery of perspective, you know, back in the Enlightenment, and I was thinking, well, obviously, you know, if this is a sort of a more generic theory of consciousness, then I was wondering if it connected perhaps to Metzinger's idea of transparent states, so that, you know, the projective geometry would have always been there, but they would have been transparent, and somehow, you know, in the process of the discovery of perspective,

It became something that we were able to pay attention to more consciously.

Anyway, just a thought.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool idea.

Let me actually unpack that.

First, what would you describe as the transparent state?

Because I don't know of that terminology specifically.

What is a transparent state here?


SPEAKER_05:
I think in Metzinger's model, so transparent states would be those states that we view the world through.

So we're in a state, but we don't know that we're having a particular state, whereas he contrasted to us a metaphor.

So an opaque state would be

a state where we understand that it's a sensory state, if you know what I mean.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

The transparent state, it's kind of like, what is water?

The water we swim in, it's like the water is transparent.

So when you look out in all directions, it's not being seen specifically.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, all glass, like you're looking through it, you're looking through it, but you're not able to actually observe it as a state of your, as a state, an embodied state that you're having, if you see what I mean.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just to unpack this one bit for Stephen, it's kind of like without a theory of air, you could just look forever and you could just have any model could replace this idea about what fills up space.

Then there's this chemical theory of air and there have been various chemical theories of air and whether there's four types of things and they mix or whether it's protons and neutrons and different ratios and things like that.

And then once you have a theory of air, you could ask things like, well, what if I compressed all of the quote invisible stuff in this room?

And all of a sudden it looks like blue or something.

It's like, whoa, it kind of is there.

There's unique experiments, there's unique predictions.

I'm taking something that was transparent in the niche that actually was real, ontologically real.

And then through attention and awareness and affordances, we're able to now like look at it.

So we've developed projective geometry and it's like, whoa, what if it really were projective geometry all along?

But then now with the projective geometric tools, we're coming back to experience that.

And it's actually something that Stephen and I were talking about just this weekend with a little bit like what people's experiences of perspective have been in the past.

because there is those sometimes funny pictures, at least comical sometimes, where it's like a person's face and it looks like it's from almost a cubist angle, but it's like a Renaissance painting.

And there's probably so much to say from an art history perspective about the evolution and the development of perspective,

But at the very least, it seems like people throughout time have been differentially excited by different types of representations of perspective.

People weren't doing photorealistic charcoal drawings in a different era, even if they could have had the technologies to do so.

So something's happening there with perspective and how it's changing the way that we interact with the visual world.

Cubism, of course, was shocking when it came out.

And so now, where are we with perspective?

There's a lot to say about that.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I mean, one of the things that's interesting with like imagined feelings in space is that they can be kind of transparent.

So if you like, what's the energy of someone or if I imagine the energies of people around me, it's like a quality, those qualities, they don't, like if you imagine something space, it doesn't become completely opaque.

It's not like you can't see that you're in the room anymore.

You know, so even if you're on stage as an actor and you imagine that you're in a scene with a king and it's an empty stage and you start to imagine the whole stage, it's still slightly transparent in relation to the physical


SPEAKER_01:
perceptive conscious physical space if that makes sense so those two things are kind of interplaying yep yeah and and to bring that to the affordances and the field of affordances field of consciousness it's like the generative model isn't just of what the video camera would see if it were next to your head the generative model is actually generating this field of action that's scaled geometrically so that things that are closer to you and better within reach are

seemingly at hand and things that are distant are seemingly distant and one example that steven and i were talking about was like there might be an object on the other side of my monitor that i'd have to kind of go around to reach and just right with a quick judgment it feels like something on the other side of my monitor is actually further away than something that might be linearly closer um or further away sorry but like i can reach it directly just by reaching my hand over i can

reach two feet over with my arm, just grab it.

But the 18 inches linearly to the monitor, I have to end up doing a 36 inch route so it feels longer away.

So even within our at-hand concepts and the way that we talk about what is accessible or what is relevant, these all have to do with the grasping and the comprehending and the action distortion of a space.

So there's really a lot here about the perspectives that we take.

And if we say there's one perspective and it's mine,

There's one perspective and it's my cultures.

Or is it, hey, we're all at this party and we're all going to have different perspectives of this party.

Okay, which perspectives can hang?

Which ones can't?

Those are the kinds of discussions that you get to there instead of, is it right, wrong the way I'm seeing it?

Because you know, not everyone's going to see the party like you see it because no one's head is overlapping with your perception because everyone's affordances and location are different.

For example, Sasha,


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I really appreciated in this paper the kind of connection

we're always talking about on this stream between taking in information and acting.

And so it's this feedback loop of two things.

And I really like this converting thinking about our space into thinking about the space of affordances so that it's not just a blank slate of information that you could access or not, but it's really what you are able to do with that

information and how you're going to act on it.

So yeah, I just thought that was a really nice connection and fits in very well with what we're talking about and kind of builds up this similar theme of how you're going to connect action and perception.


SPEAKER_01:
And just one other example that that kind of made me think about is like when I'm dissecting an insect under a microscope, it's very small movements of the fingers, but in the field of vision of a microscope will swing the forceps like, you know, 30 degrees.

So it'll be a radical motion under the microscope.

But it has the exact same embodiment feel as like swinging one's arm, almost as if what matters is how much I'm seeing my body move within a visual field and how radical of an affordance it is, like flailing my arm versus a more fine-tuned movement.

But a fine-tuned movement with the arm is like one inch, but that's represented by a certain number of degrees.

And that ends up being like visually almost the same number of degrees that I can move the forceps.

So even though it's at a different spatial scale, because the attention and the affordances are down at that scale, and I have the visual ability, the umwelt, to perceive at that smaller scale, which couldn't be seen if it were the naked eye, it takes on a feeling like it's in the regular vision, regular body world.

And then also the forceps don't have nerves, but they're sensitized.

So there's a lot to say and think about there.

A few questions that I just wrote down here, just like these are, of course, perennial questions.

They're not gonna be answered in a couple minutes, but what's exciting about studying consciousness?

What do we agree on?

What do people agree on?

What do people disagree on?

And then also, what do people agree is unknown.

What are the known unknowns?

Where might there be unknown unknowns?

And then also to always return to what is active inference doing here?

What could it do here?

What could some other theory do here?

What do you think, Shannon?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so your story about the forceps and the microscope reminded me of the first example of extended consciousness that I learned about in a philosophy of mind class in undergrad.

And our professor was talking about

divers who are, they're not actually diving, they're in a room and they're controlling a camera like on a little submarine that's underwater.

And they start to feel like they are the submarine so much so that their body's actually responding to the pressure differences that they would experience if they were diving.

So if the submarine comes up very fast, they'll actually feel like they're experiencing the bends

that would happen if they were a diver coming up so fast.

I don't know if this is a true story, I've never looked it up, but it's very intriguing that your consciousness can be so extended that you end up having these embodied effects that you perhaps could empirically measure if you had some sensors on these people as they were experiencing these extended conscious moments.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Lee?

I was just going to ask Shannon,

Do you know whether that depends on whether the people controlling the remote software have previously dived as well, so they kind of got the embodied experience as part of their model?


SPEAKER_04:
I think for specifically the bends it would, or maybe they would have to know about the bends because that's a very specific thing that doesn't happen to your body in any other case.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

One thing that makes me think of is like the drop in a techno song when everything's building and the tension's building, but that's actually a cultural regime of affordance and different sub genres of electronica or different people who are, aren't familiar with electronica, they might get chills going down their spine.

It's like, oh, this is the sickest drop ever, but somebody else might just not be tuned into that regime of attention.

And therefore it's like, okay, wait, what happened?

Why is it just, why did the drums stop?

Yeah.

Something like that.

So similarly, it's like the diver, if they're a part of this deep generative model and then they're emulating it or they're simulating it somehow, this diving, then they may have a deeply learned reflex about changing their blood pressure.

Let's just go with Stott experiment being vaguely feeling true, just ish, that you could...

If you're doing a first-person shooter immersive video game, your heart is going to start pounding, not because you need increased blood flow.

That's a psychological response.

So trained psychological responses in increasingly immersive environments like AR and VR will...

generate physiological responses and that is actually part of the thrill that was i mean there's so much happening here and it doesn't really go into the ar vr here but like what if we unprojected our projective geometry what would happen or what about these uh sort of alice in wonderland type simulators for the ar and the vr where you reach towards something but your arm moves twice as fast

or you reach towards something and your arm doesn't move and you crash into stuff and it just feels like you're like super disoriented or the glasses are flipped.

All of these transformations are just super deep interventions into the structure of sense and action.

So there's a lot that is now possible here with how we can on the fly remap these things.

In 1920, the cubist could put a light on one side of a cube and draw it and then

halfway through the drawing moved the light and to get a different perspective and that was kind of cool like a mashup of perspectives in one two-dimensional plane but now you could be experiencing like a lot more stuff happening and the cube could be mutating it could be a hypercube and stuff like that it's kind of next level with respect to our geometry and how it relates to our sense and action any other thoughts or questions here before we go to the functional features

Just think of them as they come up.

So the authors highlight four functional features of consciousness, which are global optimization and resilience, global availability, motivation of action and modulation of attention, and simulation enhancement.

so their goals are basically these are the things that they say notice that it's very mechanism independent it doesn't say you got to have neurons you need glia it doesn't say it has to be at this time scale these are all like things that you might say about a cybernetic system a control theory action perception system so these features are the abstract functional features of consciousness which through neurophenomenology will get brought into the brain

perhaps but just at the functional level these are the functions of consciousness and they write we claim that the overall function of consciousness again is it that consciousness is getting spun off by systems that have these functions or is consciousness literally the function that maps back into the system and gives these features um presence in the world

claim that the overall feature function of consciousness is to address a general cybernetic problem or problem of control consciousness enables again ambiguous a situated organism with multiple sensory channels to navigate its environment and satisfy its biological and derived needs efficiently this entails minimizing and predictive this entails minimizing predictably erroneous representations of the world and maximizing preference satisfaction

A good model of consciousness must be able to explain how this is accomplished.

The PCM thus emphasizes the following interrelated functional features of consciousness.

So ask yourself, if there was a robot that could do intermodal sensory things and memory and it was doing counterfactual simulations and it had motivated looking action and modulation of attention, global availability of some variables or some processes and it was resilient,

Within some resilience, of course, we're not resilient to getting hit with a hammer on the head.

We are resilient to, you know, a train coming at us from a mile away, but not an inch away.

I mean, it's always going to be about where you draw the bounds.

Oh, I mean, that's out of bounds.

You don't need to be resilient to that kind of an insult to this drug, but to this molecule you are.

So I would just ask if we had a robot that had some of these features, would we include it in the conscious club?

Or would Dennett include it in the club?

No.

Would a panpsychist?

Yeah, they might say, well, it's something it's like to be that robot.

But where are we really getting if we just say it's something it's like to be this robot and this thermometer and this networking system?

Well, if the only way we can ask it is the exact same affordances that we as observers have today, like measuring electromagnetic frequencies or something like that, then aren't we gonna be debating these things forever?

Because no one really disagrees that these things all appear to happen for systems that we think are complex goal-directed systems, like humans and cats and things like that.

But isn't the question about what else we're gonna do beyond this?

So hopefully that's where the projective geometry, it's kind of like that's the hook that they hang their coat on, so to speak.

They're going to bring it all to projective geometry, and they're going to say, this is what explains all these functional features and the invariance, which we'll get to in a second.

and it makes some other predictions that would be unique and testable so they're going to say yeah there's probably a lot of ways that theories of consciousness could explain these features like attention schema theory or the global workspace theory or integrated information theory all these different frameworks for consciousness but

we're going to take these things and we're going to go in a new direction by talking about the projective geometry.

So what supports in their eyes the need for not just a quantitative or a formalized framework, but also specifically the projective geometry?

And for them, it's about these phenomenological invariants.

So it's kind of like universal basic income.

It's like, it's universal.

These are invariant.

What part of that don't you get?

So these are the things that generalized systems of consciousness, you could debate with them whether these systems that they're talking about are the right ones or whatever, but these are the invariant features of experience and phenomenology.

And they have them as relational, phenomenal, intentionality, which is that all experience and all consciousness is about relations, especially between one and another system, like internal and external relationship, even though as we're going to kind of see, it's a little bit trippier than that, but basically it's about the relation of like the I to not I. It's like I thou, I you, these kinds of things.

There's a situated 3D spatiality.

And that means that you're starting, you're in a situated spot.

You're not just everywhere experiencing a 3D simulation, but it's always perceived as from a situated spot in spatial dimensions, three of them.

And then through time, three and four, there's this multimodal synchronic integration, which is in a snapshot, it's multimodal.

And then four is through time, everything's happening.

so this is kind of capturing through space or through senses and then through time saying yep you're at a concert and there's the light and the sound and things bumping into you all of that is happening in this integrated way you don't just experience those separately um at the very least the illusion appears to cover integration across senses which are qualitatively different like a chemical is different than a photon from the sun

And then there's this temporal integration through time, which is kind of related to the perceived event durations.

There's messages that can be flashed on a screen or sounds that can be outside of your awareness, but there's also ones that can be within your awareness at a certain duration of time.

So if it flashes for a second, it's

able to be at a time scale that's integrated into consciousness um there might be time scales that influence you below that but it doesn't become aware so like that's kind of conscious and subconscious but it's dealing with that um a little bit uh

blurry about whether consciousness is just the whole neuro system and anything that gets integrated into the nervous system through time is considered to be temporally integrated.

Or is it that there's experiences that actually play out over certain timescales that we experience?

And then lastly, kind of related to one is this subjective character, which is that it's about the subject.

And one and five are very similar, but in fact, they hold that two through five are all implicated in one.

Okay, so they have the functional features that's pretty abstract and cybernetic.

And then they're like, okay, what are the invariants, almost the axioms that we want to be building from that we want our theory to be able to address?

And then they laid them all out, one through five, and then they're like, yep,

Turns out that two through five all collapsed back onto one.

So really, one is the part we need to explain in how they've set up the problem.

So it's relational.

It's about the relationship between the agent and the world.

It's phenomenal.

It's based upon experience.

And it deals with intentionality.

And that is going to bring in agency, affordances.

all these kinds of things that have come into play.

Okay, any thoughts on the invariance or the functional features of consciousness?

Because in a sense, that's what frames the paper and it's what frames the discussion, the kinds of answers they're going to come to is these are their checklist for how they'll know they'll succeed.

Or this is the recipe, these are the ingredients.

This is like what they're cooking with for the paper.

So if anyone thinks of it, they can raise their hand.

I just want to clarify that because it's like, you could think about this stuff all day, but at least for a journal club, it's like, what did the authors actually specify to do?

Did they answer something that, yeah.

So Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I suppose also coming back to what Lee was saying about

perceiving things in terms of our cognition in relation to our history i.e when we started getting into perspective painting and thinking about things that way you get this sense of how much is it about us constructing cognition as a cultural way of being how much are we actually constructing this relational phenomenal intentionality

culturally and that then because in indigenous cultures you see they think a lot more about shape shifting and the land being much more fluid and enfolded um whereas we tend to have it much more linear and structured and straight edged so there's there's some question there about

how much this consciousness becomes like a construct that we actually put on the world.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

One researcher who's done a lot there is the Professor Tanya Lerman and collaborators at Stanford.

And she studies like hearing voices and various cultures.

And so what is the difference between a society that says, hey, the voices that you hear are your ancestors and they're telling you cool stuff or it's

molecular thing and it's all random or it's bad voices that are actually getting into your head that is going to be shading the experience of the people experiencing voices and so when we're talking about consciousness what if one society they tell everyone and multi-generations it's completely baked into their culture it's like yeah it's an illusion you know denit-topia everybody it's an illusion and just the ideas that come to your head they're literally defined by being illusory

And you're basically just in this perpetual auto gaslighting scenario.

Just don't worry about the policies we're pushing on you.

Just go with it.

And then another culture says, actually, the spark of awareness is what should be followed, even if it appears to disassociate from social norms.

That's going to be a different outcome.

And so all of those different cultures could contain individuals that are 100% convinced that they're right.

So being right isn't the same thing or thinking you're right isn't the same thing as having an answer to the consciousness question.

And yeah, there's a lot of implications with how we actually are constructing our world and our perspective.

So that is very related to Lee's point.

I think he's frozen for a second, but yeah, I agree.

That was a really good point about how it's like we're in feedback.

We're doing niche modification for how we perceive and what affordances we have in the consciousness space.

If you train up people in an insight meditation tradition, since they're children or something, they're going to have affordances in their consciousness.

It's another framework, good or bad, layer on top of that with the judgment.

But depending on what people are taught about their consciousness growing up, that is going to...

color their experience and what affordances and what trajectories they take later on um so very interesting stuff and i wonder like what the authors think about that or how they conceptualize these issues so just to cover this projective geometry bit because they write the concept of 4d four-dimensional projective transformation is central to the model

as it yields an account of the link between perception, imagination, and multi-point of view action planning.

So they're going to try to link some of the cool stuff like we've talked about in this action perception loop.

We've asked, where is imagination?

Where is imagination and speculation and all these different things that we appear or experience engaging in?

And then also, how do we square the circle with the fact that we're so situated in our affordances, yet we can also imagine things that aren't seemingly related to our affordances?

Like a city's grid, it doesn't seem like it's tied directly to my affordances.

Of course, in a traveling sense it is, but it doesn't depend on where I'm sitting in my building in a different city.

Geometry is about the shape and the size of things, whereas topology is about how they're connected.

So in topology, we talk a lot about nodes and edges and about connectedness and structure, whereas in geometry, structure is related to angles and sides and edges and things like that.

And Euclidean geometry is kind of like linear algebra.

It is a specific case of geometry where certain prerequisites are true, like parallel lines don't intersect and the angles of a triangle are 180 degrees.

There are

non-Euclidean geometries, just like there are non-linear models and non-Euclidean geometries, which is kind of like the outgroup to the exclusion of Euclidean.

So it includes a vast number of esoteric geometries.

And the way that you can move from some geometries to other geometries is through a projection.

and that projection is called a map so it's kind of like seeing the map that's in front of you it's like it's a map it maps your representation onto the territory so this is like a map that maps one territory onto a different territory or one geometric projection of a territory onto another so you could map between two different kinds of maps of the world you can map between a flat one and a spherical one with certain distortions taken along and things like that

But the key mathematical features are that in the Euclidean paradigm, there aren't special points.

There aren't points at infinity.

It just is like a vast plane that doesn't end.

There's no horizon.

There might be an angle of vision that you can't resolve below, but there isn't a horizon and a flat plane.

And then the origin is arbitrary in that every point you choose, you could just say, oh, well, this is 0, 0, 0.

And the local neighborhood is exactly the same here as it is everywhere else.

It's all square.

Contrast it with non-Euclidean geometries, which are like, you can imagine, though there are many non-Euclidean types, have features that include things like special points or points at infinity.

Like there is a ring of points at infinity and they're all equally infinite far away.

There can be horizons, there's non-arbitrary origins, all this kind of stuff.

And they're basically going right.

The perspectival phenomenal space, so our perspective of what we're experiencing in a geometric understanding, allows us to locate ourselves and navigate in an ambient space that is nevertheless essentially Euclidean.

So you can be in a 90 degree room, but you can be having this like wacky, distorted, hyperbolic experience of this 90 degree room and kind of seamlessly integrating across that.

Even if it was a bunch of cubes that were connected, you can climb through it, you can navigate in this Euclidean world

and measure the angles they're 90 degrees it's all euclidean but your perception is still going to have this distorted effect where things closer to you are um seemingly different than things further from you and that means that the angles as you look at them unless you're in a very specific position will not look like 90 degrees look around the room you're in even the corners don't look like 90 degrees

um and they basically say because um the euclidean space has no privilege points no points at infinity no horizon no non-arbitrary origin it very strongly suggests that a non-euclidean frame must be operating with the help of sensory motor calibrations to preserve the sense of invariance of objects across the multiple perspectives adopted and relate the situated organism to the ambient euclidean space so like put your hand on a 90 degree angle you

can pretty much feel from proprioception it's 90 degrees you look down it's not 90 degrees feels normal everything's chill because we're experiencing this distortion of the euclidean space okay any thoughts on the projective geometry or about geometry or where would geometry fit into a consciousness model i just

concur with them that there's some functional attributes that would point towards non-Euclidean spaces, but then every time I'm like, wait, what in the hell with geometry?

Just how is it giving us experience again?

I guess that's sort of the question, but yeah, Sasha.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I also thought this was really trippy.

I really liked the 9.0 kind of pre-digestion of this topic.

So I found that really helpful.

Yeah, I think this is kind of trying to walk us through the possible points of view on consciousness that not only does each individual have a different perspective necessarily in Euclidean space, like we're all seeing it from different perspectives.

locations, let's say, but that even the mapping is different between individuals onto our own non-Euclidean projection of experience.

And so I think that's kind of many steps to walk through to recognize how different

we see the world and how we can define this word perspective.

So I think that is really an important aspect of understanding consciousness is where individual perspective is baked into the whole process.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, and it makes me think about like, let me see it through your perspective or do you see it how I see it?

So we have visual metaphors for alignment and then we have put, you know, walk a mile in someone else's shoes or put yourself in their shoes.

Those are embodied and active metaphors of understanding what else someone's experience is like.

And then what we're saying here is somehow,

we should integrate that how you see it and how you walk it together so that your perspective is based upon both how you see it and the shoes that you're walking in so your actual embedded extended body and how you walk in those shoes and there's people for whom they can't walk a mile in any shoes so what are other metaphors that help us go beyond just simple walking to really understand that more generally we're talking about like perception and action

And that because perception and action are linked in us, in fact, perspectivally linked in us, it's also that way in someone else's.

So it's not just about coming to agreement with what they think or believe or state they believe, nor is it about specifically reenacting their action sequences, which we wouldn't either be able to do or wouldn't even have the same perspective on them as they do.

how are we going to collaborate?

And so there's like a lot of interesting stuff.

And I would hope that this provides a little bit more structure to sometimes discussions about everything from issues people disagree on to accessibility.

How could we, whether we bring in projective geometry or not, how can we just start

with the idea that everyone is gonna have a unique perspective and then work for something collective rather than get to this point where it's like, well, we disagree.

Okay, well, now what?

Yeah, Alex, go ahead.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I just wanted to say this brings up, it reminds me of general relativity in a way, like conscious is some sort of fundamental, it's a, if,

Two folks are in different perspectives, and they can observe the order of events occurring in different ways.

If they can observe events occurring out of order based on their perspective and a third remote thing that they're looking at.

Maybe consciousness is the way of self-observance.

of a larger system when the system is essentially a manifold.

The consciousness is the recognition of relativity in actual space, right?

And this projective geometry seems to kind of be getting there.

If we are unable to observe the entire world and we're only able to observe from our perspective,

consciousness is the recognition that that is an invariant across space and other agents should have the same, I don't know, phenomena.

I apologize for


SPEAKER_01:
uh terminology i was like no that's that's awesome i i i really like this you said the recognition of general relativity is consciousness and so in euclidean space it's like the invariant is angle is going to sum to 360 and this is going to work this way and the parallel okay so those are geometrical invariants

But because the world is so quintessentially perspectival and embedded and inactive, actually the invariant is this relationship of action and perception.

And that you move in a apparently non-Euclidean space

because the invariant is actually like the locus of what is generating awareness is um consciousness and then the two examples that came to mind are first off you hear a noise with each ear at a different um time and you hear yours you know in photons probably hit lights at your eyes at different times but also they see different things but you get a monocular perception from two different eyes

And, you know, but you can push one eye, you can violate an expectation and you can see two images, but basically when it works, it's binocular.

And then I was thinking of a concert where like the bass is on one side and the treble speakers are on the other.

And then it's like the group, they're actually hearing the events in a different order.

One person hears one note before the other one and vice versa, but especially locally, that doesn't mean it's incoherent.

So what is happening there?

That's kind of like this group consciousness question.

And just thanks for bringing it to the general relativity level.

because also with the general relativity innovation, it was a movement from a Cartesian, Newtonian, Euclidean, all these things, movement towards like, yeah, maybe gravity isn't like a nonlinear force operating on a Euclidean field, but rather it is a non-Euclidean distortion of another thing.

And so there's really a lot to say there.

And then also there's like a lot of inroads to quantum and consciousness, whether it's Hemeroff and Penrose and about the work on microtubules or whether it's just other more broader physics grounded theories, there's so much there about where quantum itself might fit in.

So a lot of points of contact there with non-Euclidean geometry perspective and, um,

And then the fact that we don't overlap with any other system in terms of our perspective.

And so then how do we take that?

And it's like, well, just like you can build a computer in a world of general relativity, can't we design information and sensemaking and attention systems that work in a world where people have different perspectives?

I'd hope so.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I like this, like, really broadening the idea of relationships because I think what's really helpful with this diagram is it, and talking about the map as a way of projecting between types of spaces rather than this idea of projection as representations in the mind being projected on the world, which it's kind of the slight danger with that language, you know, because it gets used in that representational way.

If it's somehow...

the way that we engage a type of spatial arrangement, almost bringing in spatial cognition work, but bringing it much more into the body.

And I think this relates maybe some of the work with Harry Heft.

He does some really interesting work in the world of spatial cognition.

And it'd be interesting to see his perspective on this.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, what you said about projection, so that's like in the psychotherapy, it's like, you're not seeing it how it is, you're projecting, you're envisioning it, you're biased, you're projecting onto the world, you're projecting that emotions onto them.

But it's like, what if you start from, hey, it is a projection, you are in a projection, you are the projection, your experience is the projection,

of all these things that we're talking about.

So it's like, let's start from that point of view that you're not treating this person like a robot.

You're assuming they're having emotions.

So you're engaged in this relational projection that's intentional about your relationship.

So how could we connect, for example, optimism about the relationship to how you are going to map their facial expression onto your behavior, not onto what do they think,

but on how you're going to act in a certain situation that's a pretty uh different context so i think that's like very uh interesting to bring the psychological projection that almost the psychotherapeutic use of the term to geometric progression and i'm sorry geometric projection and then connecting non-euclidean geometric projections to um general relativity and to control theory and about systems design all these different things

So just a few quotes that we can kind of go through here.

Basically, this is just a summary of what they believe the PCM's strengths are and how they summarize it, which is that the structure geometrically of multimodal lived conscious experience closely approximates a projective three-space.

So that's like a three-dimensional space with kind of this geometers lingo.

on which a projective transformation, I believe PGL4 is saying it's a four-dimensional projection projected down, but we could hear from a geometer with a little bit more information here, or what would the physics community notate this as?

Our model fits intuitive data, but it also helps account for other phenomena that might seem at first unconnected, including working perspectival imagination, inferences about the points of view and aims of others, like the intentional stance, modulo active inference,

and many peculiar phenomena associated with consciousness.

So OBE, out-of-body experience, hiatoscopy, derealization, oceanic, and mystical experiences.

It also sheds light on some visual phenomena, which we'll definitely get to.

And it sounds like there's a bunch of papes and they're probably writing more.

So if any of the authors want to, you know, share what they're thinking or doing now, that's cool.

Here is an example we talked about a little earlier, which is that when we consider, like think about the Empire State Building, we think about it in perspective, like looking up at the Empire State Building or just floating away far away so that it basically looks Euclidean because it's far away.

it's gonna be both conceptualized independently of any particular point of view.

Like you could zoom in in your little brain AutoCAD simulator and imagine yourself on the 40th floor looking at a 90 degree angle in an I-beam.

And you wouldn't have any deception that it's actually Euclidean 90 degrees.

But then at the same time, we can naturally co-experience almost this like looking up at it and understanding that no, it's still not gonna look 90 degrees.

So that's what optimally allows with this projection.

the perspectival accessing of Euclidean models of the world in memory for appraisal and updating of such models through active sampling.

So we get to benefit from the sort of statistical reality, realism, let's say at least, not reality, of having a model that's actually

rectilinear for example but then also have this total fluid projection that allows us to act and perspective a lot perspectively understand ourself in that space so there's the relative perception and then there's that perspective independent objective knowledge base which doesn't mean it's correct it just means that it's about an object it's of an object it's not truth objectivity it's objective like it's about this box on my desk

and protective geometry helps functionally connect subjectivity so being about the subject that's relational and then epistemic objectivity again not truth just knowledge about objects allowing us to see consciousness as a kind of mediator between the situated organism and the objective world it inhabits very cool stuff they also write so active vision

thus becomes like a palpation of a 3D spatial user surface to feel the epistemic affordances that are quantified by expected free energy.

This anticipatory palpation with temporal depth requires a generative model that encompasses the consequences of actions and their effective values.

So in some other work by Frist and colleagues where they've looked at, for example, reading and informational forging with the ocular motor, with the eye muscles.

And so the way that the eye scans around the page, it's not based upon maximal reward.

It's based upon the maximally informative observation that could be made.

And what is that observation maximally informative in the framework of?

Well, top-down priors about semantics.

So when somebody is coming towards you, there's like subconscious eye-saccade movements that first assess, for example, the broad category of person that it belongs to.

And then it will zoom in on different components of the face and culturally informed areas of the face that might signal different types of things like...

whether there's going to be a good relationship in the future or not and so it is so interesting what the authors did which is to tie this information foraging optimal foraging info foraging info thermodynamics perspective take it from the cybernetics where it already had been very well entrenched and now say like that's our experience of vision that's why even when your eyes are circadian at the level that you're actually perceiving it's actually a lot smoother

Because our experience is sort of smoothed out over those underlying saccades.

That being said, those saccades are driven in a top-down way as a compromise with top-down forces, let's say, by culturally informed priors.

Your eyes won't know how to scan if you don't know how to read the language.

You won't know which parts of the letter are informative, which parts of the word.

But when you're fluent in the language, then we know that like all the letters in the middle can be mixed up.

because you're really just doing a generative model of the text.

And that turns out that includes information about font and includes sentence structure, all these other things.

You can't understand the sentence with the words mixed up in a different order.

If the letters are in the right order, but the words are mixed, the semantics don't allow the top down to inform the bottom up.

So your visual foraging is bunk because you're going to be looking at the difference between a B and a D, but you're not going to understand what the sentence's meaning is because that's the level we're actually at.

This framing of expected free energy through projective transformation in imagination provides a method for envisioning how things would look, feel, or be from another, hopefully better location, and thus guide action.

It's like, where would I be looking at if I were figuring out what this word were under my generative assumptions about language?

It is important to emphasize that according to the projective consciousness model, free energy minimization is always operating as the fundamental algorithm governing the field of consciousness and thus there's never an end to the process as there's never in practice a solution that reduces free energy to zero, which because it's defined as this informational distance against the non-stationary

realism world uh it means that basically it's always going to be bounded by zero and this i thought was very funny hegel might be happy to know that on the projective consciousness model consciousness is thus always somehow unhappy even when it reaches the best possible states available to it

so this is the uh well known hegelian dialectic of thesis antithesis synthesis often shown as a loop as if it were just this run around rock paper scissor here it's actually like a virtuous or a vicious spiral and it just showing how this

semantic ordering of events with thesis, antithesis, and synthesis, it's like it never ends.

Free energy minimization, optimization, cybernetic control processes, multi-scale evolutionary adaptive systems, they don't end.

They can't take a break.

There can be relaxing times, but they can't rest in the actual like stasis.

There can be stasis with respect to a certain dimension, but that's reflected by this seething activity that actually structures the strange attractor so that the system returns to these homeostatic states

preferred, expected, and optimal states.

And if you prefer, over evolutionary time, something that isn't optimal or isn't functional, you're not going to exist.

That model will not exist of the statistical regularities in their niche because their preferences, the observations they seek out, will include things like toxins or jumping off of cliffs.

These are not adaptive observations interoceptively or from a visual perspective.

And so you end up not seeing models that prefer those things.

And so it's like this endless preference hunt, policy adaptive selection stuff happening.

Pretty cool stuff by the authors.

Any thoughts before we just look through the figures before we close out?

See you, Sash.

Thank you.

So just to spend a couple of minutes on each figure and just see what they kind of do.

And then maybe we could either reach out to the author or just everybody who's listening to this, treat it as an open call to come participate.

If you're curious about this or something does or doesn't add up, let's hear about it.

Cool.

So figure one is this account of psychological phenomena.

And I think it's almost like Minecraft helps us understand their simulation.

So we'll just imagine that they're doing this in Minecraft.

So in the A is like the builder's mode of Minecraft, which ironically is still from a perspective.

Even though they're trying their hardest to represent a Euclidean world, it turns out that can only be done from like the position of a camera.

wherever that camera is.

There's no location independent representation of this Euclidean space, unless they did like just a matrix.

And they said, look, just render it yourself.

But when you rendered it, it would have to be from a perspective.

You can't have all the perspectives at once or flatten it in a dimension that doesn't work like that.

But then the lived space S2, which is, they're using geometric notation.

I'm not totally sure about it.

Maybe again, a geometer could come on, but like basically what they're saying is, even if you have this block of interest, when you put a person's head there or the locus of their generative model, they're gonna see things in this distorted way.

B is the anti-space beyond the plane at infinity.

So I don't know exactly what it is, but it was interesting.

They said with a transparent plane at infinity.

So it's actually bringing this like transparent notion back.

But this is like, it's the opposite of what you,

see in some way i i guess it's like it's the yeah it's everything what you don't see it's like when you're watching the sunset what is not being seen and maybe is the anti-space and then this um god's eye projection are like somehow a transformation of the space that includes a lot of the planes of symmetry they write almost all the space is visible but completely warped and the world model manifests as structures with complex symmetries

So that's quite interesting because whether you agree with it being God's eye or not, I would say it's just another projection of the system or just another, at least as we're seeing it, but maybe it's in like a ton of dimensions or it has like other trippy features.

But this is kind of like

highlighting just the uh the the invariances of the visual field but that doesn't guide action like if you're a baseball player and you're running towards the ball maybe there's like you know the one symmetry would be all the grass when you look down and all the blue sky when you look up and then there's a ball and that's like breaking the symmetry in some very nuanced way in a dynamic way

But what do you want to actually see as the ball comes towards you?

Well, it's actually what we do see, which is that the ball gets bigger and apparently more manipulatable.

And we can do increased resolution on things like its speed when it's further away.

That helps us estimate where to go.

But when it's close, we can fine tune.

So it's like exactly what you would want as an embedded agent is what we're experiencing.

And so we're not experiencing this like, whoa, it's just like hidden symmetries, nor are we experiencing like the Minecraft or the Grand Theft Auto perspective.

We're in our own embedded situated experience, relationally engaging with affordances and the field of consciousness and the field of affordances are very related.

Interesting stuff.

great representations at very least just stuff to think about and learn this one i thought was very informative so this is a cue um we can think of this visual illusion as a cue that's ambiguous so it's called the necker cube and basically depending on how you see it cough cough you can either see the bigger wider side as like pointing up into the left

which is left and right already are relational spatial, and down and to the right.

So it's like, you know, let's just have a quick show of hands.

Raise your hand if in looking at either or both of these, option one is going to be, I see it basically going up to the left, two is down at the right, and three is it switches for me.

Okay, option one, who sees it go up and to the left primarily?

Okay, option two, who sees it go down and to the right primarily?

And then who sees it just like rapidly fluctuating?

Okay, yeah.

I'd say it seems like people raise their hand in every category, small sample size, but yes, it's an illusion.

It's something that is ambiguous.

And the reason why is it's a three-dimensional cube.

At least it suggests, it hints at being a three-dimensional cube, but of course it just lines on a page, okay?

We unpack that in a very generous, optimistic way as being a two-dimensional drawing of a cube.

If a child drew that, you'd say the child's trying to draw a cube.

They're not drawing like a logo with like, you know, a double helix and two, you know, it suggests a cube.

It hints at a cube.

but it's a two-dimensional projection onto a piece of paper.

Well, duh.

But it turns out that without shading one of the sides or adding a light, which implies a perspective, it's like you can flip between these two solutions, so to speak, of how to represent it.

And so U in relation to this cube is actually this ambiguity that's being flipped back and forth between, and then specific situations might cause it to prefer one side or the other.

Yeah, Lee, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_05:
I think this, I mean, I'm really interested in this because it kind of relates to the point about unconscious simulations.

So if you're looking at it and it flips, which it can do and it does do, if you start to pay more attention to that, you realize that it doesn't just flip.

There's a sense in which there's a kind of an unconscious doing, which is probably I'm assuming to do with the predictions that you're making.

So, you know, if I pay really close attention, what I notice is that I'm isolating or tracing maybe different portions of the cube in different ways and then labelling them in different ways.

So I kind of go, oh, that's, you know, if this bit is a corner or that's the front or that's the back.

So and it's that that actually makes it kind of shift.

And I think it points to this idea, you know, like that, you know, the perceptual world is kind of a co-construction.

in a way, but it's that, I suppose what I'm interested in is that it's a kind of a doing, you know, there's a way in which you're active in it, which is more often than not transparent, you know, we don't necessarily, so for example, a more real world example might be,

If we look at a tree, we might label it an object.

Typically, we do.

But actually, it's kind of more of a process.

But we don't see it that way because we just kind of look at it.

And for all intents and purposes, if it's not salient, we wouldn't notice that.


SPEAKER_01:
but anyway yeah well no it's super interesting and the semantics and the illusion it's like there's the old woman young woman illusion um and then there's like the bunny and the uh duck and those the semantic level can be like i'm looking at a bunny

and then you'll basically not see the duck as much.

Okay, so the semantics can inform us, especially when you label for action, like this is the side with a handle.

All of a sudden be like, no, I can feel it dragging.

I'm only seeing now one of those two sides fixed.

I'm keeping my eyes right where I want the handle to be.

And all of a sudden it feels easier to keep it in one zone.

And then also it's like, there's illusions that are super ambiguous for some people and other people like, I'm sorry, I just don't see the young woman in that illusion.

I just don't see the bunny.

I don't know what you're, I don't see that dress as that color.

Remember that whole thing?

So that's like, because of the subconscious, you know, the iceberg of the actual neuro phenomenology, the underpinnings and the mechanisms, some people are near a critical transition point in their perception where just by scanning their eyes, the ballerina will flip one way or the other.

Other people,

Because of how their deep priors guide their visual foraging and their information foraging and their generation of model, they just will never be able to have the ballerina switch directions, never be able to have the duck go one way.

If you haven't seen a duck, you're not going to see it in the back of the head of a bunny.

Yeah, Stephen?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I saw an interesting presentation by Burr Lotto.

He does some work down in neuroscience with Cirque du Soleil, actually.

And he showed this picture.

I think it was a fairly similar picture.

And he said that we mostly see it from above because we expect to see things from above first, which I thought was kind of interesting.

So there's kind of like you do end up with this kind of inactive situated piece because it's like, well,

I'm sucking something here.

I'm probably looking from above.

If I'm looking from above, these things pop out.

And then, well, maybe it's... So, you know, I thought that was kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
That reminds me of children's cereal being put lower on the aisle to get them in their zone of affordances.

It's in their proximal zone.

So you can do niche-based partitioning of surveillance capitalism.

Great.

I love it.

And then also there's a lot of other natural situations where we can track what an animal looks at.

And yeah, they're looking at things that are actionable.

and that's like us grabbing something from the top there's not maybe foraging for branches you don't visualize it from the top but that's something that we can do but really we specialize on picking up things that were above okay let's look at just this last two figures so figure three i think is uh related to this uh paper 2018 paper that they mentioned in the very end for more details on this family of simulations but essentially it's showing like multiple views

of the expectation map and the prior belief map.

And basically an agent has to move from the left side to the right side.

So like it moves from, here's its left, here it's starting and it has to move through this pit.

I don't know if that's a bad state or what about it, but basically here it is blue.

It believes there's a goal over here.

It's gonna pierce into this darker blue with its zone of proximal awareness, essentially.

Move through the pit, resolve uncertainty about what actions to take.

Here, the action path is simple.

Just keep walking in a straight line.

even though it looks like narrow.

And then finally it gets in contact with the goal state purple.

And so from its local geometrically distorted point of view, projected point of view, there's a free energy thermometer.

And it's like, first it scans around and then it's like, okay, I'm going to go that way towards the goal and reduce my uncertainty.

And then it's just getting lit up.

And that's interestingly where dopamine comes into play.

It's something I would love to talk about soon because I've,

worked on dopamine, the free energy principle perspective, dopamine's usually thought about as a reward molecule.

Oh, it makes you happy, or it's the reward, you know, slot machines and all that.

But if we think about it in this context, dopamine firing patterns in this phase, anticipatory of the reward, actually have to do with free energy.

And when you get to the reward, your precision is confirmed because you already believe there was a reward there.

So actually, and this is shown in figure four,

As you approach the max zone of maximal information uncertainty reduction, that's when the free energy is getting out of control, so to speak.

And then when the goal is achieved, precision is achieved again.

when we think about what the neurophysiology actually is and how different interventions in our neurophysiology might map on to differences in what about somebody who doesn't have motivation even though they know the goal is right here but they're just not even if they can see there and other people say it's well lit you can just do it and they just don't have the motivation

Maybe someone else is here and they go, actually, I like the other side more or all these different things without passing judgment on what these states are, what level of analysis or what culture says they're rewarded or not.

Just how can we map some of these cybernetic parameters onto the neuro and eventually the phenomenological parameters?

And.

I think figure four gets out a lot of similar ideas because it's talking about this relationship between the lived space and the peripersonal space, one might almost be able to say, and also events that are perceived or imagined.

And that surprisal and then reduction of uncertainty, the sort of realignment, reordering of either action or the inference side to reduce surprise about the world, given this very deep generative model,

That's kind of where it's at.

And those were some really cool ideas brought up in the paper.

And just if anyone else wants to raise their hand, just a few more interesting notes on this figure I thought were cool.

They show a loop from perception to prediction of the change in free energy, imagination, and then action.

And so we've been talking a lot about cycles that go like perception, action, world.

Right, perception, agent, action, world, like that.

But here, this is a loop that happens in an organism or in a model of analysis.

Still, it's a nested Markov situation and it doesn't replace the other one.

It's not the other one.

The other one is about agents in the world.

And this is actually like saying in these reflexive conscious systems,

what is actually the loop that allows imaginative imaginative events to influence action so i i don't know if this is and it shows which directions different things can influence each other here it has perception and action influencing each other so maybe that's the other world in the agent loop but then here's these other processes playing out just very cool and then here's like the vector of time on a free energy landscape through time

it's projected and it's going downhill so to speak through time in this like vector weird way and as i understand it and i barely understand it that's where the math and the research is is it's like okay chemical reactions always go downhill well a candle burning is still downhill okay what about a cell well a cell is also downhill in a really specific way well all of our policy actions are downhill in what landscape

That's the free energy optimization.

How is the landscape changing?

That's a relationship of how our meta optimization proceeds amidst different kinds of environmental regularities.

So, yeah, that's all I would say about these figures before we close.

Anyone else have any last thoughts?

What would be something to go into more in 9.2?

Yep, let's do Alex or then Stephen.


SPEAKER_06:
I'll try to be brief.

It's interesting to me relating this to the energy principle that if you model these dynamic systems as agents which are trying to export energy from their identity by performing action in greater systems that they're a part of, their action actually creates new unknowns that they have to perceive and solve.

And maybe cognition is just the boundary between

direct feedback and the larger environment they are part of, like, maybe it is the self referential, like structure that necessarily creates itself.


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know.

Cool.

Awesome thoughts, Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, well, just thanks for unpacking these diagrams.

Because I had looked at this paper a fair bit once in the past, but some of this stuff was really hard.

So this is really helpful.

I think this idea that there is this imagination

that's going on is really useful.

I think, I don't know how many other papers really deal with this.

So I think that's quite interesting.

And one bit in the paper that we might want to think about that I did notice is this, it does say in the paper something about how this doesn't try and deal with all the subconscious dynamics underneath, but that it's about trying to find this kind of extra layer

of conscious imagination or projection so it might be interesting just to explore that next time


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thanks for the suggestion.

And everyone, thanks a lot for participating.

We will have follow-up forms for the participants.

It's in your calendar invite.

And via that mechanism for the live participants or just a Twitter or YouTube comment for anyone else, please provide us with feedback, suggestions, questions.

We'll be able to go into them for 9.2.

Good groundwork today.

And then, yeah, 9.2, we'll be able to talk a lot more, hopefully hear from a bunch of different perspectives.

stay in communication with team column it was a great discussion really thanks everyone for participating it's just like super fascinating stuff so thanks again for the conversation and we will talk next week everybody who's hearing it you're welcome to join next week or the following week but thanks again everybody and we'll see you later

## XYRKlh2c-ps

SPEAKER_10:
Hello everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

It is Active Inference stream 9.2 and it is December 1st, 2020.

So happy December to everyone.

Today we are really excited to have David, one of the authors of the paper we're going to be discussing.

So it will be just a great discussion today.

Really looking forward to it.

Welcome to Team Calm, everyone.

Team Calm is an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us on our website, at Twitter, via email, at our YouTube channel, or our public Keybase team and Keybase username.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

Also, all perspectives and backgrounds are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live stream goes, mute if there's noise in your background, raise your hand so that we can hear from everybody in the conversation and let's use respectful speech behavior.

Just some quick updates on upcoming Act-Inf streams.

Today we are in 9.2, December 1st, talking about this Projective Consciousness Model paper.

And in the rest of December, we'll be talking about two papers.

On December 8th and 15th, we'll be in Act-Inf 10 on a variational approach to scripts.

And on December 22nd and 29th, we'll be in Act-Inf 11.

on sophisticated, effective inference.

So two cool and very interesting papers that we'll be getting to.

But today in Act Inf 9, we're still continuing our discussion of projective consciousness model.

First, we're going to have some introductions and warmups.

Then we'll go through 9.2.

As with previous times, the projective consciousness model paper by Willa Ford et al., 2018,

And in last conversation in 9.1 and 9.0, we talked about some of the groundwork and the aims and claims of the paper, as well as going through the abstract and the roadmap.

Today, especially because we're lucky enough to have an author on board, we're gonna be talking about a few deeper and auxiliary questions, as well as going through a few key quotations and talking about maybe some of the implications for the paper

And then as always, we'll return to the figures and ask what each figure is representing or invoking.

So cool to have this discussion today and then different papers in 10 and 11.

And then we'll have a whole new suite of papers in 2021.

So get in touch with us if you want to participate.

first though with our nice small group today let's introduce ourselves we'll go around and give a short introduction or a check-in and then just pass it to somebody who has not spoken yet so i'm daniel i'm in california and i will pass it to adam uh hi um i'm adam uh adam saffron i'm in


SPEAKER_03:
Bloomington, Indiana at Indiana University as a postdoctoral researcher.

And I'm very interested in consciousness and recently came up with a theory I called integrated world modeling theory, which has a lot of overlap with David's work and which I find to be really fascinating and inspiring.

So glad to be here.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool, let's go to David.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello there, I'm David Rudroff.

I'm an associate professor at the University of Geneva, Switzerland, and I'm one of the co-authors of this paper and somebody who works on trying to model the role of consciousness, including its phenomenal aspects in, let's put it that way, generally speaking, biological cybernetics and more particularly, active inference.

Thank you for having me here today.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Let's go to Sasha.

Welcome, Sasha.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, everybody.

My name is Sasha.

I'm in Davis, California, and I study developmental neuroscience and how synapses form in the developing brain.

And I'm really interested to be part of this conversation today.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Then we'll go Alex and Stephen.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, everybody.

I'm Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I'm a researcher in Systems Management School, and I pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto, and I'm doing a practice-based PhD into participatory theatre approaches and the use of landscapes to explore themes.

And back to Daniel, I believe.


SPEAKER_10:
That introduces our nice group today.

As far as the warmup questions go, we'll just have people raise their hand whenever they feel like it.

And I'll just drop out the first two questions at the beginning and they are what interests you about studying consciousness and what is a way that we can study it.

So both David and Adam, I know you've thought a lot about this.

Maybe one of you two would want to go first here.

Yeah, David, how did you get to this area?


SPEAKER_02:
It's a long story, but to make it short, let's put it that way.

It's really related to philosophical and existential questions and the quest for turning this type of question into something scientific.

But actually, I was not that interested in psychology when I was younger.

I wanted to be either an astrophysicist or a conductor of orchestra, but I did not.


SPEAKER_10:
Interesting.

It's a different type of coordination that you're achieving now.

Stephen, and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'm interested in consciousness.

In a way, it's kind of a late arrival because I...

always thought that was something esoteric that i couldn't really participate in but um and uh i've suddenly seen this as starting to come center stage um and in both this active inference world but also being talked about more in in in the participatory theater environment so you know what what does it mean to be consciously aware to have imagination and what i

think is quite interesting is to try and move beyond this kind of pan-psychic approach that seems to permeate a lot of people who actually go there.

It's either something that's ignored and pushed to the side,

or it's everywhere and everything in this panpsychic.

And what I am really interested in is how can it be engaged in terms of how we are reflective or reflexive or participatory and what consciousness means in terms of talking to people who aren't the same as us.


SPEAKER_10:
Interesting.

Definitely the coming from a different perspective is something that's baked into this type of a framing because yeah, everyone's coming from a different perspective.

That's our starting point.

That's not our conclusion here.

And then there's questions about how we're going to coordinate amidst that.

So we could either have anyone else raise their hand on these questions, or I'll just put up this special point two question, which is, what is something that you have thought about differently after reading the paper or participating in last week's discussion?

And for me, it was actually biking in the morning and seeing the moon just look massive and thinking about that illusion in the context of the projection and what we talked about last week, as well as some other literature by these authors.

So I just thought, what might be some differentiable experiences, some little tests that we could do that would be able to capture differences between the projective model and other models of consciousness?

I didn't really have an answer, but it was just something I was thinking about after our discussion.

Anyone else after reading the paper or participating in the discussion?

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, one thing that it was really helpful, this unpacking the diagrams last week, and I noticed that

there was that box for the head of the perspective, the consciousness, perspectival consciousness.

And it suddenly made me realize that, yes, this can bridge more back into the embodied work because I'd had a discussion about this paper before with someone who's in theater and interested in kind of some of this more kind of esoterical kind of ways of knowing, but I'm trying to find a way to bridge it back to

the embodied sort of inactive work and i sort of by seeing it in the in that kind of head i suddenly realized okay it still does come back to the physicality so that was really really useful for me cool cool sasha


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, after last week, I just began seeing everything as, you know, more geometrical and thinking about people and their behavior as projections, kind of.

Yeah.

Recognizing that we're always seeing just one side or one perspective of someone's behavior.

And specifically that, that GEB logo, it just, that's all I could see.


SPEAKER_10:
Right, with the light from the different sides showing the different letters, GEB.

yeah and we'll come back to geb a little bit later in this discussion any other thoughts from the panelists on these warm-up questions otherwise i'm sure there'll be a lot to get into a lot of tangents to go off onto cool all right david go ahead


SPEAKER_02:
No, I just wanted to say that there would be a lot to say about the points and questions that were raised, but perhaps we can not do that now and go through the stream and see your questions come about.


SPEAKER_10:
Great.

So today in this discussion, as with our last two weeks, we've been talking about the Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood, which is a paper in Frontiers in Psychology, December 2018, by Williford et al.,

And thanks, David, again, for coming out to the stream.

It's always awesome to have the authors.

The aims and claims of the paper we did go through in a previous week.

But David, just I'm curious here, how do you present this work or how do you introduce this topic to different audiences who might have familiarity with different topics?

Like, how do you frame the aims and the claims of the paper?


SPEAKER_02:
So lately, I've been particularly talking in contexts where people come from artificial intelligence, robotics, virtual reality.

with, you know, of course, some broader philosophical interests, and I generally try to frame it starting a bit like you did, I mean, from the question of, you know, what we could call biological cybernetics, and you elaborated on that term before,

and how active inference for a situated autonomous system with survival challenges is an interesting paradigm to understand cognition within biological cybernetics.

And then I come to the question of what would be then the role in that.

process of what you know we entreat as being consciousness what we can say about it emphasizing the big and important challenge of connecting let's put it that way for short you know the phenomenology of subjective experience is some aspect of it with

for lack of a better word, functions.

Why do we perceive and imagine the world the way, and others and yourself in the world, the way we seem to do at a certain level?

And how that actually, how can we make sense of that to understand computational, in some sense, process that are key to, you know, adaptation, you know, resilience in the context of biological cybernetics?


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Thanks for that.

And I think it was really clear how you laid out that connection in the paper.

Basically, there's the functions of consciousness, which we'll go through soon.

And then there's the subjective aspects, which were captured in the invariance.

And the PCM is like a bridge that's going to be connecting the subjective invariance of consciousness to some of these functional attributes.

And so we're kind of going from point A to point B across a specific river.

And so if we can really be clear about which sites on the riverbank we're building from and then be really clear about what the bridge is and isn't, then we'll have a really good discussion about consciousness as opposed to just swirling around and

thinking it does everything and nothing and it's everything and nothing at once and all these things so any thoughts on the aims and claims from anyone else otherwise we'll just go through to the next section cool yep we have a lot of questions coming up so in uh previous weeks we looked through the abstract sentence by sentence just to understand how

The authors were taking the free energy minimizing approach of active inference, biological cybernetics, and then connecting this to a few other areas such as geometry and the embedded psychology.

And that was the abstract.

In the roadmap, we had the sort of outline of where they go.

They start with an introduction and go straight to the methodology and then talk about the two riverbanks in that previous metaphor that we want to connect, the phenomenological invariance of experience and then the functional features of consciousness, and then sets up the problem in a way that hopefully could be solved.

So maybe, David, I'm curious, like,

in other papers how have you structured it differently or this was in 2018 what have you been um like wishing that could have been explained more or where have you bolstered the theory since then all right that's a huge uh question um so number one uh


SPEAKER_02:
Kenneth Williford, the first author of this paper, we expected him to join.

I don't know if he will join later.

He's a friend of mine and I admire for the quality of his mind.

He's a philosopher.

And so the structure of this particular paper we look at today is, I think, deeply informed

by his philosophical methods.

If you were to read the first paper we published on the topics in the Journal of Theoretical Biology in 2017, you would find a

too wordy though, but very different way of presenting.

But they are totally consistent with each other.

And in both case, you know, it's still work in progress.

So there are still a lot of questions.

And of course, we are not claiming that we explain everything by far.

We're trying to restrict ourselves to things we think we can frame in a classical scientific framework.

And I've been working for years now in my lab, and we are actually finishing a paper on that, to integrate, based on the general principle of this model, in addition to visual illusion, as we did recently in the Moon Illusion paper that was published in 2020, a mechanism of affective and social appraisal and processing

social perspective taking, based on projective geometry notably, but not only, to model and understand how artificial agents, virtual or robotics, as a model of ourselves, if you wish, can do theory of mind.

and how that plays a role in emotion regulation, adaptation of behavior.

And that's basically what I've been doing.

And interestingly, without taking too long, there are some studies from psychophysics that

that show, based on empirical data, that if you are confronted with an object or something you feel is dangerous, like for instance a snake, for some phobic for instance, the intensity of your fear will be a function of the inverse, more or less the inverse of the distance of the object.

And that has been formalized as being something you can identify with an empirical psychophysical law called Steven's law with a certain type of exponent.

And as it turns out, actually, the projective geometrical framing just gives you that naturally.

It transforms information, the apparent size of object, according, under certain constraints, to a law that is inverse from the distance.

more or less.

So you can recover things that have been documented before and understand how they may play a role in appraisal.

Something I fear when it's closer, it's bigger.

It takes more of my field of consciousness, if you wish, to make it simple.

And so one way of

motivating my behavior of, for instance, avoidance is imagining myself farther.

So the thing is smaller, takes less space, and as a result, it has less impact following the very same law we're discussing.

And therefore, that will minimize my free energy and I will move away.

And I do that with robots and things like that.


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, very cool.

Yeah, I'm imagining this like fear is proportional to one over distance, something in that family of equations, like a bus that's 100 feet away, not scary, 50 feet away, not scary.

It's still on the flat part of the fear curve.

And then it gets exponentially higher when it gets closer to you and takes up more of your field of vision.

So and then there's also long distance threats, somebody with a projectile or something like that.

And so that entails a causal model where

Somebody who's doing a certain action might be able to make an object quite big in your face very soon, but maybe it's not quite there yet, but it could happen rapidly.

So that's kind of an interesting take.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So the point here is along the line of what I was saying, trying to understand what is or what could be some aspect of the causal role of consciousness in things like appraisal and motivational behavior.

Here the point that we make is that actually the spatial structuring that we put forth, based on projective geometry, implies, naturally, something about, you know, relative size that is consistent with psychophysics.

And so it's to say that we find, somehow,

this structuration of space by consciousness act as a sort of lens, a magnifying device, if you think about it that way, that, in virtue of its own geometry, will have an impact that can then be used for other aspects of motivation and programming of behavior in the context of active inference.


SPEAKER_10:
so maybe we'll get back to this intermodal area again but that's the visual field and uh not all organisms or humans may have the visual field but it's clear that the spatial objects we visualize them in space and uh there's something similar though like if there's a lot of noise in the background but something is what you're taking up your field of audio awareness and so it's like in each of our senses there can be a sense like a sensory um expansion of focus

Greetings, Lee.

Just play on.

We're just continuing the discussion.

But go ahead there, David.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

So one of the essential things we emphasize is that it's actually not just the visual field.

It is the cognition of space as informed in a multimodal manner through audio.

you may recognize object and all of a sudden you kind of have an image of sort, the spatial representation of that object, as if you could see it even though you don't see it.

Blind people do that all the time.

They have actually perspectival representation and they represent

object in space, based on other sensory channels, there is an inference that is being made.

And the idea is that consciousness operates at some level of abstractions, once you have actually extracted information from different sense modalities, and then they become spatial objects, if you wish, with variety of properties that you put in perspective in that field of consciousness, and based on which you will operate at the conscious level, if that makes any sense.


SPEAKER_10:
Yep.

Interesting.

It's like, it's so hard sometimes to disentangle from the eyes, vision, perception, debacle, nightmare, because we know that we're not experiencing what photons hit our retina.

We know it's a generative model and you're really taking it to the next level.

And it's like, no, you're not even just seeing a generative model of the visual field.

You're seeing this extremely into your quote, seeing this integrated field of consciousness, right?

And that may depend on your visual abilities or your acuity, but it also is something that's quite derived from intermodal stimuli.

And yeah, well, that's cool stuff.

Let's get to this projective geometry idea.

And we, as non-geometers, talked about it a little bit in previous discussions and just tried to capture a few of these points that you said were differing critically between Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries.

So I'm just curious, and perhaps those who are not familiar with hearing about geometry and consciousness in the same sentence, just...

what is it that brings geometry to the table and how do we end up even talking about geometry and consciousness together


SPEAKER_02:
Excellent question.

So first of all, a little disclaimer.

I'm not a mathematician, even though since I understood early on that what I was trying to do required to think mathematically in a fairly advanced way, I banged my head to try to progress.

But I'm privileged to work with real and very good mathematicians.

So that helps.

But nevertheless, I can...

give you, to the limit of my knowledge, some info about it.

Number one, I would say, generally speaking, you know, if experience, one conspicuous aspect of experience, of subjective experience, is a spatial manifestation.

Not all experience is reduced to space, but a big chunk of it involves it, so it's good from a scientific standpoint because then it becomes something you can think about mathematically.

And a lot of models in, let's put it that way, in cognitive science has been based on information processing, sometimes very formal models like advanced Bayesian models or even active inference.

And so there is a lot of emphasis on the mathematics of information theory, so to speak.

And here the notion is that in order to bridge information processing, if you wish, with aspect of experience as manifested as a space, geometry comes obviously as a scientific object, as a mathematical object, as something necessary.

So the challenge is then to understand how to articulate information theory with geometry in order to have a fuller account of the process.

So then now on the specifics of projective geometry, it starts from trying to find some, let's call it that way, phenomenological invariant that most people would agree upon to a certain extent.

Considering experience introspectively, it appears that it's obvious in vision, but I claim it's general in most perception and imagination, that the way we

quote unquote, represents the world.

Let's not enter into the metaphysics of representation.

Let's use it in a pragmatic way.

Here, this notion of representation is in perspective.

Obviously, parallel lines do not appear to us in vision.

as parallel, but they converge at a certain vanishing point towards infinity.

There is an horizon, and it's three-dimensional.

It's not like just a projection of a 3D world on an image.

We experience it with a sense of depth.

And I argue that

The same when you imagine yourself somewhere, considering something, aiming at something.

The notion of aiming at is very important in the phenomenological tradition in philosophy.

It's not just about visual vision, it's about spatial aiming.

And in all those circumstances, the world is mapped.

Is there a world that seems to correspond to our surroundings, a world that corresponds to things we remember, or even a totally fantasy world of things that may never exist?

Every single time we build a world,

experience in consciousness the point is that there is a perspective that is being taken with these properties of having an elusive point of view somewhat in perception we tend to feel it in we feel that we are in the middle of that space so that the origin is somewhere in your head perhaps

but that's not necessarily the case and that's not something that we can identify as an act the way we could identify the location of an object in space it's a music something that the phenomenologists have talked about a lot and it's in perspective so if you take those two things

an origin of the projection or of the point of view that is elusive and a three-dimensional representation of space that is in perspective.

Then the only geometry and

And the geometry that account for that is projective geometry.

And here, since we say the space is in three dimensions, there is this notion of left, right, up, down, and forward and backward.

It's a three-dimensional projective space.

And then that means that this space is ruled by the so-called projective transformation that are

specific type of transformation that comes from a group of transformation that transform perspective into that space.

So, for instance, you can transform a point of view from the point of view I have here looking at the screen to an imaginary point of view I would have in a different position, myself or somebody else.

And all of that is naturally governed by that geometry.

So then that geometry appears naturally as

A, if not D, candidates to account for this aspect of phenomenological experience.

And therefore, then you can start thinking about, OK, how that can play a role in the process of active inference.


SPEAKER_10:
Nice.

Thank you for the clear explanation.

Really, in that little bit, the clearest part moving forward is this elusive origin and spatial perspective that we have.

If someone can imagine an experience that doesn't fulfill those two conditions, then we're already breaking our assumptions.

But if you can, that's great.

It's like write a paper about it.

But given that there's consensus that there's an elusive origin and a spatial perspective,

we can then say that we're in a family of geometries that are related to this projective transformation.

And so going from there, there's other downstream consequences.

So really difficult topic sometimes to talk about.

Of course, transdisciplinary ideas.

But I think it's really clear how the structure of your argument is set up.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Just a couple of questions.

is the distance as things go away, is that, and you feel less intensity in terms of the fear or something, is that linear or is that kind of exponential or is it very dependent on the space?

And I suppose the other question is, is this transformation between one mapping to the kind of projective geometry?

So it's not like you store it in that form.

There's some sort of,

action to make it into this projection.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, very good question.

I'm going to try to address them to the extent I can.

So number one, these experiments that shows the spatial relationship between subjective fear and distance, they found a power law with an exponent minus one.

So basically, it's like the fear decrease as a function of the inverse, one over the distance.

So it's not linear.

It's not exactly an exponential.

if it's not linear.

And as it turns out, that's the very basic

rule of perspective when you want to build a space in perspective you divide by your coordinates xyz coordinates by a parameter that corresponds to the distance along with you are basically projecting the direction of aiming that can be for instance in front of you so basically you find that in that geometry there is a similar operations if you wish

as those that are implied by the one over distance models that is empirically derived.

So that's non-linear, but it's a very particular type of non-linearity that is not a super complex non-linearity that can be handled computationally, which I guess is important.

And now

The second part of your question, can you remind me of it?


SPEAKER_00:
It's just about that transformation between however the brain stores it and this projective phenomenon that we experience.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

So the idea here is somewhat what we have to presuppose if we want to embrace that type of model is that there is an unconscious world model, which is complex, which is constantly updated, that somehow store information more or less in memory in a Euclidean manner.

and that we access that information by taking perspective on it, so by transforming this sort of quote-unquote occlidean representation into a perspectival, objective representation.

That involved multiple steps and that's something, for instance, we developed the most basic one, I would say, in our Mono Illusion paper, in which we show and we

how the calibration of a projective frame in 3D.

So we set the parameter that defines the projection and free energy immunization.

That's the idea, it's free energy minimization acting on geometry.

Hunter's illusions, such as the moon illusion, explain the illusions such as AIMZOOM illusion, and many other illusions we did not develop in this paper.

And that is somewhat, the idea is that in, you know, sometimes people talk about access consciousness,

Let's not enter into the complexity of that debate, but let's say that the hypothesis here is that in the way we access information that's in consciousness, there is somewhat a change of

coordinates, quote unquote, from a Euclidean representation to a projective one.

And that operation is essential in what makes information conscious versus not, you know, model, if that makes any sense.


SPEAKER_10:
Thanks for the answer.

Let's go to Lee.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, hiya.

Yeah.

So I was just wondering to sort of build on Stephen's question, if if a fear response is exponentially related to distance, does that hold or is there any research that shows whether that holds for a counterfactual version?

So I'm thinking here about phobia or trauma.

So if you have a particular experience, you know, often in PTSD, those things are replayed.

So yeah, did you have any thoughts on that or any pointers?


SPEAKER_02:
That's really a great question.

Okay, the literature on this, on the basic experiment, is not huge, surprisingly.

And your question is super interesting indeed because

And we would like to demonstrate that even if you do it in an imaginary way, you recover this type of effect consistent with the model.

I'm not aware of such study, but I'm doing so much multidisciplinary work that the literature I have to cover is vast.

And sometime I may miss important studies in specific subfield, but definitely that gives us the roadmap for a great experiment.


SPEAKER_04:
Because in the literature, I'm thinking of Benjamin Bergen on simulation.

He talks about the difference between canonical perspective and I can't remember the other one, but it's essentially first person perspective and the ability to shift between these.

So I just wondered whether it might be related, but I'd be certainly interested if there's any research that you're thinking about doing.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, David, unmute, and then go ahead, and then Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
So you want me to speak now?


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, if you have anything to add there.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, I misunderstood.

I lost the screen.


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, yeah, no, great point, and thanks for that question, Lee.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, very interesting stuff.

Makes me think about this consciousness and understanding of...

how to interact with your space as like narrative building and how that develops over the lifetime that like as a child, that the things that you're afraid of are quite specific and nearby.

And as, you know, as we grow up, we're afraid of much kind of larger, but more distant things.

But there's something, you know, some transformation we have to figure out

as far as we still have to be motivated and afraid of the things that are either very afraid or very, or sorry, very scary or very unlikely.

And those are still enough to motivate people to avoid them.

And so I think that's a really interesting, yeah, something in there about changing the scope of your


SPEAKER_10:
uh non-euclidean projection let's say um as you uh grow up nice sasha and it's kind of like when you go back to see something scary in childhood you go oh wait it was only a six inch stair that we were jumping off of well you're bigger but also you have a different world view and then just like in the computational psychiatry realm we might talk about difference in a statistical parameter leading to decreased motivation or decision making

It could be a distortion of this projection that results in things being perceived as dangerously close.

Claustrophobia, people are too close to me or people are too far away from me.

There's so much there with the social touch as well.

Let's go just...

onto the sort of new parts of 9.2 and talk about some of these other slides and questions we have.

So last week we talked about the functional features, the cybernetic features, as well as some of these other theories, threads that were drawn in, like the availability, kind of like a workspace, the simulation theory, motivation of action.

We talked about that last week.

as well as the questions about the phenomenological invariance with the emphasis on point one being that relational phenomenal intentionality so just pause the video and look at those if you want more detail or of course read the paper but let's go to some feedback from participants so one thing that a participant who couldn't be here today asked

was one thing I'm curious about is whether they are working on more complex forms of the model with higher temporal depth that kind of speaks to these adult fears considerations we talked about.

And then also this person added another thing I'm curious about more philosophically is what do they mean by now?

They have an extended phenomenological background for the model, which suggests that the now would be extended, like an extended now.

However, in naturalist models, which I assumed active inference or potentially artificial intelligence framework-based models are a subset of, time is often modeled and understood as point-like or as a continuous variable with points.

I wonder what the implications are or what there might be if they mixed up these two interpretations of what the now is, the physical and the psychological now.

So David, what do you think about these questions from the participant?


SPEAKER_02:
They are great.

I'm going to try to address some of it, of course.

And again, there are still a lot of things to discover and understand.

And one of the things we like about starting with a mathematical model is that then it acts as a guide.

Now it's the theory that tells us where are the problems and where are the solutions.

It's a general analogy, sorry, I'm going a bit off track, but it's useful.

And without comparing ourselves with Einstein, don't worry, we don't have that ambition.

If you think about general relativity, once the mathematical theory was derived, basically people looked into it and started thinking, there is a problem with this theory.

It tells us that there should be black holes, right?

And in fact, basically, the theory predicted things that nobody could observe, of course, before, and very difficult to observe.

And that was a consequence of the mathematics.

And so that's the idea that we follow from a scientific standpoint is let's give us mathematics and see where it leads us.

One thing I'm curious about, the first question, yes, we are working on more complex form.

I alluded to that at the beginning.

Number one, this notion of transformation as an inverse law of distance related to this literature is not to say that we appraise information only that way.

was to show at least to that type of relation in appraisal.

And to some extent, our model makes sense of it.

Now about the more complex form, remember the space here, the geometry is one thing, but it's embedded into an active inference framework.

with a lot of complex computation involving higher beliefs and preference, internal model of the body, of others, of objects, including internal model, that's what we are doing now, of beliefs about the beliefs of others and beliefs about the beliefs that others believe others have.

So basically, level six of second order theory of mind.

And by actually...

imbuing an artificial agent with this type of statistical processing and combine with the geometry, then we can start modeling how

you know, inspired from simulation theory, we can put ourselves in the shoes of others.

We can try to imagine what it would feel like to look at things, to observe things, to aim at things as they seem to do, including understanding that they may have different beliefs and preferences as us.

You know, the same object may look cool to us.

And so when you get closer, it's better.

But for them, maybe that's something they hate.

And when it gets closer, they want to run away.

So then we have a way of extending the model very naturally with the same math, with the same general principle to encompass theory of mind and social affective perspective taking, if you wish.

And one interesting thing that we find is that when you enable artificial agents with this type of process, then you enable them also to be influenced by each other.

because you may be able to understand and predict other behavior, but not care about it.

But if you do, then the agents, the little robots or the virtual humans, start showing a joint attention behavior.

They start interacting, looking at the same thing, looking at each other to kind of confirm that they understand what the other likes.

And they constantly put themselves in the shoes of the other and reciprocally.

And through this process of projective perspective taking, informed by all these kind of Bayesian-like models and the free energy minimization, they start showing very complex behavior, including, you know, we have reproduced in a non-verbal way the famous Sally and Anne task, you know, about

theory of mind, basically, that's two puppets.

One of them, they are together.

There is some object of interest in a basket.

One of them leave, the other take the object of interest from the basket and put it in the box.

And typically, you ask children when the other come back.

Where do you think she will go?

And if you understand false belief, you will say, well, because she believes that the object is still in the basket, she will go to the basket.

And so we have modeled a kind of simulation framework in a nonverbal way for that.

And we show agents actually exploit their understanding of false belief in others to approach disingenuously object they would like by, you know,

being freed of being bothered by the other because now the other has false belief.

The same way we can kind of simulate some aspect of social anxiety because anytime you have an agent that believes that the other agent doesn't like it, then playing the algorithm, just running the algorithm, anytime the agent imagines itself approaching the other agent that

the agents suppose do not like him, then he puts itself, because he does social perspective taking, in the shoes of this other agent.

And when he imagines what it is like for this other agent to see himself or itself get closer because of the same rule we have discussed,

he understands that would raise free energy in the other agent, and since he takes into account the other agent's opinion that he attributes to the others, therefore that raises its own free energy.

As a result, it tends to avoid approaching the agent that it believes doesn't like it.

So you see, you start having very sophisticated behavior all through this basic processing.

So that's for the first question.

Sorry it was long.

I hope it was not too confusing.

Anytime you have to deal with theory of mind, in particular second order theory of mind, and talk about belief that another may have, about the belief of another, et cetera, et cetera, and so on, it's become very challenging for the mind.

So now, regarding the other question about the now and the spacious present.

So in a way, it's a hard question to answer, and we are still working on that.

In a way, there is the physical time, let's call it that way, which is point-like, probably that is involved in the underlying processing.

whatever it is based on the brain or based on some computational algorithm.

So there is a timer.

And then there is the time as it is integrated, perceived, and structured in consciousness.

And the idea here is that because we are doing active inference, constantly anticipating the future to some extent, even a very close future, it can be at different scales.

So then we are trying to recover from that, but we are not yet there, the notion of this kind of extended present, so that basically at a given time instant, that's not the right, at a given moment, if you wish, you not only have this instantaneous representation of space in perspective,

but you have a process in which the anticipation drives the next instant in a manner that is integrated as a whole.

So it's very abstract what I'm saying.

We're also trying to understand how we can put time pressure within this free energy context, and we have solutions for that, and also how the agents can

dive into the autobiographical memory under the same process.

We are also very interested, now it's moving away from that, but it connects to questions that we had before to the, I would say, pathological transformations, in the sense that here we are talking about very adaptive behaviors, very tuned to sensory-motor contingencies and constraints,

And so that as this embodiment, the fact that we tend to have this first person point of view, refer to the representation that we have of our body in space, that's constraint, that embodiment constraint somewhat reduce the number of possible projective transformations.

And because only some of them will give you that type of point of view.

But if you relax those constraints,

then you can get very wild things that I find are very interesting to connect with the literature on psychotropes, on mystical experience, on arts.

And to give you an example, we have not published on that yet, but one of the things that happens to the agents is that

you know if they they have the possibility of basically being freer in the application of the projective transformation they can use for instance in the context in which they are in a desperate world in the sense that everything they can think about or do as an embodied agent will yield a very high level of free energy there is no good solution then one option is to release the constraint on the projection and when you do that

In order to minimize free energy, the agent will tend to basically put their

point of view, quote unquote, at infinity, what we called the God point of view, which is a bit of a bad choice of words.

And so basically, that means that one way of minimizing free energy for those agents is to releasing those normal constraints is to escape towards infinity so that basically the world become very, very far.

And then the structure of the representation of the world you have start having very odd symmetries.

that may remind us of mandalas or things like that.

So I'm shutting up now.


SPEAKER_10:
Wow.

A lot of stuff there.

Let's go Adam and then Lee and then Steven.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, can you hear me?


SPEAKER_10:
Yep.

Sounds good.


SPEAKER_03:
So one thing I've been struggling with in terms of time and consciousness is whether it's

better to think of it as like a series of kind of discrete snapshots or more of a continuous flow.

I'm personally leaning more towards discrete snapshots.

And so with respect to projected geometric modeling, I'm wondering whether the refresh rate might be like at something like alpha frequencies, like 10 times a second to primarily like posterior courtesies getting into the mix

establishing that 40 perspective.

But then more like, and you mentioned like access consciousness or where that might start and like the whole active inferential unfolding that that might be more at like theta frequencies, like three to four times a second.

And then like, you might get something like a North off style, like a spatial temporal alignment based on like your interoceptive States, maybe more like Delta frequencies.

And so you might have this like nested hierarchy of time scales with a core screening over events at various resolutions.

But at the bottom of it though, it seems like where like the core of it is this establishing of a field with projected geometric modeling at the center.

And I guess, are these estimates, I'm wondering, discrete, do you think, or is it continuous?


SPEAKER_02:
That's really a very good question and a very sound and interesting hypothesis, you know, with this sort of empirical testing, because it's a whole program of research.

I've been for a long time an electrophysiologist.

I worked for a long time on this stuff.

I don't anymore, but I'm very open to pursuing collaborations on that.

First of all, I should say I don't have a satisfying answer to that question.

I think it's indeed multi-scaled.

I think that it has a discrete, quote-unquote, sharp, if not discrete component, which may be perfectly embedded in a more, at least in the way it manifests itself, a continuous flow.

But that is, I don't think, in and of itself,

doesn't pose a challenge, a theoretical challenge, it's just complex, but we can think about how it could be done, and we can also think about how it could be calibrated based on the type of biological reason you are talking about.

What is more of a theoretical challenge is this notion of spacious presence, in which somewhere, that's the

words that the phenomenologists like Husserl would use, we pretend, or pretension this notion, in the now, there is somewhat us in the center of that now, and there is at the same time a pretension towards the future, and somehow there is simultaneously, as a manifold, an experience of the, you know, here and now, and an experience of the just after, and at the same time there is still this resonance of

this retention, to use Husserl's word, retention of an immediate past.

So you can think, okay, there is an immediate past, there is an actual present, and there is a close future, and then those things are somewhat bonded together.

But the difficulty is to try to think how actually you can find a mathematical expression of a representation of that in which they are actually part of the same whole and not just, you know, something you could argue, well, but then that means that, you know, they are ultimately separate process.

So we're still trying to work on that, see if there is any way of thinking about that, but we are not yet there.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

We'll do Stephen, Lee, Sasha.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just building on the idea that the projective consciousness can be released when things are not certain enough to be able to know how to make sense of action in the world.

it sort of ties in with this way that indigenous approaches are shape-shifting and they're trying to attune to an environment which they aren't able to construct in the way that we tend to construct and place ourselves in the centre of.

So I think there's an interesting thing as well as there being the risk, if it could just be the increasing level of ambiguity and uncertainty

in the world so that's interesting that you take that i'm just wondering if there's as well as the projective thing going from the self and maybe to infinity do you think there's a like there might be another process another type of geometry come in the other direction like it could be and and and this it sort of shifts towards the self-centered and there's an allocentric

mechanism as well.


SPEAKER_02:
So that's such a great question and that touched to another work that we are pursuing with mathematician Daniel Behnken and Kenneth Williford, who just told me unfortunately he could not make it today, sorry, about what sometimes people have called pre-reflective self-consciousness.

It's a bit along the line of this bizarre sense of the spacious present, but now it's about self-consciousness in the sense that that's what people have called sometimes the self-consciousness hypothesis.

Not everybody agrees upon that.

that we are always, consciousness is always conscious of itself.

That is, it's not like a higher order theory where there is a consciousness, for instance, perceptual consciousness of something and then you reflect upon it and become aware of the fact that you are perceiving that.

The idea is that it's actually the manifold itself is such that there is this pre-reflective slash reflexive relationship

that is fundamental to it.

And so philosophers like Sartre, I believe, and others, I've talked about, how to say that in English,

the seers seeing or seeing the sincere, if you wish, the one we see is also seen at the same time as if there was some sort of duality in which whenever I have a first person perspective and I'm looking at the sky, it feels like there is something in it that feels like that the sky is looking back at me.

Well, as it turns out, it's a natural property of the most, you know, bizarre, strange and interesting aspect of projective geometry, which is not just, you know, it's a very complex and rich geometry.

And we're trying to work that out thanks to this mathematician around this concept of duality, reciprocity, in which there is, at once,

Potentially, we're still working out the math.

The fact that you take a perspective implies that there are reciprocal perspectives and that you look at something and these things look back at you.

I know it's odd, it's bizarre, but it's my attempt to try to touch upon what you were talking about.


SPEAKER_10:
OK.

Lee, then Sasha, Adam, thanks for all these cool questions.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so I'm anticipating that I might be about to ask a stupid question, but I'm going to go ahead anyway.

So it was stimulated by the fact that you were saying that you were kind of interested in, you know, like mystical experiences in relation to projective geometry.

And I was thinking about the meditative experience of non-duality.

I was wondering whether you have come across this and whether you see it in any way related to projective geometry perhaps?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I used to be, I mean, I was at some point, I don't know if you know that person, a student of Francisco Varela, unfortunately passed away during my PhD.

That's why I moved to the US to work with Antonio Damasio to finish my PhD.

And of course, with Varela, I was very interested in

let's say, meditation in the broad sense of the term, both from a scientific standpoint as a possible method to study consciousness, but also more at the personal and existential level, I got more acquainted with that.

I practiced it.

I even studied it a bit.

And I've been, for instance, involved in a very nice workshop in Israel

and perspective on consciousness where this type of tradition, multiple traditions, we are meeting together and we had very interesting discussions and thought about that.

Very nice group.

So, can you try just for me and for the audience perhaps to specify the phenomenology, the aspect of the experience you are describing?

the specific meditation experience that you are describing, this kind of unified experience?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure, I can try.

So I think in some sense, there was

Prior to a certain point, there was an assumption that there's a separation between the observer and the observed.

And that starts to break down such that you kind of, it becomes one space for one to be better.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I think that, of course, I'm not saying that's the answer.

I'm saying that perhaps that contributes to that type of state that connects to what I was talking about of that intrinsic to this, the reciprocal relations that are embedded into this geometry.

I wish the mathematician I work with was here.

There is something like

it's non-trivial, that's important, a reciprocity between looking at or aiming at and being looked at or aimed at simultaneously.

It's not like necessarily you lose track of the perspectives that you have, but there is this richer experience that is implied by this type of geometry.

So in that sense, at some level,

You can perfectly conceive within this geometry how perspective can be taken from anywhere and are all connected through projective transformation, but even deeper.

Perhaps through notions of dualities that I unfortunately could not expand upon because I would totally fail.

That's why I need to work with mathematicians.

That gives you this sort of

a unified experience of some sort of bizarre panopticon where you could be anywhere, you could be looking from anywhere and from your particular perspective and being looked at, that could be you, that could be something else.

And that's a manifold of point of view that at the same time is grounded into a unique point of view that exists in full dimension.

So I know it sounds bizarre, but that's just the maths.

That's what they are.


SPEAKER_10:
Thank you.

We have a new visitor, but Sasha, go ahead.

Then Adam.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just thinking about this whole time perception question, whether, and I guess it's two separate things.

It's, is time discrete or continuous?

And the second question is time perception, discrete or continuous?

And if it is possible for people to have different spatial understandings or perceptions, then it's also possible for people to have different perceptions of time passing and different rate of how everything is happening.

And is that...

How do we integrate that or allow for that to happen, that people perceive time perhaps very differently?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, that I don't think in and of itself is a deeply difficult conceptual challenge, at some level at least, in the sense that

It's not different if you want to think about it as having systems that have internal model of beliefs

and understanding that somebody else may have different beliefs.

In my robot, in the example I was giving, it was many beliefs about whether or not an agent likes or dislikes something.

And all this, let's put it that way, let's be broader.

In the mechanics of the whole system, there are a lot of parameters that concerns beliefs, that concerns the calibration of projective frames that can be different from people to people.

So I would guess that it's not a satisfactory answer.

I'm sorry, but that could be the same for the way the flow of time is...

structure is construed within consciousness.

To me, at some point you are living with complex systems that have statistical models with a lot of parameters.

So it's perfectly logical that if you have parameters pertaining to time consciousness,

they could be different from one person to the other.

You know, at that level of abstraction, I don't think the problem is an essential challenge in the sense that, oh, here there is a big paradox that I cannot resolve in a consistent manner with mathematical thinking.

But of course, there are much deeper questions than this whole, what we were talking about before, this whole spacious present, this kind of extended experience of experience of the present, of the now, is more difficult to grasp to me.

Yes.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Let's go last comments here from Adam, and then we'll welcome Kent.


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, can you hear me?

Yep.

So in talking about this sort of reciprocity or mutuality of like when you look and then looking back at you, it started to make me wonder about the extent to which

projective geometric modeling might be intersubjectively bootstrapped, and that it both enables theory of mind capacities in terms of giving you this flexible transformation between perspectives, which would be at the heart of mentalizing a theory of mind.

But also to engage in that, I'm wondering if that helps to induce the capacity.

which then feeds back and makes you better perspective, which then, and a kind of bootstrapping process.

And now I'm wondering in terms of like evolution and development, like when is this starting to arise?

Like you could, in theory, think of this happening like non-intersubjectively in a way where it's like, I don't know, like a predator sort of like hunting, maybe if I go here and doing sort of like, where do I need to be to get, like if the organism has like,

a model of itself of some degree of temporal depth, and it's trying to do something a little bit more elaborate, trying to like forge for information, well, that's gonna go, hey, I go here, I'll have a different perspective, and this is like influencing the policy selection.

But in humans, it's probably really heavily intersubjectively bootstrapped.

Anyway, so some thoughts.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm not going to make a long comment to not take too much space, but I find everything you say that I agree with you.

I think actually you're right, probably so.

There are very interesting stuff in ethology and animal behavior, even in relatively recent literature that suggests the role of projective representations into the way animals

try to lure others into either being a mate or being a prey.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Welcome, Ken.


SPEAKER_05:
You can say hi.

Hi.

Yeah, sorry I'm so late.


SPEAKER_10:
All good.


SPEAKER_05:
Good morning.


SPEAKER_10:
Do you have anything to add or just feel free to raise your hand any time?


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, we'll do.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Well, there's a few more slides.

This was really a great set of questions by the participant.

So that's really fun topics.

Here's some quotes that I put up there.

And the part I wanted to kind of start off with is the second half of the second quote on here.

which is just a system running the PCM would more closely approximate the actual complexity, organization and processing power of human or animal brains.

And this could very well on the author's view, literally be an artificial consciousness.

So maybe getting into sort of questions about what does it actually entail to have the awareness?

What if you make a system that has action and perception and it does a projective geometry transformation and it, you know, it's doing it because you're the one who made the robot.

So I was just curious to hear about from the robotics side or from the mathematical side or from the neuro phenomenological, what else is happening in humans?

Is it evolutionary?

Is it linguistic, et cetera?


SPEAKER_02:
So I would like Ken to speak, because he has a lot to say.

But since you're asking about robots, and that question is very relevant, of course,

I will answer as a scientist.

I'm hiding behind the method, the scientific method, not to avoid the question, but to tell you first that I don't have an answer to that fundamental question.

What I'm trying to do, and that's, I think, the only thing science can do, at least as we know it, and you can take the model of physics as a prominent example of that, is to try to understand, not necessarily why, but how

we do think, we do things.

And that applies to consciousness, to the phenomenology of consciousness.

So what we are modeling here is that phenomenology and how it is involved in other process.

And so at the end, the only thing I could say about my robot

in the way they are implemented at this point, there is a lot of work ahead, is that at least their behavior will be governed by principles that are central to the way consciousness processes information.

Let's put it that way.

So it doesn't imply at all that those robots are actually conscious in the sense we would like to, but at least they can demonstrate how

our consciousness and the principles that seems to shape our consciousness play a role in our overall, the economy of our behavior, et cetera, et cetera.

It doesn't give us an answer to why, you know, this is conscious in the sense, maybe actually it's with a certain level of complexity, it's sufficient.

And maybe Ken should speak now and rebound on that.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, I was going to say this passage, if memory serves, of course, this is a general sort of worry that anybody who works on consciousness thinks about it has, especially if you are doing anything with simulations, as David was.

So we started to think, well, of course, we don't think that the simulations that David has built

are actually contained consciousness uh you know actually contain conscious agents um so then you wonder all right you know so it's not it's not merely um processing information and the the way in a way that simulates what's specified in the model i guess you could say um it could be

things as well like so in a sense we we think okay this is a necessary condition for consciousness that you process information and the way the PCM outlines sufficiency acquire a certain kind of scale and complexity that

that we're not certain about yet.

So we shouldn't just assume that any kind of situation that follows this model is just ipso facto a conscious being.

That's kind of claiming too much.

What else is involved?

Well, we don't know, but it seems like,

This is we maintain.

This is necessary for consciousness, so Be conscious being will will have this structure process information in this way um And it for all we know it could be sort of Things that we don't we're not going to be able to reduce to principles

so easily that we'd have to discover empirically.

That's the, that's the reason we say here, the, an a posteriori identity theory.

That's, that's the idea that you can't really say what consciousness is a priori.

You have to find out what it is empirically.

And at some point you might find yourself in a situation where you could say, okay, these, suppose we build a lot of artificial systems that do this.

These exhibit all the behaviors and so on that make it seem like a conscious being.

They, you know, suppose they operate on a certain scale and a certain complexity.

At some point, we might be able to say, yeah, we think right here's the sweet spot.

Why exactly?

We don't know.

Maybe we will discover that, maybe not.

But on the one hand, it seems like you don't want to be

um shy of saying that the you know from what we can tell these are necessary conditions and on the other you don't want to be to um you don't want to you don't want to have a view of the sufficient conditions for consciousness that make it quite too easy you know so that's awesome yeah thanks for that response steven just a really quick comment and then we'll move on


SPEAKER_00:
Just quickly, I was just wondering, when you think about projective consciousness, is it like this is really summing up

a particular type of consciousness, which we are taking these projective, perspectival kind of ways of engaging the world.

And there's a potential, I wonder if there's a potential for that to seem like it's more like how consciousness is, because we culturally have taken that on to be how we think of the world.

But this might be like one way of taking a view from a more sort of higher perspective.


SPEAKER_06:
So shall I take this one?

Yes, Ken, please do, and speak more.


SPEAKER_02:
What's that?

I think you should speak, because I have spoken already a lot, and you have a lot to say.


SPEAKER_06:
So, I mean, our hypothesis is that this is not just of, you know, how we've been enculturated or

Let's see if I got your question right.

I mean, our view is that this is at least a necessary feature of all consciousness.

That's the claim.

So now you could imagine, and you could actually wed this kind of view to other theories of consciousness.

You could wed it to, you know, panpsychism for that matter.

You could just say, oh, no, actually consciousness is something else.

It's whatever, some fundamental property of nature.

But if you had that sort of view, this kind of work would still be of interest because it might sketch out how conscious beings like us, or probably animals, how they experience the world and how they process information.

Right.

So but and of course, when we make it so it's compatible with that, with really your consciousness that's cast at a kind of metaphysical level.

I guess our view would be something like, well, you know, suppose this suppose this type of model allows us to explain everything that we we think is pertinent to consciousness.

So it allows us to account for whatever behavioral and cognitive functions.

consciousness carries out, and for the phenomenology of consciousness, if it allowed you to account for those things, then

And suppose you could identify the type of structure this is and the sort of scale and complexity it needs to be organized on.

Then to our way of thinking, at least as it comes to the metaphysical issue, we have a tendency to think, OK, that's just what consciousness is.

We discovered this empirically.

We discovered it a posteriori.

There's no need to postulate any further metaphysics because any metaphysical account of consciousness

Well, it actually has the same structure.

It's something you didn't figure out a priori, really.

You just thought, okay, well, here's an account that would make sense of the fact that, you know, take panpsychism.

Why is anything conscious?

Well, you know, if everything is conscious, then it's no mystery that we are.

So that's an argument you could make.

Well, you know, as you probably know, there are all these different ways

Positions in the philosophy of mind about the nature of consciousness and the and the distribution of consciousness that in my view They're all kind of epistemically on a par.

None of them are really like you can't show any of them a priori you can't demonstrate so It seems like it's wide open to you on the theoretical level to be this kind of identity theorist Just you and you reach, you know when you have this structure have this level

You're a conscious being.

That's what consciousness is.

We figure it out empirically, and we don't need to sort of postulate anything else.

That said, it's totally compatible with other views.

So you could hold that, no, this is much more derived and primitive, like sensing or something is a basic form of consciousness or something like that.

We do think, though, that

So here's one thing.

It's not exactly a priori, but let's say it's a strong intuition that a lot of people have.

If you're conscious of anything, that's going to involve the appearance of something to something.

So it has this kind of appearance of to structure.

And that's a kind of spatial, I mean quasi-spatial structure, a proto-geometrical structure.

And that takes you already kind of in the direction of thinking of consciousness as like a space and like a projective space, in fact.

That's not, you know, you can't demonstrate that a priori, but it is a strong intuition that people have.

So I'd like to say, I think I say in this paper, don't I?

You know, follow your phenomenological muse.

Build your models and see where they take you.

We can't really determine those things a priori or just by

banging on the table with our favorite interviewers.


SPEAKER_10:
Thanks.

I see Adam and Lee have their hands raised, but just really quick, especially David and Ken, would either of you be okay with staying for a few minutes past the hour so we can just continue talking for a few minutes?

Okay.

I have a question.

about 40 minutes but so i'm fine oh beautiful so we'll just um anyone can depart whenever they need to and uh otherwise we won't have to come to a speedy landing there but we'll go adam and then lee oh hello um


SPEAKER_03:
I guess I'd like to hear a little bit more about the intuition for why it is that existing simulations might not be conscious and in terms of what it would actually take to get a sufficiency.

This is something I've been struggling with also.

For me, I've been mostly coming at it from the neural direction, thinking of like, OK, what in terms of neural systems might underlie these different capacities?

And then how would that be implemented?

I become a little bit more confused when I start to think of alternative implementations.

So something like projective geometric modeling, I'm wondering if that's primarily posterior medial cortices, and that's giving you this sort of flexible spatial modeling.

But then this is coupled to body maps of lateral parietal lobes.

And then this is part of one basically synchronous complex, which is mutually constraining each other as you're filling in this sort of joint estimate of the world and your lived body in relation to it, so basically exactly what you propose.

And so for me, it's like when I'm talking about a biological system, there's a certain grain at which this calculation

is being established through a metastable synchronous complex, or I call it a non-equilibrium steady state distribution, or I call it a self-organizing harmonic mode.

But if we're talking about something like a simulation on a Turing machine that might be doing the geometric modeling by very different means, is that an issue?

Is that not an issue for you?

Just curious to know more thoughts on boundary problems.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe I can give my thought about that and then Ken.

So number one about the functional neuroanatomy and the neurodynamical

mechanism that may implement the type of process we are talking about.

I think I agree with you.

In the paper we published in 2017 in the Journal of Cervical Biology, we have at the end a little figure that kind of summarizes our gross functional neuroanatomical hypothesis.

And indeed, it seems that the posterior

in particular the parietal lobe and to some extent the posterior mesial cortex, but the posterior mesial cortex maybe more is a bridge, a hub towards interaction with other systems, but the parietal lobe, and then we could enter into the detail, is certain, is probably where this sort of project, as we call it in the paper, projective geometrical engine operate.

And I think the way you attempt to make sense of the difference between, you know, something like the model being processed the way you describe it into a brain versus into a Turing machine, basically a computer is perfectly fair and right.

And maybe indeed,

when you do it in the Turing-like way, like when I do my simulations with my virtual humans and robots, it doesn't entail the type of experiential aspect of which we are trying to figure out the cause, basically the sufficient condition.

And perhaps, indeed, it's a very different context of processing, the way you describe it.

And that is actually key, perhaps not

It would need more elaboration.

Of course, there are still explanatory gaps here, but to make that process conscious.

So for me, it's not a problem.

It's a different type of implementation.

We can use the Turing light to do simulation from which we can learn a lot.

But probably, indeed, there is something about the embodied processing with this type of whatever the brain is doing.

I'm a neuroscientist initially, and I

We all know that actually we know much less about the brain than we pretend to.

And there are probably great and important deep fundamental principles still to understand.

And until we have understood the brain in a much deeper way, well, we won't be able to conclude on that question.


SPEAKER_06:
Ken?

Yeah, I can just add that, you know, I mean, suppose it

It sounds a little odd, you know, from the kind of computer science perspective to think that, say, performing all these computations in a massively parallel way so that, you know, I mean, you can imagine, you know, a tinker...

computer doing the computations involved and taking like thousands of years or something and you think okay that's it's not it's not merely running this program right but if you say okay it has to do with um massively parallel integrated computation of these uh functions um that of course sounds a bit like um

Like, strange.

Like, why would simply being able to do it really fast or do it in this parallel way make a difference?

But, you know, if you're serious about your identity, then you think, well, okay, we'll just find out, right?

It does seem really strange, though, to think...

that a Turing machine made out of beer cans and string, as John Searle would put it, carrying out these conversations would be consciousness.

So that's why I think it's a good idea to leave a little bit of space here, which is what we try to do in here.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe let me just add a little historical note.

It's not about Turing, but it's about von Neumann.

In his seminal paper when he was at the Bell Laboratory, I believe, he derived, he explained the foundation of his architecture that is now basically an implementation of a Turing machine into the computers that we use currently.

Actually, and then it become like, oh, von Neumann machine versus the wet brand.

But in fact, von Neumann in this paper starts from models of artificial neurons, the basic McClough and Pitt neurons, to try to figure out how basic computations such as arithmetic operations could be abstracted.

And then he proposes a serial model of computing

Emphasizing that at the time, because they had to use those vacuum tubes to make the equivalent of semiconductor, it would be too big to build a parallel machine.

It would just not be physically practical.

It would need like a giant building just to put enough tubes in there.

And so the solution of doing it in a binary manner and in a kind of sequential manner, it was just a practical solution.

But his thinking was broader.

So maybe there are also deeper aspects of computations that we don't understand yet and that could help us also to make sense of the experiential dimension.

That's an hypothesis.


SPEAKER_06:
And if I could add one thing to that.

It's also true that simply massive complexity hides... I mean, it has sort of...

I don't take this too seriously, but you all know the old sort of Hegelian idea that quantity eventually yields to quality.

So you have quantitative changes, and if you have enough of them, it's as if it transitions to quality.

Well, there is one way of thinking about that.

not taking the metaphysics of dialectics seriously, but looking at it epistemically, where very complicated things can end up being... In fact, this is kind of the way we are.

Oh, somebody brought this up.

Okay.

Well, all right.

So I'm speaking to... Nobody's going to be freaked out if I start bringing up Hegel.

That's good to know.

Anyway, the idea is

that particular notion of going from quantity to quality.

So just think of massive complexity.

You take a massive complex system as a whole, it can behave in ways that you have to understand sort of qualitatively.

You can't, I mean,

Even things like chess-playing computer programs, to take the classic example, approach your chess-playing computer, if it's a good program, from the intentional stance.

In Dennett's term, you regard it as trying to attack the team and so on.

You don't think of the...

low-level complications going on in it to implement that.

So that's all just to say massive complexity with the massively parallel patient, it's not totally crazy to think that that could yield something that has this kind of form and this kind of macro structure, if you like, that we experience qualitatively.

that consciousness has.

It's not completely crazy to say, okay, yes, serial computation couldn't do it, but massively parallel computation could.


SPEAKER_03:
It's no crazier than the theory of consciousness.

Thanks for that.

That makes a lot of sense to me.

I guess in my own thinking, I've been struggling with to what extent I'm dealing with practical versus in principle practical

issues with respect to boundaries and what it would take to realize consciousness.

So you could say the mass of parallelism is practically necessary, but is it in principle necessary?

And there does seem to be something strange, like church-turning thesis.

In theory, you can do it with the beer cans and rope and let it just play out in a really long time scale.

And eventually, you calculate the whole darn thing, right?

But you're just like, I don't know about that.

But why?

So it would be like, well, practically, there might be like a sense for like, okay, you need consciousness to both like inform and be informed by action perception cycles or something like that.

But that's still a practical, not necessarily like an in principle.

But then like, I guess I've been wondering like, okay, so if it's, if we're going to in principle, it would be like,

is the computational objects, like, real or not?

So, like, if, like, a simulation versus an emulation or things like this.

So, like, in, like, with, like, the recurrent dynamics, sort of, like, metastable synchronous complexes model I'm working on,

even then there's like an issue of like, is this a real thing or not?

And like, they're dealing with like this issue with respect to non-equilibrium, uh, steady states and the free energy principle, which is like these, um, these things are defined as these like harmonic modes.

Um, but then their, their boundaries are like, um,

they seem to be modeler dependent.

Or like in a neural system, like do you ever get like exact synchrony?

How much is enough to count?

What's the time scale at which the thing actually has its existence as a particular attracting state and relative to what?

And so this is where I start to,

Yeah, this difference between practical and in principle issues of implementation and what would actually and then what would let you say, OK, this thing is conscious.

I'm still really confused about it.

May I interject?


SPEAKER_09:
May I comment on that?


SPEAKER_02:
I don't seem to have an opposition.

So I started developing an hypothesis a while ago that I published in a journal called Advances in Neuroscience that actually died.

I don't think it still exists.

And it was kind of based on a reflection on my own work and the work of others in neuroscience and neuropsychology, notably working with brain damage patients.

showing that, you know, a lot of what we believe as being critical for cognition and many aspects of, you know, cognition and affective processing in the brain, like everybody believes now that the insular cortex is critical for craving and many aspects of the sense of self.

Well, I worked with brain damage patients that basically had no insular on both sides, lacked 40% of their brain, and nevertheless, you know, except for some deep anterior amnesia that can be explained by their whatever, they were normal.

So I came to actually think that the brain is much more complex than we think, that the way we observe it with the method we have, neuroimaging or electrophysiology, is very low level.

It's not different than putting thermometers on the microprocessor and trying to infer what type of operating system it's running.

And so I started thinking, so maybe there are layers of abstractions that we haven't understood in the way the brain processes information.

And one analogy that came to my mind

I was very interested in computer science at the time, is the process of virtualization in computer science.

That is basically a way, I mean, it's a simplistic way of explaining it, but a way of creating abstraction layers so that actually at the user level, of course we are talking about computer involving user, but at the process level, all the details of the hardware are hidden.

To take a very trivial example that is not a good analogy, when you use your desktop computer, you don't see the machine language.

You are not using Word.

You don't need to program in assembly language to use your Microsoft Word interface.

So virtualization is actually a process through which

software or process can be abstracted, hide the complexity of the hardware, and also become much more resilient in the sense that then you can kind of move things around across servers, across different things.

So it's not an answer to the question, but I still have this intuition and belief that perhaps there is something analogous that is bridging the gap to some extent between what we know and observe of the brain

subjective experience and more, you know, higher-order level process that is analogous to virtualization, that basically the phenomenal experience of consciousness is very useful for active inference, etc., but relies on neural mechanisms that precisely are designed to hide the nitty-gritty, small and complex details of the hardware

and therefore makes it more usable, more practical.

And of course, at the same time, it takes longer because you need to run many cycles to do that.

For instance, if you want to simulate a certain type of microprocessor over another architecture of microprocessor, et cetera, et cetera.

So I think there is something there about trying to understand how the brain may create a virtual space and through virtualization process that then may help

bridge the gap between the different domains we are talking about.

Even though it's not sufficient yet in my mind, it doesn't fully address the problem.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Just a couple notes to tie together a little bit of the discussion.

So we've heard about a few classic philosophy of science dichotomies like necessary and sufficient, practical and principled from philosophy, and then also like real versus unreal.


SPEAKER_03:
Seems like to some degree, brains would like have to

because they're so complex, they would have to create these abstraction layers just to work as control systems, just to work as integrated systems.

They'd have to.

You'd have to self-core screen just to actually have purchase to do hierarchical control.

And then once you're doing this, then you might get

potential some flexible multiple realizability from that, potentially.

Or non-flexibility, too, depending on how you did it.


SPEAKER_02:
You summarized, Adam, again, a very good summary and better presentation of my own thinking.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, you've influenced me very heavily, so I don't think that's a coincidence.


SPEAKER_10:
um yeah one just to bring a few of these threads together this is all really interesting stuff so one is that in complexity we say more is different and that's related to this qualitative to quantitative uh more quantitative changes can lead to qualitative differences through phase transitions self-organization just qualitatively different behavior strong or weak emergence from just quantitatively more and then that's always going to be a relational question how many grains of sand are in a heap

That's the whole point is that's not pretending to be an objective question.

It's about the object, but it's not pretending to be a non-relational question, even though it is about the world.

And these ideas about which levels of the system are available for introspection versus which aren't.

is related not just to attention schema theory and attentional salience saliences from the fep and active inference but also a lot of things in girdle escher bach and so there is a uh hofstetter citation and a lot of these ideas have a lot of analogy there which just shows how in some senses many of the same questions are returned to even 40 years later

So we have to balance out the big computing hype from the really quintessential philosophical questions like necessary sufficient, practical versus principle, real versus unreal, perspectival and taking that seriously, the relational perspective, integrating topology and geometry.

So it's just really interesting to hear this great discussion and that the way the paper and actually the sequence of papers is written is very clear interfaces

and highly focused with different metaphysics but just saying it's neither uh simply necessary nor sufficient to have this projected mapping it's just under condition x and y for example the vanishing um you know privilege point and uh all these things we were talking about it just goes downstream from there so it's an interesting approach and as we're hearing from this discussion that come together

in thinking about these topics.

So thanks for bringing all these perspectives to the table, this cool stuff.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe Ken, can you comment on your reference that you had before on Douglas Hofstadter works and Gedalik Schoenbach, because actually Ken has worked a lot on these questions, has actually contributed to the I'm a Strange Look book of Douglas Hofstadter by editing a version of it, and he knows Douglas Hofstadter very well.

Cool.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

This is the, this is the section that where it was one of the sections where Hofstadter was cited, but I'd love to hear about this.

Can it be great?

Thanks.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Well, it's just a little bit of, I guess, history about this.

Like, um, actually I met David through, um, he and Antonio Damasio were contributing a paper to a book I was editing.

And Douglas Hofstadter also had a paper in that book.

And, you know, the papers were supposed to be like, I don't know, 30 pages maybe, and Hofstadter turned in 100 pages.

And it's kind of typical way.

So I said, well, look, you know, we have to edit this.

And he's like, you know...

Okay, but be very careful.

And so I went through this long process of editing down his contribution.

I cut it in half.

And that eventually became I Am a Strange Loop, which is cited here.

But he was ultimately okay with my editing job.

And in particular, what I thought ended up being really nice about I Am a Strange Loop

the way in which Hofstetter is able to describe basically the causal efficacy of implementing mathematical forms.

At least in philosophy,

Think of mathematics as a totally abstract, platonic way.

It doesn't have any causal powers and so on.

And then, of course, there's the Aristotelian tradition, which says, no, no, the forms are actually in the matter.

They're implemented in the matter.

But that position is not particularly important.

I mean, you can find it, but it's kind of like it's not the dominant sort of thumbnail sketch of this issue in the minds of most philosophers.

But I found Hofstadter's book to be really, really good on that.

Like, you know, implementing certain computational structure, certain ultimately mathematical forms has real causal power.

You know, it does change the system that implements it.

And it's perfectly legitimate to think of it as a causally real thing.

Uh, Yep.


SPEAKER_10:
One example from Hofstadter's writing that reminded me of today was when we were talking about whether it would simply be enough to have a data processing model that involved a projective geometrical component, would that be necessary or sufficient for consciousness?

And your very articulated answer was about how actually we know that these are some sort of, uh, features of what we want to be modeling, but they're neither at the necessary nor sufficient tier.

They're things that we're seeing as like sort of being spun off from some underlying process that there's still a lot of mystery around.

And so that's like the phonographs with the low resolution phonographs in Gertrude Escher Bach.

It's like you can make a very limited thing that does one thing without error or without some of the fancy attributes.

But then to extrapolate from this less is different, more is different case, it's like, well, it's not a phonograph, it's a hammer.

It's like, okay, it doesn't play records.

Yep, well, it's that kind of a phonograph.

That's what it's like to be that kind of a phonograph.

That's what it's like to be a light switch.

Okay, well, that's not really the complexity of system that we're talking about here, which is the embedded in culture human.

and then that level of complexity the full featured phonograph opens itself because of its strange loop nature to this whole new universe of recursion and of loops and of self-reflection projection

And then the phase transition or more is different question is like, how do we get from things that don't have that strange loop feature to things that do, but there's nothing that is sort of a strange loop or is not a strange loop.

It's like either it loops back with sufficient complexity to be strange in the world, or it's just not strange enough to be as interesting as these open ended infinite generative systems that we seem to be participating in.

Adam.

And I'm curious about how this interfaces with free energy because I don't think there's been a Hofstadter free energy crossover quite like this.

Adam?


SPEAKER_03:
Hi.

I'm thinking again about what David was mentioning with this sort of like reciprocity or mutuality of perspective of like seeing and then like looking at something and then this being looked at and the ways in which some of these things might be intersubjectively bootstrapped.

And I guess I'm wondering whether that puts a strange loop right at the heart of this model.

And I'm also wondering whether one of the things that might potentially get you is recursion and a powerful kind of reflexivity, which would then, you can then start talking about things like conscious access

all sorts of metacognition kind of like growing out of that potentially.

Yeah, some thoughts.


SPEAKER_02:
Ken, you need to answer that question, you know, in reference to self-reference and non-well-founded set theory and whole project, et cetera.

You are the one to address that.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, well, so actually that volume that David contributed to and Hofstadter contributed to, it was a book called The Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness.

And most of it was written by analytic philosophers and a couple of phenomenologists.

But that was the theme, basically.

People who think that, like,

like I long have, that consciousness involves this kind of reflexivity, kind of self-awareness that is not just introspection, it's a more basic notion of reflexivity than being able to attend to yourself or reflect on yourself.

And that book was about that.

But in that

book, I kind of looked at ways of formalizing this using... So the Hofstetter, we asked Hofstetter to

contribute to it because we thought that's that's right in line with Gertl Escher Bach and the notion of kind of using the notion of metamathematics and self-representation in self-reference in in the metamathematical context as sort of one model for the kind of self-awareness that's involved in consciousness he of course he that's a strange that's the kind of quintessential strange loop for him with respect to consciousness um and

But I, you know, looked at models using hyper sets, like sets that contain themselves as members.

And now recently, though, I mean, we kind of actually working on that is kind of at the origin of the whole project, the whole PCM project, because I moved back to Iowa City in like 2007.

I think that's right.

And David was there at, it's still in the, he had graduated from the neuroscience program there, but he was still working at the neuroscience program at Iowa.

And we kind of formed a little research group just based on this.

And this eventually, you know, sort of, we kind of discussed geometrical models a little bit, but David really had the breakthrough with regard to thinking of projective geometry as the,

the way forward somewhere around 2010 or something like that.

But we long wondered, can you really connect these two threads, the geometrical part, the projective geometry, and this notion of

for lack of, well, to use Hofstetter's term, strange loopiness of consciousness.

And we're actually still working on this.

So we think, we're not certain, but we think we, thanks to Daniel, because Daniel Behnkein, we think we found a way to connect these two notions finally more clearly.

David, do you want to say a little bit about that?

about how the PCM can sort of make sense of this notion of strange loopiness, strange loopiness?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah so that was uh really a driving force indeed in trying to select a a model uh so that the model would incorporate intrinsically properties like that so when i was trying to because i always had been convinced that you know there was something geometrical about intuition and so we needed to move from kind of abstract

graph theory and even with this kind of non-well-founded sort of set theory that allows you these loops, etc., into something more phenomenal, more experiential, more concrete.

And so I was looking into kind of possible geometries that had weird features beyond this perspectival intuition from which we introduced that.

And this projective geometry

under some boundary condition, but actually it's intrinsic to it, as a natural loop, if you wish.

What I'm going to say is going to sound very awkward, and it's a kind of qualitative description of things that needs to be expressed and formulated rigorously.

So sorry to the mathematician that may listen if I'm not doing it the right way.

But basically, when you look at a point at infinity in front of you, so the vanishing point just in front of you,

That's the same point.

That's the back of the point that is actually the antipodal point in the back.

Antipodal points, so two opposite points at infinity in that projective space, are topologically glued.

So that in some sense, actually, if you were kind of a virtual little creature moving into the space of consciousness, when you reach the point at infinity, you find yourself on the other side of the space.

And if you think about it, it's just as if actually the projective space, you know, when you kind of start messing with or considering the plane at infinity and its topological properties, basically was kind of a sort of mirror in the sense that basically when I look in front,

That's not the case in our visual experience, obviously, but that is in the structure of the geometry.

I look, quote unquote, of myself looking in front from the back in a kind of reverse way.

That's a property that is actually intrinsic to projective spaces, but that we don't normally see.


SPEAKER_10:
okay cool stuff here thanks for sharing all this history too so just two thoughts one is this virtualization idea and in girdle usher bach it's prelude ant fugue aunt hillary the ant colony and uh is it a virtual machine well there's yes and no in one sense

lower level details are shielded to the more semantically operative top levels.

So that's virtualization for sure, concurrent programming as well.

But is it a virtual machine in the sense that it's a dot VM that I can run on a different operating system?

No, that's not even the ant colony OS.

That's not a strategy that transfers.

So the virtual machine metaphor captures one aspect perfectly, which is that there's shielding of lower levels of the quote assembly code.

But also there's another feature of virtual machines that they've come to mean in the modern computing environment, which is like reproducible computing.

And that's definitely not the case.

That's because we have this embodied, inactive, ecological element.

So that's kind of a cool extension of a Hofstadter idea.

And then this idea of infinity being on the other side, it's sort of like you would if your light rays were being bent around the sphere or whatever shape we're on.

it would be seeing around so that's straight out it like a laser so that's sort of an attentional laser reflected by the higher concentration of photoreceptors the increased sensitivity to observations there but that being the point of attention and even meditative practices often focusing on attentional points and visual rays like that but it does if you think about the the ray of light going all the way around it would be the trajectory you would look at

to see yourself from the back.

So very interesting there.

And that's related to our conception of the space of the earth.

Whereas on a flat plane, it would just go to infinity and then pop through in like a piercing way because the space doesn't bend back on itself.

Adam.


SPEAKER_08:
Sorry.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
So I'm thinking that you, um,

might be providing an additional account of some of the phenomena that Graziano tries to describe with attention schema theory in terms of certain intuitions about the nature of consciousness and selfhood and a kind of like awareness is like a soul-like ethereal non-material intuition and so for Graziano for him consciousness is you know it's this

low dimensional sketch necessarily reduce dimensionality for the sake of control, to have a model that's more handleable, that throws away details and gives you purchase.

But that this like low dimensionality to it is like the thing that makes you, that if this is your awareness, this is, and your sense of consciousness and self coming from this, that this is part of certain intuitions about like immaterial souls and things like this.

But if your perspective,

inherently involves this kind of like strange loop, this like difficult conceivability where it's like you are both the constant context for everything, the reference point, but you're the one thing that's like invisible.

And in this kind of paradoxical way, I'm wondering if even, I'm wondering if that potentially contributes to similar aspects of phenomenology where like certain aspects of kind of like mystical intuitions.

about the self and consciousness.

Some thoughts.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool question.

We're taking it nice and interesting areas.

David, why don't you go ahead?


SPEAKER_02:
Ken could say a lot of things.

Oh, sorry, somebody else wanted to talk?


SPEAKER_10:
No, you or Ken, go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm going to just say something, but Ken will be able to better elaborate.

There was a...

If a mystic or, I would say, an esoterist named Rudolf Steiner, right, Ken, who actually believed that projective geometry, because of this sort of reciprocity of perspective, when I look at the sky, the sky looks back at myself, was a connection to God.

We don't endorse that view necessarily, but there is a history of mystical and esoteric traditions that invokes projective geometry in the past in that kind of context.

Right, Ken?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so there's the Steiner tradition, which one of his students, I believe she was one of his students, Olive Whitchier, she wrote a really good introduction to projective geometry.

which I highly recommend looking at.

It's got wonderful illustrations and they seem to have been onto the idea that projected geometry was crucial to consciousness and mind.

But they also had a lot of strange other notions that made them seem like cranks.

And then there was another interest in just higher dimensional geometry

that came from people like P.D.

Ouspensky, if you've heard of this guy.

He wrote a book called The Fourth Dimension.

And his view is that there must be part of ourselves that we don't have access to in the way in which we have access to three-dimensional objects.

And he thought that would be in the fourth dimension.

It's not clear that he thought that it was a projective geometrical structure, but it's still sort of in the ballpark.


SPEAKER_10:
Well, just one note there is that Ouspensky, who studied under Gurdjieff, there's some deep esoteric threads and, of course, going much deeper through time, alternative ideas about number, geometry, color, and, of course, philosophy.

those are in many ways what define the uh less religious at least in the exoteric sense of these wisdom traditions so it's very interesting to see the geometry spiritual connection return

after who knows maybe never even a separation but at the very least in most people's mind they think of it as shapes on a plane not about the conceptions of the lower level structure of reality or the higher level structures of reality like the shape of the universe shape of things shape of ourselves so very nice threads and david's a big fan of uh what's his name matilda geeker isn't that right


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, a poet, mathematician and Romanian prince who wrote many books about the connection between mathematics, aesthetics and natural form.

Yes, there are a lot of connections that were very inspiring to me.

My father used to show me his book when I was a kid and my grandfather was an art historian and he was also searching, you know...

interpretation of art forms from mathematics so there is a long family tradition that led me here so i'm sorry but i will have to leave to another call it was very very great i can leave you and you can continue to discuss and was very happy so we'll get in touch and stay in touch and i'll see you


SPEAKER_10:
Great see you all move us to the end, but really and can thanks so much.

It's like, always just great to have the authors on here to be hearing all this extra stuff.

So, the other slides, just to visualize them, people could screen cap them is just a few more quotes to get to that dialectic, which we actually got to talk about.

We could have had a few more just general questions, especially where does active inference fit into this whole picture and that's in the cybernetics and how it's carried out but active inference live streaming whatnot that's always what we want to think about.

And then we just had figure one, figure two, figure three, and figure four.

So those are just things that we could have talked about maybe, uh, in the future or in 2021, we could have the moon illusion or a deep dive on one dimension or another, because this was such a fascinating conversation.

So if, uh, Adam or Alex or Ken, maybe each of you want to have just a, uh, last comment, that would be great.

So let's, um, Alex, if you want to go first, then Adam, and then Ken or pass, no worries if not.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

Okay, I'll pass by now.


SPEAKER_10:
Thank you, Alex.

Adam, any last thoughts?

How is it going to change what you're going to work on or think about or just?


SPEAKER_03:
Too many thoughts, but one of the things I'm doing a lot of thinking about, like what neural systems might potentially contribute to different aspects of visual spatial awareness and geometric modeling.

And one issue I'm wondering about is the extent to which, at least in its visual nature, the conscious awareness might always be more of a 2D projection.

and that things like additional depth and additional dimensions might involve the ability to transition between different points of view in a coherent way, in a way that would imply a 3D world, but where at any given moment the visual aspect is

actually 2D and potentially without clear depth?

These are some things I'm wondering about.

And I think it's not incompatible with projected geometric modeling.

It would just be whether the engine, how distributed it is and the granularity over which it's being achieved.

And so this coupling between a 2D projection screen

And like, you know, a body map, like adjusting what you ought to see or something like the posterior cingulate, like saying like, okay, here's where you're like your eyes and your head is.

So, you know, giving, putting your perspective in there and then putting, it seems like 4D geometry could be perfectly compatible with this, but I'm trying to figure out how that works.

That was a lot of rambling, but thank you.


SPEAKER_10:
No, great.

Thanks for your participation.

And this figure two, I think points out some of what you're talking about.

That's a projection onto the 2D.

There's an ambiguous projection on the left because of the perspective being ambiguous.

And then free energy is invoked as like a symmetry break that gives a perspective on which side of the box one is actually on, given a prior that about how certain angles must be reflective of two dimensional representations.

So yeah, Ken, any thoughts on that?

And or just a last comments?


SPEAKER_06:
Well, just thank you for organizing this, and I'm sorry I couldn't make it for the whole thing.

And it's really been a wonderful conversation.

And I'll just say the next thing we're working on, Daniel and David and I, is a paper trying to relate the projective geometrical model closer to show how it relates to notions like strange strengths and...

pre-reflective self-consciousness.

It's kind of more basic type of self-consciousness than introspection or attention.

And to show that you can make sense of that in terms of the projected geometrical structure.

That's the next thing on the agenda for us.


SPEAKER_10:
cool sounds like a fun research direction so with all of this being said everyone thanks a lot for participating live and if you're watching for watching it too we will have the follow-up form link is in the calendar invite if you want to just provide us some thoughts any feedback suggestions and questions are always welcome

other than that just uh stay in communication really appreciate this great conversation and some awesome stuff so thanks again everyone for participating and watching and we will talk soon so see you later thank you
