## LPj_ok8Pxxw

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome.

This is ACT-INF Livestream number 52.0 and it is February 28th, 2023.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org if you want to learn more and participate in learning groups and projects at the Institute, including these live streams.

Well.

We're here today to learn and discuss the paper Geometric Methods for Sampling Optimization Inference and Adaptive Agents by Alessandra Barp, Lancelot DeCosta, Guilherme Franca, Karl Fristen, Mark Ghiralami, Michael Jordan, and Gregorios Pavliotis.

This video, like all DOT Zero videos are,

is a introduction for some of the ideas.

It is not a review or a final word.

And as we've joked before, it's more than anything, a call for help.

So if you're curious about these topics, if you're knowledgeable about these topics, we would really look forward to you getting involved in the upcoming 52.1 and 52.2 discussions, as well as in an ongoing basis to help us understand some of the technical details

This is going to get technical at times and certainly beyond the technicalities I understand, though I am looking forward to presenting them.

And it'll be great to have those who have backgrounds of all different types to come together and talk about this awesome work.

Also, a big thanks to Ali and Kandon for the assistance, technical and moral, during the preparations here.

In 52.0, we're going to bring up some aims and claims, read the abstract, look at the roadmap, and talk about the keywords.

And then we will walk through the paper with an emphasis on the figures, formalisms, and key points.

in the coming weeks we're going to be discussing this paper with one or more authors so as usual get in touch if you want to participate or if it's after the fact you can still get involved we can start with an introduction or a warm-up I'm Daniel I'm a researcher in California and

i'm tempted to say just totally honestly i'm happy to get this one over with but that sounds a little bit different than i might intend it to be i'm really excited to dive into this work which is going to be approaching active inference from an angle that we haven't necessarily highlighted on these streams so i think it's going to be a fascinating discussion it's going to run the gamut span the gap however you choose to see it between

technical sophistication and intuition which is a great place to be so i've been really excited and motivated to prepare and i'm looking forward to the dot zero we're doing right now and to the upcoming discussions

so let's jump in with the big questions that might motivate one to read this paper this kind of paper even if they were not familiar with the authors or topics and these are just a few ways to write it up of course not the only ways so first question

how can we effectively and efficiently navigate information geometric or information theoretic landscapes and how can we tackle that question from an analytical which is to say equation based as well as a computational which is to say real implementation based perspective often it's really

fun, intuitive, natural to talk about information theory, even for those who haven't taken the technical prerequisites.

And this work may help us navigate to a space where we're able to think with good intuitions about information geometry, information theory, and also make sure that those intuitions are going to be caught by our technical tools.

Second, how can we optimize inference in complex models, including cases where we are doing inference on action as a parameter, also known as active inference?

Optimization and functional analysis, as we'll come to see soon, has long been interested in these complex or challenging models that are right at the margin, right at the border of what is tractable or not, given the computational hardware that modelers have access to.

For example, big data sets, high dimensional state spaces, complex dynamics, and so on.

How about cases where we're also interested in doing parametric inference and optimization on action or action plans as a parameter, also known as active inference.

And third, what technical underpinnings support the rigor and applicability of active inference?

And what special cases are revealed when we consider possibilities and constraints?

These are those two branches of analytical and computational coming back again.

We want to make sure that when we're thinking within the active inference paradigm, the active inference ontology is the language that we're speaking and that there's a technical rigor to what's being discussed.

Additionally, we want to make sure that it's not just an analytical rigor, but it's also going to be computationally plausible, tractable, or maybe even preferable.

That would be awesome.

Those are the questions that at least appeared.

We are discussing this paper, Geometric Methods for Sampling, Optimization, Inference, and Adaptive Agents by Barp and DaCosta et al., shared first authorship, and it was published on Archive.

I'll just note a few key claims from this paper.

They wrote, our goal in this chapter is to discuss the emergence of natural geometries within a few important areas of statistics and applied mathematics, namely optimization, sampling, inference, and adaptive agents.

That's the title.

We provide a conceptual introduction to the underlying ideas rather than a technical discussion, highlighting connections with various fields of mathematics and physics.

Well, I can tell you that they do make connections with various fields of mathematics and physics, though whether it is a conceptual introduction or a technical discussion is all going to be about your perspective.

Third, to illustrate a generic use case for the previous methodologies that are going to be discussed, we consider active inference, a unifying formulation of behavior, subsuming perception, planning, and learning as a process of inference.

So inference on adaptive agents is not necessarily new.

It goes by reinforcement learning, machine learning, and so on.

However, to use those methodologies

in the context of active inference a unifying formulation of behavior is something that the authors are bringing forth here and last we describe decision making under active inference using information geometry revealing several special cases that are established notions in statistics cognitive science and engineering so active inference is not just unifying it's going to be shown to be generalized as well which is to say that special cases of the generalization

emerge different formalisms that were known disparately across fields.

On to the abstract.

They write, in this chapter, we identify fundamental geometric structures that underlie the problems of sampling, optimization, inference, and adaptive decision-making.

Based on this identification, we derive algorithms that exploit these geometric structures to solve these problems efficiently.

We show that a wide range of geometric theories emerge naturally in these fields, ranging from measure-preserving processes, information divergences, Poisson geometry, and geometric integration.

Specifically, we explain how.

1.

Leveraging the symplectic geometry of Hamiltonian systems enable us to construct accelerated sampling and optimization methods.


UNKNOWN:
2.


SPEAKER_00:
The theory of Hilbertian subspaces and Stein operators provides a general methodology to obtain robust estimators.


UNKNOWN:
3.


SPEAKER_00:
Preserving the information geometry of decision making yields adaptive agents that perform active inference.

Throughout, we emphasize the rich connections between these fields, e.g., inference draws on sampling and optimization, and adaptive decision-making assesses decisions by inferring their counterfactual consequences.

Our exposition provides a conceptual overview of underlying ideas rather than a technical discussion, which can be found in the references herein.

And indeed, there are several hundred references in this paper.

Let's go to the roadmap.

So, first, we can start on the right side.

Here's an active agent.

Vroom, vroom.

doing accelerated optimization in the carpool lane, looking ahead to the almost dessert-like visual representation of active inference, that's where we're going to go.

And on the right side, it's just some cars.

One of them is accelerated.

The other one isn't.

The paper begins with an introduction, and then in section two gets into the topic of accelerated optimization, covering the areas of principle of geometric integration, conservative flows and symplectic integrators, rate matching integrators for smooth optimization, manifold and constrained optimization, gradient flow as a high friction limit, and optimization on the space of probability measures.

In Section 3, they turn from accelerated optimization in general to Hamiltonian-based accelerated sampling.

The subsections of 3 are Optimizing Diffusion Processes for Sampling and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

From the Hamiltonian-based accelerated sampling, they turn towards doing statistical inference with kernel-based discrepancies in section four.

The subsections are topological methods for MMDs, smooth measures and KSDs,

the canonical Stein operator and Poincaré duality, kernel Stein discrepancies and score matching, information geometry of MMDs and natural gradient descent, minimum Stein discrepancy estimators, likelihood inference with generative models.

Finally, in Section 5, Adaptive Agents Through Active Inference, they're going to bring it home to active inference.

Section 5.1, Modeling Adaptive Decision Making, Behavior, Agents, and Environments, Decision Making in Precise Agents, the Information Geometry of Decision Making,

and 5.2 realizing adaptive agents the basic active inference algorithm sequential decision making under uncertainty world model learning as inference and scaling active inference a quick note we have all the formalisms entered into our dot zero teams coda document there are 46 numbered equations in this paper and 83 overall

We're going to bring in some, but not all of these formalisms in the .zero video, and we're ready to bring in more during the .one and .two discussions with the authors.

Just for those who are watching along, I'm going to scan through all of the formalisms from our coda.

And again, for those who want to help get involved with a .zero preparation, this is a little bit of what .zero preparation looks like.

I'm going to now scroll through the formalisms just in case anybody wants to screenshot or see them.

Great.

On to the keywords.

Keywords of the paper are information geometry, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, Stein's method, reproducing kernel, variational inference, accelerated optimization, dissipative systems, decision theory, and active inference in no particular pedagogical order.

Let's start with decision theory.

From the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, the article begins, decision theory is concerned with the reasoning underlying an agent's choices, whether this is a mundane choice between taking the bus or getting a taxi, or a more far reaching choice about whether to pursue a demanding political career.

Decision theory is about agents making decisions, cognitive things making decisions.

And we can take a peek ahead to figure three, which is shown here, as well as invoke some of the keywords that we're about to walk into now.

So if this is your first time hearing some of this vocabulary or you're super familiar, either way, it's great.

In this paper and in this discussion, we're going to see how different decision theoretic settings

such as no ambiguity, no ambiguity or no preference, no extrinsic value, and no intrinsic value, are going to be operationalized within an information theoretic formalism, an information geometric formalism, and specifically one that we're able to do accelerated inference on using variational methods.

we're going to be involving action as a parameter, so we can call that active inference.

And that's how we're approaching decision theory and getting from here to there with all those fun stops in between.

Let's go to information theory.

The paper in the introduction writes, of particular relevance to this chapter is information geometry, e.g.

the differential geometric treatment of smooth statistical manifolds.

whose origin stems from a seminal article by Rao , who introduced the Fischer metric tensor on parameterized statistical models, and thus a natural Riemannian geometry that was later observed to correspond to an infinitesimal distance with respect to the Kolbach-Leibler divergence.

So, going into citation 23 and 24.

Citation 23 is Rao from 1992, and Rao wrote, The objective of the paper is to derive certain inequality relations connecting the elements of the information matrix as defined by Fisher and the variances and covariances of the estimating functions.

A class of distribution functions which admit estimation of parameters with the minimum possible variance has been discussed.

The concept of distance between populations of a given type has been developed starting from a quadratic differential metric defining the element of length.

So I'm only going to give the disclaimer one time.

Everything in red text is beyond speculative.

It's just priming the pump for discussions with those who know more and with those who know less.

And it's just a first pass that we're going to continue to develop on.

But broadly...

If we can compute inequality relationships, which this paper developed in 1992, we can bound estimators, test for relative improvements, and basically do stuff with those distributions.

And if we can compute certain kinds of statistical distances, such that a distance requires a length metric,

we can find optimal estimators of parameters, specifically their variances and covariance structure, in principle and in practice, by finding the maximum informational alignment to other estimators or empirical data.

So we'll often say like, if you had the optimum parameterization, you'd be predicting as well as you could.

And so we want to be able to operationalize that using distances and metrics.

and citation 24. this is an invariant form for the prior probability and estimation problems by harold jeffries and jeffries wrote it has shown that a certain differential form depending on the values of the parameters in a law of chance is invariant for all transformations of the parameters when the law is differentiable with regard to all parameters

For laws containing a location and a scale parameter, a form with a somewhat restricted type of invariance is found even when the law is not everywhere differentiable with regard to the parameters.

This form has the properties required to give a general rule for stating the prior probability in a large class of estimation problems.

So, if all the parameters in our model, whether there's one, two, or more,

are differentiable, which is to say they're smooth, et cetera, et cetera.

There are technical details.

Then there are certain transformational invariances.

So just like every Gaussian distribution, by shifting it and stretching and shrinking it, you can map those onto each other.

It's like that.

It turns out that some of those constraints can even be somewhat relaxed.

For example, this approach may still be effective even where parameters are not differentiable everywhere.

And this is big for helping us do Bayesian estimation, which can be seen as a special case of informational transformations or of manipulations of statistical distributions

in the information theoretic or information geometric sense.

Functional analysis.

So let's begin as tradition in our year 2023 with a brief quote from ChatGPT.

How is functional analysis helpful for us who are learning and applying active inference?

I'll just read the last section.

Overall, functional analysis provides a powerful mathematical toolset for understanding and analyzing the principles of active inference.

and one can read more.

Functional analysis is the study of functions.

And here we see one way of showing what a function does in terms of being this box f of x that takes in an input, an argument x, and outputs a result y. And also that can be understood as a mapping

between or amongst spaces.

And there's a lot more to go into.

Just wanted to bring up that in math, sometimes people have analyzed functions and their properties.

And we're interested in the properties of a special class of functions, which are probability distributions, well-behaved probability distributions.

What do we do with those probability distributions?

Well, one thing we might want to do is sample.

So the paper writes, sampling methods are critical to the efficient implementations of many methodologies.

Most modern samplers are based on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods, which includes slice samplers, piecewise deterministic Markov chains, and so on.

The original Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, or HMC, which we're gonna get to, algorithm was introduced in physics to sample distributions on gauge groups for lattice quantum chromodynamics.

It combined two approaches that emerged in previous decades, namely the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm and the Hamiltonian formulation of molecular dynamics.

So the way that they state it in the beginning of section three of the paper is,

The purpose of sampling methods is to efficiently draw samples from a given target distribution, rho, or more commonly to calculate expectations with respect to rho by equation 33 and other.

They write, modern Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, which again we're going to get to in a second, relies heavily on symplectic integrators, another keyword, to simulate a deterministic dynamic responsible for generating distant moves between samples and thus reduce their correlation, while at the same time preserving important geometric properties.

Now, we want to make our samples as informative as possible.

If we're just drawing samples and it's the same sample again and again, one can imagine that it is uninformative.

Conversely, one can imagine a situation where samples are informative.

And that is brought into practice by making sure that the samples are minimally correlated with each other, as noted above.

And this also has analogy in cryptography.

So if we're sampling something where the successive samples are 99% correlated, you can imagine that you're oversampling.

So you're taking 10,000 frames per second of a YouTube video with 30 frames per second.

I think I'm streaming at 25 frames per second right now.

Conversely, if one were to sample every 10 minutes, then their correlation structure would also not capture the video's 25 frames per second.

So in order to generate good and large moves in the space, we would need perfect knowledge of what the space is or how it's generated, which is sometimes knowable in cryptography.

However, empirically, we need to use heuristics and statistical approximations.

So this is the applied statistics angle on the analytical relationships that we're going to be talking about.

And it's going to come up again and again, this tension between analytical formulations, what's true in principle, and the statistical or numerical or computational applications.

To Hamiltonian Monte Carlo from Wikipedia.

The Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algorithm, originally known as hybrid Monte Carlo, still HMC, is a Markov chain Monte Carlo method for obtaining a sequence of random samples which converge to being distributed according to a target probability distribution for which direct sampling is difficult.

So just a few first pass reflections.

We're sampling, which is to say Monte Carlo, and Monte Carlo is hearkening back to a different time when gambling was done in Monte Carlo and the state space of all the hands of poker were too vast to compute analytically or equations were not known.

And so what one used to do and still does

is draw samples and say, well, I don't know if this is the final estimate on how likely a royal flush is, but from the two billion hands that I sampled, there were two royal flushes.

And so it's one in a billion based upon my sample.

So we're sampling because this is a complex distribution for which an analytical solution is not possible, not known, not relevant, or not tractable computationally.

So there's various situations where we want to sample and we don't necessarily have an analytical solution.

When we're sampling from a converged stationarity of a statistical landscape, from a numerical perspective, we understand that landscape well enough to do inference.

So imagine that we're sampling height estimates from GPS locations in the X and the Y coordinates, and we're getting a Z value in our sample.

At some point, we can say we're unsurprised by new samples.

At that point, we understand the landscape well enough to do statistical inference.

And just like the frames per second in the previous example, one can imagine if the landscape is changing on the spatial scale of one mile and you're sampling every millimeter, you might be oversampling.

If you were sampling every league, maybe you'd be too coarse grained with your samples.

And so one reason that comes up in science all the time for using sampling is that the search space might be just too large.

For example, the combinatorics of a phylogenetic tree with a thousand species might be vast.

And so it might be better to say something like, well, 99% of the million samples we drew were consistent with X because an analytical solution or a brute force search, neither might be possible.

And the Wikipedia wrote, this sequence of samples can be used to estimate integrals with respect to the target distribution.

So sometimes we're sampling not from the target distribution itself, but rather from a distribution that is related or transformed from the target distribution.

This is because sampling directly from the target distribution might be difficult or less than perfectly informative.

So we might, for example,

Hint, hint, sample from the derivative of the target, which might help us identify points where, for example, the derivative is flat in all directions.

In the case that we're sampling from a derived landscape of the target distribution, this is called a symplectic integrator.

So let's look at what a symplectic integrator is.

So first, backing up to what is differential geometry.

Differential geometry is a mathematical discipline that studies the geometry of smooth shapes and smooth spaces, otherwise known as smooth manifolds.

Symplectic geometry is a branch of differential geometry and differential topology that studies symplectic manifolds, that is, differentiable manifolds equipped with a closed non-degenerate two-form.

Symplectic geometry has its origins in the Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics, where the phase space of certain classical systems takes on the structure of a symplectic manifold.

So, the keyword density is high, these topics are all very closely linked.

From the paper, it has been known for a long time that the class of symplectic integrators is the preferred choice for simulating physical systems, only the finest for our simulations of physical systems.

These discretization techniques are designed to preserve the underlying symplectic geometry of Hamiltonian systems.

And they also form the basis of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo or hybrid Monte Carlo methods.

We're gonna come back to this tension again and again, which is what good

is a in principle smooth and differentiable analytical formulation if our discretization scheme the way that we actually implement the steps on a computer are inferior we might ruin all those nice properties that we work to get about the analytical form we might just throw those out when we discretize it coarsely or inappropriately

So what is a symplectic integrator?

It's a numerical integration scheme for Hamiltonian systems.

Symplectic integrators form the subclass of geometric integrators, which by definition are canonical transformations.

They're transformations we know a lot about.

Symplectic integrator schemes

are referring to, again, just broadly, both the analytical formulations and the software packages and approaches that we can use to implement those formalisms.

And these integration schemes are useful across difficult estimation problems, which is why they're used to study nonlinear dynamics, molecular dynamics, like protein simulation,

discrete element methods, accelerator physics, plasma physics, quantum physics, celestial mechanics.

The time evolution of Hamilton's equation is a symplectomorphism, meaning that it conserves the symplectic two-form.

A numerical scheme is a symplectic integrator if it also conserves this two-form.

Let's hear more if this is not correct or not complete.

But the one form is like the differentiation and integration of a line.

The two form is like the differentiation and integration of a surface.

And the three form is like integration or differentiation of a volume.

And John Denker has a great blog post on the basic properties of a symplectic integrator.

Some really interesting quotes that are good to just keep in mind when we're hearing about all these avenues we're going to be exploring in the paper.

A symplectic integrator conserves the area in phase space delimited by an ensemble of systems.

For a periodic system, there is an area that is conserved, namely the area inside the phase space orbit of the system.

The main reason for mentioning the orbit is to make the point that there are lots of different things with dimensions of area in face space.

Some are conserved and some not.

Some are interesting and some not.

You have to specify which sort of area you are talking about.

So another theme that's going to arise is we're interested in very well-behaved outcomes,

from a very specific or constrained, still broad, but definitely constrained set of distributions.

For example, distributions that can be interpreted in an information theory sense as probability distributions.

What was that mention of the Hamiltonian and the shadow Hamiltonian?

So the author's right.

For symplectic brackets, which is the kind of operation that reflects the symplectic integrator, the existence of a shadow Hamiltonian can be guaranteed beyond the case of splitting methods, e.g.

for variational integrators, which use variational inference, which use a discrete version of Hamilton's principle of least action.

And we've heard it before, that free energy principle is a principle of least action for inference and action.

and more generally for most symplectic integrators in which the symplectic bracket is preserved up to topological considerations described by some technicalities that we can learn about.

As we shall see, such geometric integrators can be constructed by leveraging the shadow Hamiltonian property of symplectic methods on higher dimensional conservative Hamiltonian systems.

In short, as a consequence of having shadow Hamiltonian,

such geometric integrators are able to reproduce all the relevant properties of the continuum system these arguments are completely general so even before one knows what the shadow hamiltonian necessarily is the authors are letting us know that if we can discretize the shadow hamiltonian appropriately

Through symplectic integration, we can provide a discretization scheme that ends up staying consistent and compatible and all down the middle with the analytical properties that we worked so hard to get.

And there were some different papers that were cited and some that were found during research.

This paper, Timestep and Shadow Hamiltonian in Molecular Dynamics Simulations by Kim

demonstrates symplectic integrators on the simplest possible system, a simple harmonic oscillator.

So if one wants to go to a technical example, but one that builds intuition, that's a great place to start.

And from the Wikipedia article on energy drift, these integrators do not in fact reproduce the actual Hamiltonian mechanics of the system.

Instead, they reproduce a closely related shadow Hamiltonian whose value they conserved many orders of magnitude more closely.

The accuracy of the energy conservation for the true Hamiltonian is dependent on the time step.

So if we can, for example, just metaphorically speaking, capture a high resolution image of the shadow, then we'll be able to know something, do something with the actual.

Some technical details on Stein's method.

which is a general method in probability theory to obtain bounds on the distance between two probability distributions with respect to a probability metric.

And Stein's method is used in the context of Stein operators and Stein class, which we're going to get to in the subsequent discussions.

Reproducing kernel.

Our discussion of inference builds upon the theory of Hilbertian subspaces and in particular, reproducing kernels.

These inference schemes rely on the continuity of linear functionals such as probability and Schwartz distributions over a class of functions to geometrize

the analysis of integral probability metrics, which measure the worst case integration error.

We shall explain how maximum mean, kernelized, and score matching discrepancies arise naturally from topological considerations.

So we've added some background links here to the slide, but it'll be a great place to start with authors.

What is a reproducing kernel?

And how is it used in this paper?

Onwards through the keywords we go.

Accelerated optimization and variational inference.

So here's a 2016 paper from Michael Jordan and other authors and some quotes from the abstract.

Accelerated methods achieve faster convergent rates than gradient methods and indeed under certain conditions they achieve optimal rates.

However, accelerated methods are not descent methods and remain a conceptual mystery.

We propose a variational continuous time framework for understanding accelerated methods.

We provide a systematic methodology for converting accelerated higher order methods from continuous time to discrete time.

Our work illuminates a class of dynamics that may be useful for designing better algorithms for optimization.

And this is going to be, again, something awesome to discuss.

We've talked about on many streams variational inference in the context of gradient-based analysis.

optimization for example the ball is rolling to the bottom of the bowl bottom of the hill and what you can do is you can take the gradient div grab curl and all that of where the ball is and just go downhill and if you designed the hill to be the right shape

or you're using a chosen family of variational estimators that are the right shape, are a good shape, well-behaved shape, then you follow the gradient on down.

And that's how we've talked about variational inference.

Accelerated optimization is going to be accelerated from that.

And so it's fun to think about, and it'll be great to talk about.

Dissipative systems.

The vast majority of statistics and machine learning applications involve solving optimization problems.

The author is right.

Accelerated gradient based methods and several variations thereof have become workhorses in these fields.

Recently, there has been great interest in studying such methods from a continuous time limiting perspective.

Such methods can be seen as first order integrators to a classical Hamiltonian system with dissipation.

This raises the question,

on how to discretize the system such that important properties are preserved, assuming the system has fast conversions to critical point and desirable stability properties.

Originally, such a theory of geometric integration was developed with conservative systems in mind while optimization,

In optimization, the associated system is naturally a dissipative one.

More recently, it has been proved that a generalization of symplectic integrators to dissipative Hamiltonian systems is indeed able to preserve rates of convergence and stability, which are the main properties of interest for optimization.

So, from the Wikipedia on Hamiltonian systems.

example of a time independent hamiltonian system is the harmonic oscillator so it's just a frictionless spring oscillating around the hamiltonian of the system does not depend on time and thus the energy of the system is conserved and so we can say that that is a conservative hamiltonian if the hamiltonian decays in time it is dissipative

recently the advances of these authors and others have extended our ability to make discretizations of dissipative hamiltonians that respect the rates of convergence and stability which are the main properties of interest for optimization

and we've talked about hamiltonians on live stream number 49 with dalton on bayesian mechanics so pretty cool what is conservative what is dissipative we'll explore as the final keyword here

i just wanted to start with a blank slide on active inference and see what happens in 52.1 so consider the slide to be blank and for the authors and discussants looking forward to hearing how are we approaching active inference given everything that we've just loaded onto the table and everywhere that we're about to go with the paper let's get into it section one introduction so

the authors begin with differential geometry

a fundamental role in applied mathematics statistics and computer science including various domains citations 1 through 22 which can be shown here various citations from this well-cited paper the geometric study of statistical models has had many successes ranging from statistical inference where it was used to prove the optimality of maximum likelihood estimator

to the construction of the category of mathematical statistics generated by Markov morphisms.

So what are Markov morphisms from NCAT lab?

The formalism of Markov categories can be thought of as a way to express certain aspects of probability and statistics synthetically.

In other words, it consists of structure and axioms, which one can think of as fundamental in probability and statistics,

which one can use to prove theorems without having to use measure theory directly.

Intuitively, for the purposes of probability, a Markov category can be seen as a category where morphisms behave like random functions or Markov kernels, hence the name.

So just some red text speculation.

It was a big success and a breakthrough to think about the category from a formal category theoretic perspective

to think about the category of statistical distributions from an information geometric perspective.

This means that we can understand many analytical properties and transformations of statistical distributions, hashtag Bayesian, and develop general methods that work for that whole category, like accelerated optimization.

And the applications are vast.

Originally, such a theory of geometric integration was developed with conservative systems in mind.

While in optimization, the associated system is naturally a dissipative one.

Nevertheless, symplectic integrators were exploited in this context.

More recently, it has been proved that a generalization of symplectic integrators to dissipative Hamiltonian systems is indeed able to preserve rates of convergence and stability, which are the main properties of interest for optimization.

So, citation nine, what is it about?

2021 paper on dissipative symplectic integration with applications to gradient-based optimization by some of the authors.

And it's interesting to pull out some quotes from the abstract and just hear a little bit about what they're up to.

Recently, continuous time dynamical systems have proved useful in providing conceptual and quantitative insights into gradient-based optimization, widely used in modern machine learning and statistics.

An important question that arises in this line of work is how to discretize the system in such a way that its stability and rates of convergence are preserved.

So this is the sampling problem.

In continuous time, the math is continuous and nice.

However, the sampling problem, which actually comes into play when we use modern computational methods that are implemented on discrete time, space, and constraints,

What happens when we use unconventional computing?

That's an interesting discussion question, but in practice today, the discretization approach is going to matter a lot.

In this paper, we propose a geometric framework in which such discretizations can be realized systematically, enabling the derivation of rate matching algorithms without the need for a discrete convergence analysis.

More specifically, we show that a generalization of symplectic integrators to non-conservative and in particular dissipative Hamiltonian systems is able to preserve rates of convergence up to a controlled error.

So this is the advance of this paper, that within a controlled error, good enough, they can model conservative and non-conservative, even dissipative Hamiltonian systems.

Moreover, such methods preserve a shadow Hamiltonian despite the absence of a conservation law, extending key results of symplectic integrators to non-conservative cases.

Our arguments rely on a combination of backwards error analysis with fundamental results from symplectic geometry.

We stress that although the original motivation for this work was the application of optimization, where dissipative systems play a natural role, they are fully general and not only provide a differential geometric analysis for dissipative Hamiltonian systems, but also substantially extend the theory of structure-preserving integration.

So, they made this generalization in the case of optimization.

However, it's exciting that it extends even deeper into the math and the symmetry.

Those are a few highlights from section one.

On to section two, accelerated optimization.

Vroom, vroom, here we go.

So there are going to be a lot of slides from sections two through five.

And to keep the video a reasonable length, I'm going to just highlight a few pieces, not even necessarily what I intended to highlight, but I'm just going to go for it so we can get through it.

Section two, we shall be concerned with a problem of optimization of a function, finding a point that maximizes V of Q or minimizes negative V of Q over a smooth manifold M, R in the real numbers.

Many algorithms and optimization are given as a sequence of finite differences.

Even when these algorithms are seen

discretizations of a continuum system whose behavior is presumably understood it is well known that most discretizations break important properties of a system and they continue to write the analysis of such finite difference iterations is usually challenging relying on painstaking algebra to obtain theoretical guarantees such as conversions to a critical point stability and rates of convergence to a critical point

Even when these algorithms are seen as discretizations of a continuum system whose behavior is presumably understood, it is well known that most discretizations break important properties of the system.

It can't be highlighted enough.

When we implement optimization algorithms on modern computers, we have to make discretizations in space and time and in practice.

So even if the analytical properties of the distribution are totally fire,

When we try to solve and fit models to empirical data, unless we also match that elegance and power with a discretization approach, we end up failing to realize analytical promises.

2.1 The Principle of Geometric Integration Fortunately, the authors write, here comes into play one of the most fundamental ideas of geometric integrations.

Many numerical integrators are very close, exponentially in the step size, to a smooth dynamics generated by a shadow vector field.

A little whisper of a shadow Hamiltonian.

and the shadow vector field is a perturbation of the original vector field.

This allows us to analyze the discrete trajectory implemented by the algorithm using powerful tools from dynamical systems and differential geometry, which are a priori reserved to smooth systems.

So we're going to be able to discretize our cake and have it be smooth too.

Crucially, while numerical integrators typically diverge significantly from the dynamics they aim to simulate, geometric integrators respect the main properties of a system.

In the context of optimization, this means respecting stability and rates of convergence.

Seems like a good idea to respect the main properties of the system.

This was first demonstrated in 9 and further extended in 10.

Our discussion will be based on these work.

So, citation 9, Franca, Jordan, and Vidal, mentioned previously.

And citation 10, Franca, Barp, Girolami, and Jordan, Optimization on Manifolds, A Symplectic Approach, author's previous work.

So, big development.

We can use geometric rather than coarse numerical integrators, so our sampling-based optimization schemes, including their discretization, respect the main properties of the system.

Sounds great.

Section 2.2, conservative flows and symplectic integrators.

As a stepping stone, we first discussed the construction of suitable conservative flows.

These are very well studied and they're very intuitive, more intuitive.

To construct vector fields along the derivative of x, which is the function of flows along which some function is constant,

we shall need brackets.

Geometrically, these are morphisms, x star to x, also known as contravariant tensors of rank two in physics.

So calling back the two form and the brackets.

Importantly, vector fields that preserve F correspond to bracket vector fields in which B is anti-symmetric.

Constructing conservative flows is thus straightforward.

Unfortunately, it is a rather more challenging task to construct efficient discretizations that retain this property.

Most well-known procedures, namely discrete gradient and projection methods, only give rise to integrators that require solving implicit equations at every step, and they may break other important properties of the system.

Citation 96.

This is the issue.

Again, no matter how nicely behaved, in principle, our analytical underlying smooth differentiable function is, if we discretize it and we chop it up in a way that's inappropriate, we don't respect the properties of the system.

We don't end up with being able to realize those analytical promises.

Indeed, in practice, the Hamiltonian usually decomposes into a potential energy associated to position and independent of momentum, and a kinetic energy associated to momentum and invariant under position changes, both generating tractable flows.

Thanks to this decomposition, we are able to construct numerical methods through splitting the vector field.

few ideas coming together here recalling some of our generalized coordinate based approaches to non-equilibrium steady states in bayesian mechanics and also decomposition of complex functions

Note also that for symplectic brackets, the existence of a shadow Hamiltonian can be guaranteed beyond the case of splitting methods, e.g.

for variational integrators, which use a discrete version of Hamiltonian's, Hamilton's principle of least action, and for most symplectic integrators in which the symplectic bracket is preserved up to topological considerations described by the first Dirham cohomology of face space.

So for discussion with authors and you all,

what are the splitting integrators what is split from what and why what is the bracket notation or operation and what is a Poisson bracket what is a Poisson system section 2 3 rate matching integrators for smooth optimization so having obtained a vast family of smooth Dynamics and integrators that closely preserve F we can now apply these ideas to optimization

What is being set up in this section and why?

In equation seven, we see that the damping coefficient gamma of T being greater than zero reflects the dissipative component or the second term in that right-hand side of equation seven.

So damping coefficient controls the strength of the dissipation.

One can imagine that if the damping coefficient is zero, the dissipative side zeroes out and B has conservative behavior.

and so on so what is being set up here and why dot dot dot dot dot the existence of such a lyopin of function described above implies that trajectory starting in the neighborhood of q star will converge to q star so it's like a ball rolling to the bottom of a hill just like we've always wanted

In other words, the above system provably solves the optimization problem, minimum of V on Q, such that Q is in the D dimensional real.

Punchline, we're setting up a system with good smooth optimization characteristics, ball rolling to the bottom of a smooth hill, that is also on the path or using the notation of or prepared to make the

Transformation two, a tractable discretization approach.

So some more on the damping coefficient.

They bring up some common choices for the damping coefficient and big O notation describes on the order of which something occurs.

For example, linearly order of the variable or sub or super linearly as a function of time or data points.

So in computational complexity analysis, people are often interested as I double the amount of data I'm analyzing,

Does that make the algorithm take twice as long?

That's linear computational complexity.

Does it take four times as long?

Does it take the same amount of time?

And so on.

And it'll be great to talk about the intuitions and implications and generalizations about how the damping coefficient influences the computational complexity estimates for convergence in different settings.

They write, the conservative system from equation 16 reduces precisely the original dissipative system, 13.

The second equation in 16 reproduces 14 and the remaining equations are equivalent to the equations of motion associated to 13, which in turn are equivalent to eight as previously noted.

Formally,

What we have done is to embed the original dissipative system with phase space R2D, so real with 2D dimensions, into a higher dimensional conservative system with phase space R2D plus two.

The dissipative dynamics thus lies on a hyper surface of constant energy k equals zero in high dimensions.

The reason for doing this procedure called symplectification is purely theoretical.

Oh come on, it's not purely theoretical.

Since the theory of symplectic integrators only accounts for conservative systems, we can now extend this theory to dissipative systems settings by applying a symplectic integrator to 13 and then fixing the relevant coordinates, 17, in the resulting methods.

Geometrically, this corresponds to integrating the time flow exactly.

going to talk about a relationship between time and dissipative systems after all it's dissipative systems that are dissipating in time and so discretization of time plays a role in the appropriate discretization of a dissipative hamiltonian

And in citation 9, previously raised, such a procedure was defined under the name of presymplectic integrators, and these connections hold not only for the specific example above, but also for general non-conservative Hamiltonian systems.

So, what is happening here?

What's an intuition for conservative and dissipative systems, and how have the recent works of Franke et al.

expanded what is possible?

are now ready to explain why this approach is suitable to construct practical optimization methods the coordinate t sub k becomes simply the time discretization which is exact and so is u sub k since it is a function of time alone importantly u does not couple to any of the other degrees of freedom so it is irrelevant whether we have access to u or not because we're looking to solve a function of t

17a can be substituted in 15 to get 18 and you can replace 13 to get 19. we'll talk more about it with the authors therefore the known rates equation 11 for the continuum system are nearly preserved and so would be any rates of more general time dependent dissipative hamiltonian systems

Let us now present an explicit algorithm to solve the optimization problem.

This is all happening as a consequence of having a shadow Hamiltonian such that geometric integrators are able to reproduce all the relevant properties of the continuum system.

Section 2.4.

Manifold and constrained optimization.

Following 10, we briefly mentioned how the previous approach can be extended in great generality to an optimization problem.

So, equation 21, we present our minimization problem, V of Q, variational distribution on Q, citation 10, Franke et al.

They write, there are essentially two ways to solve this problem through a dissipative Hamiltonian approach.

One is to simulate a Hamiltonian dynamics on T star M by incorporating the metric of M in the kinetic moving part of the Hamiltonian.

Another is to consider a Hamiltonian dynamics on Rn and embed M into Rn by imposing several constraints.

The first approach uses a Lie group.

We'll talk more about it.

An example of a second approach

One can constrain the integrator on Rn to define a symplectic integrator on M via the discrete constrained variational approach by using some techniques.

above method consists in a dissipative generalization of the well-known rattle integrator from molecular dynamics citations 100 through 103 used in computational biology section 2.5 gradient flow as a high friction limit let us provide some intuition why simulating second order systems is expected to yield faster algorithms as an illustration consider figure one on the left we'll look at in a second

where a particle immersed in a fluid falls under the influence of a potential force negative delta sub q on v and q so partial differential with respect to q of v on q that plays a role of gravity and is constrained to move on a surface so ball rolling down the hill we weren't joking about it

In the underdamped case, the particle is underwater, which is not so viscous, so it has acceleration and moves fast.

It may even oscillate.

In the overdamped case, the particle is in a highly viscous fluid, such as honey, and the drag force, that damping coefficient, gamma, is comparable or stronger to the gradient.

Thus, the particle moves slowly since it cannot accelerate.

During the same elapsed time, delta T, an accelerated particle would travel a longer distance.

Here's figure one.

So here, why simulating second order systems yields accelerated methods.

So on the left, constrained particle falling in fluids of differential viscosity.

Here on the left, we have the particle falling through honey.

It's slowly making its way to the bottom of the bowl, but it never really,

builds speed its terminal velocity is being dominated by the viscosity of the fluid whereas this ball falling through water or falling through air is with respect to the honey dampened bowl this is like an accelerated optimization and they present some numerical results that help us bolster that intuition

Really fun and embodied way to think about optimization.

We've talked about that ball rolling to the bottom of the hill and what the ball does when it hits a small bump, but we have not talked about what media the ball is floating through and the media is the message and the fish doesn't know what it's swimming through.

Section 2.6, optimization in the space of probability measures.

It'll be great to explore more because we're gonna see free energy calculations on the stationary density, KL divergence and more.

For now, we can just say all those optimization techniques we were bringing up earlier, we're gonna be able to do them on information geometric spaces that correspond to probability measures that are well-behaved.

not all distributions are probability measures or probability distributions.

Just because you draw a line doesn't mean you can use that in part of your variational inference scheme for Bayesian statistics.

That's section two.

On to section three, Hamiltonian-based accelerated sampling.

So we talked about the Hamiltonian, conservative and dissipative, and the shadow Hamiltonian, which is going to be orders of magnitude better to approximate.

We talked about gradient-based methods and how accelerated sampling is going to help us accelerate those sampling techniques.

And now Section 3 brings it together with Hamiltonian-based accelerated sampling.

Section 3.

The purpose of sampling methods is to efficiently draw samples from a target distribution row, or more commonly to calculate expectations with respect to row.

And from the end of the paragraph.

efficient sampling scheme is one that minimizes the variance of the monte carlo markov chain estimator monte carlo that means that we're sampling hands from the poker table and markov chain which means that the past only influences the future through the present it's a quote memoryless process

other words fewer samples will be needed to obtain a good estimate intuitively good samplers are markov chains that converge as fast as possible to the target distribution it's like if you laid down a jump rope on a mountain if that jump rope converged quickly to the topography of the mountain it would have been a fast converging jump rope and we're doing something like that but with sampling from the jump rope

3.1, optimizing diffusion processes for sampling.

As many MCMC methods are based on discretizing continuous time stochastic processes, the analysis of continuous time processes is informative of the properties of efficient samplers.

And diffusion processes possess a rich geometric theory, extending that of vector fields and have been widely studied in the context of sampling.

lot of very fascinating ideas here stratanovich stochastic differential equations are going to come into play equation 34 more technical details on diffusion the calculus of twisted differential forms allows us to have a measure-informed calculus on multi-vector fields

What are twisted differential forms?

I'm looking forward to that conversation.

What is the untwisted differential form?

Have we been twisted all along or not?

and they go on to write.

A fundamental criterion for efficient sampling is non-reversibility.

A process is non-reversible if it is statistically distinguishable from its time reversal when initialized at the target distribution.

So once the jump rope is lying flat on the mountain, it's like in a position of reversibility.

Mixing metaphors at will here.

Measure-preserving diffusions are non-reversible precisely when some conditions are met.

Intuitively non-reversible processes backtrack less often and thus furnish more diverse samples.

So if you're that ball rolling on the mountain, you want to just plow forward.

And whether you're going up or downhill, you want to be sampling and making moves, but you don't want to be going back and forth because at that point, it's not an efficient sampling path.

It's well known that removing non-reversibility worsens the spectral gap and the asymptotic variance of the MCMC estimator.

So, time discretization, spectral gap.

In diffusions with linear coefficients, one can construct the optimal non-reversible matrix A to optimize the spectral gap.

we can have well-behaved parameters that help us get at optimal discretization schemes so that that shadow hamiltonian can be preserved when we do discretize it during optimization so that we can respect the key properties of the system however there are no generic guidelines on how to optimize non-reversibility in arbitrary diffusions

This suggests a two-step strategy to construct efficient samplers.

One, optimize reversible distributions, diffusions.

And two, add a non-reversible perturbation.

Equation 36, citation 125.

Diffusions or manifolds, diffusion on manifolds are reversible when certain things are the case and they're not when other things are the case.

Equation 37, we got a triangle pointing down and a triangle pointing up.

We're gonna talk more about it.

Underdamped Langvin dynamics combine all the desirable properties of an efficient sampler.

It is reversible, has degenerate noise, and achieves accelerated conversions to the target density.

So all of this groundwork

is helping us get to an analytical formalization that's going to have the right kind of properties so we can do that discretization right on the shadow hamiltonian so we can get the accelerated optimization done 3.2 hamiltonian monte carlo a challenging task consists of constructing efficient sampling algorithms with strong theoretical guarantees

We now discuss an important family of well-studied methods known as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, HMC, which can be implemented on any manifold for any smooth, fully supported target measure that is known up to a normalizing constant.

Some of these methods can be seen as an appropriate geometric integration of the underdamped Langvin diffusion

diffusing down that hill but in simpler it is in general simpler to view them as combining a geometrically integrated deterministic dynamics with a simple stochastic process that ensures ergodicity equation 38. if we interpret the negative log density v of q as a potential energy

e.g.

a function depending on position Q, one can then plug in the potential within Newton's equation to obtain a deterministic proposal that is well-defined on any manifold, as soon as the acceleration and derivative operators have been replaced by their curved analogs.

So, what pulls the ball down the hill?

Or, if you're an instrumentalist, what force describes the movement of the ball moving down the hill?

Gravity.

I think there's a John Mayer song about it.

Surprises like gravity.

It can be understood as the minimizing force that pulls the ball down the hill or describes the movement of the ball on its path of least action down the hill.

How cool.

More discussion around 38.

Bringing these ingredients together

We thus have the following HMC algorithm.

Given dot, dot, dot, we're going to compute a function according to one, a heat bath, two, shadow Hamiltonian dynamics, and three, metropolis correction.

That's the recipe.

We're bringing those ingredients together.

The above rudimentary HMC method

was proposed for simulations in lattice quantum chromodynamics, with M being the special unitary group and used a Hamiltonian dynamics ingeniously constructed from the Maurer-Cartan frame to compute the partition function of discretized gauge theories.

This method has later been applied in molecular dynamics and statistics.

There are three critical properties underpinning the success of HMC in practice.

The first two are the preservation of the reference measure and the existence of a conserved shadow Hamiltonian for the numerical method.

The third critical property is the existence of splittings methods for which all the composing flows are either tractable or have adequate approximations, namely the geodesic integrators.

so geodesic geodesic methods buckminster fuller tensegrity synergetics or however you think about geodesics as paths in curved space that is the kind of approximation and splitting we're gaining access to with appropriate discretizations on those balls rolling to the bottom of the hill

Let us also briefly mention some useful upgrades that have been proposed in recent years.

So, for those who it's been a few years since you checked in with this domain, this is a great place to look.

First, you can grant the method extra integration steps when the proposal is rejected.

Or,

You can use criterion that aim to ensure the motion is long enough to avoid random walks, but short enough that we do not waste computational effort, such as the no U-turn sampler, which is integrated in a lot of software packages.

Second,

Modern HMC methods bypass this issue of slow convergence by replacing the heat bath with an Ornstein-Ohlbeck process, which ensures the overall algorithm is irreversible.

An OU process is like a Brownian diffusion with a linear regression.

So it vibrates and has volatility, and it has a trend line that's linear.

Third, many modifications of the rudimentary HMC algorithm only provide improvements when the acceptance rate is sufficiently high.

A third class of upgrades improve the acceptance rate by using the fact that the shadow Hamiltonian is exactly preserved by the integrator.

Big point of the whole paper.

Finally, the metropolis step can be replaced with a multinomial correction that uses the entire numerical trajectory accepting a given point along it according to the degree by which it distorts the target measure.

Some path-based inference methods with some caveats.

All right, on to section four, statistical inference with kernel-based discrepancies.

So section four, the problem of parameter inference consists of estimating an element theta star within big theta using a sequence of random functions or estimators theta hat n of omega onto big theta equations.

Conveniently, reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces are precisely Hilbert spaces over which the Dirac distributions, which is

a statistical distribution type where it's like a spike at one location and zero elsewhere, act continuously.

So whether we're talking about events or spiking neurons, this is a really good property.

And more generally, the probability distributions that act continuously by integration on an RKHS, H, are exactly those for which all elements of H are integrable.

So analytically, we have that nice property.

Denoting by fancy p sub h the set of such probability measures such that dot dot dot, we can define the maximum mean discrepancy, or MMD, as such.

More definitions.

A practical expression for the squared MMD.

So just like in linear regression, we're often interested in the sum of squared errors, here we're interested in the sum of squared MMD.

4.1, topological methods for MMDs.

Just remember, MMDs, maximum mean discrepancy.

A key feature of RKHS is that they are Hilbertian subspaces.

More details about embedding in Hilbert spaces and subspaces later.

The geometric description of RKHS and MMD allows us to swiftly apply topological methods in their analysis.

There are reasons.

This reduces the matter to a topological question.

Instead of defining T star to be the set of probability measures, it is commonly done to define statistical manifolds

It's desirable to embed fancy P within a more structured space, such as the space of finite radon measures, which enables the method to learn the target function independently of the data generating distribution.

What is a radon measure?

We're going to find out.

However, it enables the method to learn the target function independently of the data generating distribution.

Sounds pretty important if we want that tail of two densities.

MMD can discriminate distributions.

That makes it useful to do other things.

Let's find out more.

Section 4.2.

Smooth measures and KSDs.

So,

more information on MMDs and about making them computationally tractable.

And citations to Stein's method are provided for 195, which is the 1972 Stein paper, and 196, which is a paper written by some of the authors about Stein's method meets statistics, a review of some recent developments from 2021.

And I thought it'd be fun to look at some figures from this paper and look at the abstract.

So I'll put the figures up above.

Stein's method compares probability distributions through the study of a class of linear operators called Stein operators.

While mainly studied in probability and used to underpin theoretical statistics, Stein's method has led to significant advances in computational statistics.

topics that are discussed in that review include tools to benchmark and compare sampling methods such as approximate markov chain monte carlo deterministic alternatives to sampling methods control variant techniques parameter estimations and goodness of fit testing and from the paper they write the list of results given in this paper are but a mere sample

of the ongoing activity in this newly established area of research at the boundary between probability, functional analysis, data science, and computational statistics.

For instance, Stein's method has been used for designing sampling-based algorithms for non-convex optimization, learning semi-parametric multi-index models in high dimensions, and in Bayesian statistics, Stein discrepancies have been used as variational objectives for posterior optimization, which is what we're all about.

Free energy functionals?

using variational inference as objectives for posterior approximation of inference and action, free energy principle.

And these images have some nice intuitions too.

Here we see, depending on our step size, we're getting different sampling.

When our step size is to the negative fifth power, we're oversampling one part of the space.

Then as we make the step size larger, our samples are drawn from different distributions.

So that's selecting the step size epsilon for a stochastic gradient Langvin dynamic.

And also from the Anastasio paper.

Here's another fun way to see that.

Here we have that bowl that we're rolling the ball to the bottom of and the Stein points and the Stein thinning, which is helping us understand maybe how starting the ball in different locations or critical locations accelerates what we're doing with optimization.

So cool to talk about.

4.2.1, the canonical Stein operator and Poincaré duality.

There are two fundamental theorems that help us understand the integral differential geometry of the manifold, Durham's theorem and the Poincaré duality.

The former, Durham's theorem, relates the topology of the manifold to information on the solutions of differential equations defined over the manifold.

The latter, which contains the fundamental theorem of calculus, describes the properties of the integral pairing, alpha-beta, of differential forms,

which include the pairing of test functions with smooth measures.

Let's learn more about it.

4.2.2, kernel Stein discrepancies and score matchings.

Technical definitions, facilitating Stein variational gradient descent.

4.3, information geometry of MMDs and natural gradient descent.

these tools have proved to be useful in a wide range of contexts more information about the divergence and how divergence can improve the speed of convergence by following the natural gradient descent okay red text speculation beware so the operator

which is a phone routing system like Ring Ring Hello Operator, is constructed in Section 4.2.2, Colonel Stein discrepancies and score matching.

You can't have a t-test without the t-distribution.

The t-test statistic is using a t-distribution.

So, a class of Fancy V

a set, fancy V, of vector fields, or more generally tensor fields, whose image F under the operator, ring, ring, has mean zero under mu.

That's going to give us this discrepancy, the SD, and the Stein variational gradient descent.

So, there's some class of V vector fields such that the mean of something about them is zero.

does this enable the central limit theorem or just statistics more broadly like the parametric and non-parametric methods that we know and love from spm does that mean zero enable us to use gaussian methods generalized gaussian methods generalized linear methods spm and does it enable the proposed smooth distribution

the one generating the shadow Hamiltonian that's getting inferred over, to be interpreted or used truly as a statistical distribution.

It's easy to forget that not all distributions are formal probability distributions.

For example, the area under the curve from zero to one of a probability distribution is one.

Something has to happen.

But not all functions have an area under the curve of one between zero and one.

so in variational bayesian inference the kind which we do in active inference in fact the kind that's done in machine learning and statistics more broadly but we're interested when action is a parameter that we're doing inference on we're concerned with the extremely well behaved properties of a certain subset of distributions so why are we doing this why is it important that

We didn't need the input data that we could construct measures that are independent of the input data because we want to enable the tail of two densities.

We want to make generative models that can be used generatively, generative AI, in the forward or the generative direction.

but we also want to be able to enable the recognition distribution, which is from empirical data to do hidden state inference.

And so just like least squares regression, in the linear modeling case, where the sum of squares above and below the regression line should be as low as possible, L2 norm, sum of squares minimization, always works, never complains,

We want that kind of ball rolling to the bottom of the hill with free energy functionals, variational and expected free energy functionals as the optimized or satisficed imperative for optimal perception, which is signal processing, signals intelligence, and control, which is control theory or action selection.

More technical details and equations 39b and 39c.

So what does it mean that the resulting Stein discrepancy can be thought of as an MMD that depends only on rho and is known as a kernel Stein discrepancy?

What is that?

As we did previously, we can remove the supremum by rewriting the above as a supremum over some unit ball of continuous linear functional.

Is this like simulating or modeling a sphere rolling on a landscape like we've been talking about?

Is the ball of optimal radius for rolling on that landscape or what is being optimized?

And what is the unit, the scaling or the scale specificity that this scale friendly sphere is scaled to?

Equation 42 and 42a.

While in the Euclidean space yields the diffusion score matching.

Citation 204.

Barp et al.

Again.

Minimum Stein discrepancy estimators from 2019.

They write, the main strength of our methodology is its flexibility, which allows us to design estimators with desirable properties for specific models at hand by carefully selecting the Stein discrepancy.

We illustrate this advantage

for several challenging problems for score matching, such as non-smooth, heavy-tailed, or light-tailed densities.

So again, just with a little bit of speculation here, and I think my camera has frozen.

It's all good.

I'll just go without the camera.

okay um one can estimate infer or optimize the zero point and hence the variance structure of the distribution this is going to enable generalized well-behaved modeling again from all of those nice perspectives that we raised earlier like gaussian central limit theorem smoothness statistical distance euclidean all of those well-behaved properties that we're looking for this is going to help us get there

We are only talking about a specific subset or type of landscape here, the one that we're doing variational inference on.

That's the map.

This is not the structure of the territory.

These well-behaved attributes of models, for better, worse, and different, through sickness and health, is because they're maps.

It is always the case that our statistically nice generative models are of a different structure or form than the generative process.

So this is actually not a criticism of quantitative modeling as a process.

In fact, this is the entire basis of quantitative modeling.

So we've approached this map territory distinction,

map territory fallacy fallacy fallacy from many angles and one will still hear things like well the structure of the statistical model is not the same as the territory or how can you say that the organism has these well-behaved properties just because the model does

And this brings a really sharp light on it, which is we're doing this insane amount of analytical groundwork so that the map has the good properties, not to constrain what the territory is.

So map territory.

all of the math we've been talking about is map we want well-behaved maps so that we can describe well-behaved and unruly territories but it isn't the case that the organism minimizes variational free energy it's the generative model that minimizes variational free energy so

a little bit of a leading discussion topic or question for you all.

Feel free to give a thought in the live chat or write a comment or join our discussions.

How is this line of basic and fundamental math research

by Barp et al., creating new models that have the operational or denotational semantics that we want for computational statistics, which is to say applied information theory.

For example, distributions that can be interpreted or used as statistical distributions, ideally directly compatible with current computational methods, SPM in MATLAB, PyMDP in Python, and Forney Lab in Julia, and so on.

Section 4.3.1.

Minimum Stein discrepancy estimators.

More technical details.

More citation to 204.

The parameters can be adjusted to achieve characteristicness, consistency, bias, robustness, and obtain central limit theorems.

See 204.

2019 paper with Barp et al.

And let's just look at a really cool image from that paper.

Figure one and figure two.

Pretty cool SD estimators, looking nice.

Section 4.3.2, likelihood-free inference with generative models.

So for many applications of interests, the densities of the model mu sub data cannot be evaluated or differentiated.

thus need density-free inference methods super convenient for bayesian statistics more technical details information tensor under appropriate choices of kernels and models one can derive theoretical guarantees such as concentration and generalization bounds consistency asymptotic normality and robustness so a little bit of a summary

we have good analytical and computational footing in certain kinds of situations or under certain constraints certainly not all constraints but definitely for some

that might enable the efficient computation, not just specification, but actual implementation of large generative models, such as described in the paper of Friston et al, 2022, designing ecosystems of intelligence from shared, sorry, designing ecosystems of intelligence from first principles.

And they use the term ecosystems of shared intelligence in that paper.

and so it's relevant to learn about the actuality and build intuition why slash how do we know well here's the one figure in that paper of friston at all the one figure in this absolutely positional paper that they have released beliefs as parameters of a probability distribution here's the sharpening of a belief as a distance belief updating

as traversing a statistical manifold, which is to say a lower dimensional projected space, and what's being shown as the parameter space of a probability distribution.

So whether we see this as gradient ascent to climb to the top of the hill, or we take the negative and we have gradient descent to the bottom of the hill, this is the figure chosen by some very well-informed authors to describe Bayesian mechanics.

and long last we get to section five adaptive agents through active inference we close as the authors write with a generic use case called active inference a general framework for describing and designing adaptive agents that unifies all aspects of behavior including perception planning and learning as processes of inference

By exploiting this geometric structure in a generic framework for designing adaptive agents, we derive the objective functional overarching decision-making and describe its information geometric structure, revealing several special cases that are established notions in statistics, cognitive science, and engineering.

So section 5.1, modeling adaptive decision-making.

First, they're going to talk about behavior agents and environments.

Behavior is going to be defined as the interaction between an agent and its environment, and the system is going to describe the agent plus its environment.

There's going to be a set of states that are partitions from a state space, big X. External states, S, are going to be unknown to the agent and constitute the environment.

States belonging to the agent, pi, particular states,

are going to be a subset of two different things.

So here is S, which is here, external states.

Note that in some other settings, S will refer to sensory states.

So look at the notation in this paper.

And pi, which in other papers is sometimes used to describe policy inference, here is gonna describe particular states.

So pi is O and A. O are the observable states, states that the agent can see but cannot directly control, sense states.

And A are the autonomous states, states that the agent sees and can directly control.

And those are going to be internal states and active states.

Figure two has a great representation.

And again, note the way that pi, s, o, and a are being used in this paper.

S is the external process, hidden state, latent state, causal inference.

O are the observations.

And the agent process consists of pi, which is the observations, and alpha, or a.

a is consisting of according to the particular partition two different kinds of states which is internal states cognitive states and action states and so we're going to compute bounds for free energy functionals with a special focus on autonomous processes because controlling our perception

is not possible and maybe not even preferable by controlling it at the level of what we observe but rather if we control our internal states which is our interpretation of the perception and our action states we'll be doing optimal perception and optimal action so those are the two sides of the coin with

inference as perception slash learning and action selection that's how we unify action and inference inactive inference is by caring about the bounding of self-surprisal just like gravity on our autonomous processes so this will be super fun to discuss more

5.1.2.

Decision-making in precise agents.

So what distinguishes people from small particles?

People are subject to classical as opposed to statistical mechanics.

Check out ACDIMF Livestream 49 for more on Bayesian mechanics and some of these distinctions with classical, statistical, quantum, and thermo.

In other words, they are precise agents with conservative dynamics.

Precise agent, definition 5.1.

An agent is precise when it evolves deterministically in a possibly stochastic environment.

More definitions.

And it's useful here to highlight Friston et al.

's recent paper, Path Integrals, Particular Kinds, and Strange Things, which provides a taxonomy of things, taxonomy of particular entities that run the gamut of sophistication from inert particles, which have no active states, active particles, which have active states,

conservative particles, which have cognitive dynamics that are described as classical, and strange particles, which represent, in this visualization, the highest level of cognitive sophistication, in which those internal hidden states themselves have this kind of what would happen if this happens counterfactual type or thinking through other minds type cognitive model structure.

doing forward and inverse inference on these great times.

5.1.2, decision-making and precise agents.

We have mathematical formalisms for decisions, preferences, and predictions, all using the partitioned variables.

5.1.2, more formalisms.

We get to expected free energy.

Expected free energy is...

Equation 41k.

Active inference is Hamilton's principle of least action on expected free energy and expresses the most likely decision where certain features are met.

Principle of least action on manifolds of inference and action subsuming or bringing together inference and action.

Active inference.

Free energy principle.


UNKNOWN:
5.1.3.


SPEAKER_00:
Active inference framework, AIF, looks like it describes agents that engage in purposeful behavior.

we can rearrange the expected free energy, EFE, in several ways, each of which reveals a fundamental trade-off that underwrites decision-making.

This allows us to relate active inference to information theoretic formalizations of decision-making that predominate in statistics, cognitive science, and engineering.

Figure three.

as hinted at in the early early keywords here on the top we have the general formalizations of active inference and one of the partitions or better to say decompositions is shown here where extrinsic value is the surprisal about observations

making sure that what we're getting in observations are what we expect slash prefer.

If the body wants to be expecting homeostatic temperature, that's what this is going to determine.

And it plays a role equivalent to reward

in reward and reinforcement learning based approaches, because we don't need to actually set a reward function, but we get something that looks like self-surprisal aligned with reward using the preference variable over observations.

A lot more to say there.

And the second term is the intrinsic value, the epistemic value, curiosity, novelty, learning, reduction of uncertainty.

And another partitioning is between risk and ambiguity.

There are four colored dots, red, tan, gray, and blue corresponding to special cases.

So under the setting where there's no ambiguity,

we realize or manifest the special case where control can be seen as inference, maximum entropy reinforcement learning, prospect theory, and KL optimal control.

This is like doing as good as you can strategically or tactically, given that there's no ambiguity in how your decisions play out.

Now, under the setting where there's no ambiguity or preferences,

a maximum entropy principle is realized.

And work with Bayesian mechanics and Dalton et al has shown that the constrained maximum entropy principle is dual to the FEP.

In the case of no extrinsic value, so no quote reward, no quote goals.

We don't use reward or goals in the active inference ontology, but borrowing those words from some long, long forgotten ontology.

In the case of no extrinsic value,

we realize the special case of maximum information gain, Bayesian experimental design.

So not to prove or disprove, but the maximally informative experiment.

That's the Bayesian scientific epistemology.

Intrinsic motivation and Bayesian surprise.

Seeking out optimally informative stimuli.

And contrast that with a setting where there's no intrinsic value.

So where there's nothing to learn,

we realize expected utility theory, Bayesian decision theory, reinforcement learning, and optimal control.

So special cases from many different fields ranging from statistical mechanics to Bayesian decision-making and statistics integrated or perhaps better generalized across in the formalisms of active inference, which

is something like a Hamilton's principle of least action on variational or expected free energy expressing the most likely inference and action under certain constraints.

Not the most rewarding, but the most likely.

5.1.3, decision-making minimizes both risk and ambiguity.

Risk, first term on the right-hand side.

Ambiguity, second term.

Minimizing ambiguity leads to a type of observational bias commonly known as the streetlight effect.

When a person loses their keys at night, they initially search for them under the streetlight because of the resulting observations.

I see my keys under the streetlight, or I do not see my keys under the streetlight, accurately disambiguate external states of affairs.

First place to look makes sense under the streetlight, and the last place you look is where you find it.

more in 5.1.3 decision making maximizes extrinsic and intrinsic value another decomposition of the formalisms of active inference maximizing information gain leads to a goal-directed form of exploration driven to answer what would happen if i did that true counterfactuals

This decision-making procedure underwrites Bayesian experimental design in statistics, which describes optimal experiments as those that maximize expected information gain.

And we've had some great discussions recently in textbook groups and in discussion hours where we contrasted that falsificationist concept of accept or reject a hypothesis

And even the idea of a scientist or a researcher setting out to accept or reject hypothesis, whether you take that positivist or you take the other path of falsificationism,

In both cases, you might end up with an informative experiment or not, but you can easily imagine cases where you end up with an uninformative experiment because you set out to confirm something you knew, or you set out to disprove something by constraining your experiment so that it was locally disproven.

In contrast, when we take into account the richness of our generative model,

We motivate this Bayesian epistemology and ultimately professional Bayesianism, where we make optimal experiments in terms of their maximum expected information gain, which requires you to also state your generative model.

Decision-making under active inference weighs the imperatives of maximizing utility and information gain, which suggests a principled solution to the exploration exploitation dilemma.

great point to jump into does active inference simply by written down by being written down on a paper resolve or transcend or dissolve exploration exploitation no does it provide a space or a framework a method an approach software packages research community that can help us address and navigate and surf on the edge of that dilemma absolutely

5.2.1 the basic active inference algorithm we're going to go through it with authors preferential inference we want to infer preferences about external and observable trajectories two for each possible sequence of past present and future actions a we're going to engage in both sides of the coin perceptual inference

What would I perceive if that happened?

And planning as inference.

Assess the action sequence by evaluating its expected free energy.

And then three, decision-making.

Execute the most likely decision at T plus one according to some distributions.

Sample from your action posterior.

Action prior, that's like your habits.

It gets sharpened or modified with expected free energy, and then you sample from the action posterior.

5.2.1 sequential decision making under uncertainty a partially observable markov decision process pomdp is a discrete time model of how actions influence external states in a pomdp each external state depends only on the current action and previous external state that's the markov property each observation depends only on the current external state and one can additionally specify a distribution of preferences over external trajectories

1 and 2 form the agent's POMDP prediction model.

2 and 3 form the agent's hidden Markov preference model, which defines the active inference agent.

A simple simulation of active inference on a POMDP is provided in Figure 4.

Implementation details on generic POMDPs are available.

For more complex simulations of sequential decision making, e.g.

involving hierarchical POMDPs, please see citations.

Figure 4.

It's a prediction model.

This is sequential decision-making in a T maze environment.

On the left, the agent's prediction model as a POMDP, represented here as a Bayesian network.

On the right, information on the T maze.

So here we have some type of Bayesian graph reflecting, hopefully,

a statistical system that's going to have all of these well-behaved properties that we've been talking about in the paper.

And then the team A's is played out.

We'll talk about it.

5.2.3, world model learning as inference.

Due to a lack of domain knowledge, it may be challenging to specify an agent's prediction and preference model.

For example, how do external states map to observations?

Should external states be represented in a discrete or continuous state space?

Also some great questions that come up every day and are addressed in chapter six, a recipe for active inference modeling by the Parr, Pizzullo and Friston 2022 textbook.

So how do we get the right priors or at least approximately adequate priors?

One way to answer the question lies in optimizing a free energy functional F, which is an evidence lower bound.

We see here variational free energy decomposed into an energy minus entropy and decomposed into a complexity minus accuracy framing.

Maximizing accuracy usually results in generative models involving universal function approximators.

Minimizing complexity results in organizing representations in sparse, compartmentalized and hierarchical generative models, where higher levels of a hierarchy encode more abstract representations and vice versa.

A computationally efficient method to compare priors by their free energy is Bayesian model reduction.

Free energy unifies inference and model selection under a single objective function.

5.2.4 Scaling Active Inference Planning for all possible courses of action is computationally expensive.

One way to finesse this is by planning only for intelligently chosen subsets of action sequences using sampling algorithms like Monte Carlo tree search.

If you're interested in that, check out the recent research on branching time active inference.

Similarly, Monte Carlo sampling finesses the expectations inherent in assessing action sequences.

A complementary approach is to assess actions instead of action sequences by conditioning all future actions to be optimal in the sense that they minimize the expected free energy.

It leads to smarter agents whose computational complexity scales linearly as opposed to exponentially in the length of action sequence.

Let's learn more about it.

Scalable inference methods can be used to make active inference more efficient.

We can train neural networks to predict the various posterior distributions, including the posterior overactions.

While training, the output of the neural network can be used as an initial conditions for variational inference, resulting in accurate inferences whose computational costs decrease as the network learns.

Additionally, optimizing free energy reduces to efficient message passing schemes when one imposes certain simplifying restrictions to the family of candidate distributions.

Lots of really exciting work in neurobiology and statistics around message passing.

Getting close to the end here.

A much cheaper implementation of active inference exists for continuous states evolving in continuous time.

Pretty cool.

Parr et al.

2022 textbook.

Chapter 7.

Discrete-time active inference generative models.

Chapter 8.

Continuous-time active inference models.

This method frames perception and decision-making as variational inference by simulating a gradient flow on free energy in an extended state space.

It can be combined with discrete active inference to operate efficiently in generative models combining discrete and continuous states.

We talked about that in Livestream 46.

Active inference does not contradict folk psychology.

Discrete active inference, decision-making active inference, DAI, and continuous time motor active inference.

being used together, also seen in the Pardal textbook.

As an example, high-dimensional observations in the continuous domain, e.g.

speech, processed through continuous active inference are converted into discrete abstract representations, e.g.

semantics, and we can even go further and say rhetorical and narrative information spaces.

Based on these representations, the agent makes high-level categorical decisions, e.g.

I want to move over there, which contextualize low-level continuous actions, e.g.

the continuous motion of a limb towards the goal location.

And that is how the paper ends.

So, closing thoughts.

If anybody wants to write a comment live, feel free to do so.

We'll be over very shortly.

what are the implications of this work we have an open space to talk about it what questions and discussion topics are you interested in please write comments before or after the dot one and the dot two so we can have those interesting discussions

and just as a little bit of a closer I'll share some stable diffusion images that were generated using the paper title as well as various other terms free energy lots of fun images a lot of good balance to some of the technical aspects that were being described in the paper was good to look at what diffusion looks like aesthetically

and so that is the end of this live stream 52.0 i hope that you found it useful that you're interested to act and for serve to learn more contribute more write a comment make it happen in your own life or in your own way with this

honestly challenging paper.

So if you've listened this far, thanks a lot for your attention and looking forward to 51, I'm sorry, 52.1 and 0.2 when we will speak with some authors and some of you.

So till next time, thanks again and see you in the dot one.

## 00O1QK9FWh8

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome it is march 2nd 2023 and we're here in actin live stream 52.1

Welcome to the ACT-INF Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.

Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about getting involved in learning groups and projects such as livestreams.

All right, we are in 52.1, and our goal today is to learn and discuss this awesome paper, Geometric Methods for Sampling, Optimization, Inference, and Adoptive Agents of BARP and ACOSTA et al.

And we're going to just jump right in.

Thanks a lot, Lance, for joining.

And, uh,

Those who have listened to 52.0 will know me.

I'm a researcher and a learner with respect to this topic.

So thanks again for joining and it'll be great to have you introduce yourself and also tell a little bit of the story of how this paper came to be.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

Thanks, Daniel, for organizing.

I mean, this is really great and I'm very happy to be here.

So, my name is Lance Da Costa.

Some of you may know me.

I'm a PhD student both at Imperial College London and UCL, mostly working on active inference and the free energy principle, also some probabilistic machine learning.

And today we're going to be discussing geometric methods for sampling, optimization, inference, and adaptive agents.

So how this paper came to be where I happen to know people who do more like statistics, machine learning, and so on.

And we've always been talking about the similarities and differences between what we do in active inference and what they do in sampling optimization, which are

kind of the workhorses of statistics and machine learning.

And at some point we had a paper invitation for the Handbook of Statistics and we decided to team up and make a review article to see how all these fields that come from very different places scientifically

uh that have very different contributors as well and we wanted to know how they're interconnected and also how they can help each other um because we realized for all this time that we're actually doing similar things but the communities are very different they're not

very much talking to each other.

And I think a main barrier is a difference in language, difference in jargon.

So that was kind of an issue when we started.

And so we wanted to put that all, I mean, as much as possible in a paper and see how these different approaches to statistics, whether it is sampling, optimization, inference, or decision-making, how they can benefit from each other and how they relate to each other.

And so long story short, we're going to delve into this into more detail.

But long story short, if you want to sample from a distribution, you can also view that as an optimization problem.

So optimization is kind of, you can see it as the root of sampling and you want to optimize sampling, make sampling as efficient as possible.

Inference, you can also see it as an optimization of beliefs.

optimization of probability distributions that's also an optimization procedure and if you want to do decision making which is what we do in active inference and reinforcement learning and all many different places well through decision making you actually need optimization and inference and if you want to do decision making efficiently you often are going to need something as well

So decision-making and active inference is kind of like what comes at the very end and requires all of the sophisticated machinery of sampling, inference, and metronization in order to work.

So this was really the idea of the paper.

How does optimization come about?

How do you do efficient optimization?

And of course, there's many different ways to do that.

So we decided to focus on natural ways, and we'll get to that.

But one way to do optimization that is very natural is through techniques from geometry.

And so same with sampling in sampling and inference you have geometry that just comes out very naturally when you when you want to solve these problems and So decision-making puts it all together So that was really the idea of of the paper Can we put all these fields together and have like a you know, like a connecting line which is based in geometry?


SPEAKER_00:
And so that's what we did Awesome great overview so

so many places to jump in.

I barely even know where to sample from this distribution.

Let's just start with sampling though.

So what is sampling and how is it being used?

How has it been used?

And let's characterize sampling and then move on to these other fields.


SPEAKER_02:
Right, well, sampling, I mean, the idea of sampling is very simple and it's also a very difficult thing to do.

So first, explain the idea.

The idea is, let's say you have a Gaussian in one dimension, so that's very easy to picture.

Sampling would be, so for example, the Gaussian I just mentioned describes the temperature in the room.

So in my room, it's maybe currently 18 degrees Celsius, plus or minus some variance representing my uncertainty.

Now, sampling from the distribution would be

saying it is maybe 19 degrees or maybe 17 degrees, you know, drawing a lot of different temperatures so that if you put them all together as a histogram with like their frequency, for example, if you ask me what temperature it is in my room, I would say,

there's a higher chance that I say 18 degrees.

So I would say more often if you ask me this question many times, and you know, if you put my answers, if you collect all my answers in a histogram, for example, I'd say 18 degrees more often, so that bar around 18 degrees

would be higher and the other temperatures will be slightly lower.

And if you aggregate that, you would get a Gaussian, get the Gaussian we started with.

So sampling in other words, and very simply, it's like drawing a data point or an observation from an underlying probability distribution.

So you have a distribution, let's say a Gaussian that represents your

most likely value of what the temperature in the room is and some uncertainty.

And you just want to draw one or several observations from that distribution.

and you want to draw these observations so as to preserve the overall statistics of the distribution that you started with so that if you draw infinitely many data points or infinitely many observations from the distribution then you can recover the original distribution so that's what we want to do and so why is this useful in the first place well

It just happens all the time in the things that you want to compute integrals.

It just happens all the time.

So if you want to, for example, if you have a Bayesian inference problem, you have, you know, you observe some data in the world, it could be medical data, it could really be anything.

and you have a prior and a likelihood of observing that data, so these are two terms in Bayes rule, then you want to know, then if you apply Bayes rule, you get a posterior belief about what caused that data that you observed.

So for example,

a practical use case would be some medical data of a patient that's sick and you want to know so you get for example you know it's blood pressure collection of symptoms and so on so that's your data and you want to know what kind of disease or what kind of malfunction caused that data so let's say typically you would have a model of

if i get this uh if i have this malfunction of this disease i would have these symptoms about if i have this other disease i would get these other symptoms and so basero enables you to infer in the best way possible um the disease that caused the symptoms that you just saw

So this is like a common thing.

I mean, something that people use every day in statistics all the time.

And arguably, everybody uses it every day because like the kind of the thesis of the 300 principle of the result that it provides is that you can describe percent.

as doing Bayesian inference.

Bayesian inference is a very ubiquitous thing.

You can use it to describe perception in humans, and you can also use it to do statistics and solve all kinds of problems.

Coming back to sampling, actually doing Bayesian inference, you have this problem of how do you compute the posterior distribution in the first place?

And it turns out that this distribution is generally intractable because you have kind of a term in the denominator that's very hard to compute.

And so one way to compute it is to use what's called Monte Carlo methods.

And Monte Carlo methods are based on sampling.

So long story short, in order to do Bayesian inference, you need to compute this log likelihood term, which is a high dimensional integral.

And one way to do it is by using Monte Carlo methods.

And Monte Carlo methods are based on sampling.

So the sampling enables you to approximate the high dimensional integral that you started with.

So now many listeners or also readers of this work will wonder, well,

Um, one thing that people do in the free energy principle, and also like, kind of like the, um, the raison d'etre of the free energy principle is you're actually not going to compute this denominator.

That's very expensive to the Bayesian inference, but you're going to approximate the posterior, um, by minimizing free energy, um, which is called variational inference.

That's another method of doing Bayesian inference.

And it has many advantages over sampling.

Sampling also has advantages with respect to variational inference.

We can get into that.

But if that's what you're thinking, well, this is not necessarily

interesting because we can do variational inference.

There's so many other places where we need sampling in statistics.

I would say basically any time you need to compute an integral and integrals are all over the place.

But I think the Bayesian inference motivation is a nice one because it just speaks to all of us.

um so how does so so how does actually sampling getting to the picture of integration let's say we have an integral that we need to compute um an integral is basically let's say you have a state space so to be very simple let's say the state space is my desk it would be like a planner surface and we have a function that's defined on the desk so this would be like a landscape

over the desk, right?

Like a 2D surface landscape that could be rugged or whatever.

The integral of this function is going to be the volume between the landscape and the desk.

So this is kind of like the geometric picture of what an integral is.

Um, so this turns out to be very hard to, you know, compute in practice because you have like, um, let's say you have a very rough surface and it's not clear how to, you know, compute all this volume, which is very irregular.

Um, what sampling does, it's going to pick a few locations on the desk, um, as many as you wish.

Uh, so let's start by one and it's going to compute the height.

the height under the function and then pick another location and compute that height as well.

Since sampling is gonna pick locations on the desk at random,

And from there, it's going to build a histogram that's going to approximate the surface that you started with.

And so histogram is very simple because you get a whole bunch of skyscrapers if you wish to approximate the surface that we started with.

And computing the volume of skyscrapers is very simple because you know they're like squares.

It's like depth times height times width.

of those things.

So this is kind of the idea.

We want to compute the volume under a rock surface and to do that we're going to pick arbitrary locations on the

on the desk, on the face space, and at those locations, build skyscrapers at the height of the surface.

So you get a skyline, a histogram that approximates your original function, and it's very simple to know the volume of the histogram, the volume of the skyline.

And so from then, you get an estimate of the integral that you started with.

So that's kind of like the geometric picture.

The beauty of this is that it works in arbitrary dimensions and it doesn't suffer from the curse of dimensionality.

So this is why it's so powerful.

If you want to know, so there's a formula that tells you

how well the volume of your skyline will approximate the volume that you initially wanted to compute the integral.

So this difference between the integral and your estimate basically decreases as a function of the number of skyscrapers that you put in.

The more skyscrapers, the more precise you get

And this bound on the error that you have on your integral that you started with, it doesn't depend on the dimension.

So as the higher dimensional your state space, so let's say, let's imagine I had a high dimensional desk, which is very hard to imagine, and I had a function on top of it, and I wanted to compute the area under the function.

If my desk was very high dimensional, the higher the dimension, the harder it would be to solve this problem numerically.

But with sampling, actually the degree of accuracy that you get through sampling would be agnostic to the dimension.

says this is why it's so so powerful and and just used all the time in statistics and machine learning when you imagine you know practical problems that you have in machine learning coming back to medical data you could get a whole bunch of data about a patient which could be

you know, heart rate over time, blood oxygen levels, blood glucose levels, body temperature and whatnot.

There's so many data modalities that you would have.

So your state of face would have many, many dimensions.

And also the state space of the different diseases that could have given rise to all these symptoms would be also very high.

So it could be that the patient has fever or it could be that it has flu.

No, fever is a symptom.

It could be that the disease is flu.

that the disease is tuberculosis it could be a disease it is AIDS you know there's so many different conditions or problems that one might want to you know examine so in this particular case of medical data and this is just like a very simple use case I would say you have a very high dimensional state space

And to do Bayesian inference, you have a very high dimensional integral to estimate.

And so one way to do that efficiently or maybe efficiently is disingenuous because it's just very hard.

I mean, it's just very computationally intensive to do these things.

But one way to do this that's state of the art is through sampling, just by drawing different points at random on the state space.

and approximating the function landscape and approximating the integral like that.

So yeah, this is really why this is so important.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So we've made a sample.

where does these topics of accepting or rejecting a move amongst samples or discretizing how do we pick that next sample and then what does it mean to accept or reject that sample that's a great question this is basically like the the heart of sampling you know uh so if you if you knew how to do that in full generality


SPEAKER_02:
Sampling would be solved Which it isn't so so I'm gonna tell you a bit like where where things stand So

The yeah to so to do sampling you need to pick places at random and you need to pick places random so as to preserve probability distribution so coming back to the example of the desk you want to pick in indicate in that case, you want to pick samples uniformly on the desk.

Um, if we come back to the previous example of like a Gaussian distribution, you want to pick samples, um, you know, that, that preserve the Gaussian distribution.

So you want to preserve it, to take a lot of samples around the mean a very few samples on the tails.

Um, so it turns out that for those.

very simple distributions like uniform distribution, Gaussian distribution, there are ways to sample that do not require what this paper is talking about.

So there are ways to sample exactly that do not lead to any kind of error and that are very fast.

So for Gaussian and uniform,

and a bunch of other distributions from the exponential family you have ways to sample exactly so the problem is these distributions they they're not there all the time and it turns out that very often

you don't have these kind of very simple distributions.

Otherwise, we would be done.

So one simple example, coming back to Bayesian inference, is the idea of Jeffries prior.

So Jeffries prior is the idea that you should take the highest entropy prior that's consistent with what you know about the system.

So why entropy maximizing?

So we know that entropy is a measure of the uncertainty present in a distribution.

And so what Jeffries prior says is that you should take a prior belief about a system, the belief that is maximally uncertain,

but that is also compatible with your knowledge so out of all priors that are compatible with what you know about the system you would take the one that's most uncertain and this seems pretty intuitive right um so when you take jeffrey's fryer what you what you get is often a distribution that's in the form of what people call a gibbs measure

So Gibbs measures or Gibbs distributions, they're of the form exponential minus v. So they're proportional to exponential minus v. And v could be an arbitrary function.

So if V, just as an example, if V were like a parabola, a quadratic function, then the associated Gibbs distribution is a Gaussian.

So we all know what Gaussians are, right?

But V could be

pretty much anything if you take V to be like X to the power of 4 minus X to the power of 2 then V is kind of like a camel but upside down so you know it has like two humps and therefore the exponential minus V distribution the Gibbs measure would be like a Gaussian but with two humps

So these Gibbs measures, they just arrive, they're just there like everywhere and they come up all the time.

So one example, one other example is in statistical mechanics.

So let's say you have a system of molecules that just interact with each other, and these system of molecules, they could also be subject to thermal fluctuations and whatnot.

This system is going to relax to what people call a steady state, often a non-equilibrium steady state.

These steady states, which is kind of like the end configuration of the system,

is um in general a gibbs measure um so so yeah so now you can see that in statistical mechanics and also in statistics uh gibbs measures comes up come up also in you know basin inference and um it's very hard in general to sample from a gibbs measure i mean there's ways to do it and and we're going to come back to it but you know we need to

And so when, you know, the, the most common way to solve from this distribution is, uh, what's called Markov chain Monte Carlo.

And so the idea is to run a Markov chain.

So to run like a stochastic process, and you could think of it as, um, stimulating, um, you know, molecule that interact with each other with some thermal fluctuations.

And that are going to relax to this gives distribution, this

So coming back to the original examples, the steady state could be like a Gaussian that we want to sample from.

Going back to the example of the desk, it could be the uniform distribution on the desk that we want to sample from.

It could also be a Gibbs measure.

So we can

so once we know the distribution that we want to sample from um we're going to run we're going to design a stochastic process some kind of random motion that's who whose distribution is going to converge to the target distribution so as you run the process

Think of it as running, you know, simulating those molecules that interact and that converge to your target.

Yeah, so you're just going to simulate that.

And once your system has converged to steady state, which is the target distribution, then each movement...

on the steady state density is going to give you a new sample.

So just for intuition, let's come back to the desk and say that we have this uniform measure, uniform distribution on the desk that we want to sample from.

So we're going to design a dynamic that moves randomly around, and that's going to converge to the uniform distribution, which means that if you run it long enough,

It's just going to sample everywhere on the desk and it's going to sample each point equally often.

And so you're just going to run this dynamic for a very long time.

And, and then you're going to collect the samples, collect the samples and use them to approximate the integral that you started with.

Um, so this is how sampling is done.

Now there's two, there's, yeah, basically one big question, one big outstanding question is how do you choose this dynamic?

How do you choose this random motion to converge to your target distribution, to sample from the distribution?

So given a target distribution, there's like a closed form formulas for,

all all the possible choices of processes that you can use to sample from them so that's a closed problem and that's also explained in the in the paper but then out of all of these processes you would like to know which one is going to sample the most efficiently and you also want to know um and and the second of all

A lot of the analysis of stochastic processes is done in continuous time.

So you know that if you implement this process, it's gonna converge at this rate to the target distribution.

And so the faster it converges, the better.

Um, but it could be that when you simulate this on a computer and in a computer, you can only, you know, have like discrete time steps or like discrete operations in discrete time.

So you cannot really simulate this dynamic in continuous time.

So every time you simulate it, it's going to introduce some error.

Now it could be that the thing that you simulate on your computer actually goes a lot slower than the, than the original process that you wanted to simulate.

So there's these two questions.

How do you take a process that, you know, samples very efficiently converges very fast to your target, but.

In addition to that, how do you stimulate the process accurately on your computer so as to retain all the important characteristics of that process?

So there's many different criteria and this is what we discussed essentially.

among the state of the art is called Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

Now Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, without getting into too much detail,

Um, it takes, uh, it has two advantages.

The first advantage is that it can be analyzed, um, using mathematical methods.

So you can get guarantees based on your target distribution.

You can get guarantees of how fast you're going to converge, how accurate your samples are going to be and so on.

It has also many other desirable properties.

One of them, which we discuss a lot in the paper, is the importance of being irreversible.

Being irreversible means that if you run the process forward in time,

Or if, and so let's say, let's say you run the process forward in time for like 10 seconds, let's say you run the process backward in time.

So you kind of like run the process backward.

Um, you just like take a movie and play backward and look at how the process behaves.

Now a process is reversible.

If the forward and the backward movies, uh, are statistically in this indistinguishable.

And a process is irreversible if you run time as time goes forward.

If you run time forward, it would look statistically different from if you run the process backward.

So, so this, there's some, yeah, I think that you can kind of like picture what, what irreversibility is now.

Um, irreversibility is crucial to, to do efficient sampling because if you're reversible, um, it means that you're going to backtrack very often.

When you're sampling positions on the decks, on the desk, say

You're going to start somewhere and go somewhere else.

And then there's a non-trivial chance, a significant chance that you're going to come back to where you started.

So they're going to be very slow to explore all the desks and build skyscrapers everywhere.

So then sampling turns out to be very slow.

now when you're irreversible um there's way less chances that you just come back to where you started so you're gonna like explore the desk a lot faster because you're not allowed to come back to the same place so much and so you're gonna sample faster and it's gonna be much more efficient um so it's actually by going from a reversible process for sampling to an irreversible process

you can gain orders and orders of magnitude efficiency.

It's actually pretty crazy.

So Hamiltonian Monte Carlo has guarantees, is irreversible, it has other desirable properties, and the main one is that you can actually

stimulated on your computer in a way that the discretized version, which you actually simulate on the computer is going to be very, very, um, very close to, um, to the true Hamilton in Monte Carlo that you get, you know, by writing the equation now.

Um, so these, this is like why, why it's so big and, and you know, why, why people use it.

Um, so.

Yeah, I think this is pretty much it.

Oh yeah, so Hamiltonia Monte Carlo has an accept-reject step, which is...

So coming back to when you simulate a process on your computer, every time you discretize a process, you introduce some error.

Now you want to make that discretization error as small as possible so that the process that you actually simulate on your computer is very close to what you want to simulate.

So Hamiltonia Monte Carlo has

a very important step called Metropolis Hastings, which is going to say, should I keep this sample or should I drop this sample and go to the next sample?

And by using Metropolis Hastings, it's a very clever but also simple procedure.

By using Metropolis Hastings,

you guarantee that the distribution that you're going to sample is exactly the same as the distribution that you want to sample.

So just to put in other maybe simpler terms.

So you have this process that you want to simulate.

This process is going to sample your target distribution.

Now, it could be that when you discretize the process, because the discretized process is different, you're going to sample from a slightly different distribution.

Now, by using Metropolis-Hastings, you're going to guarantee that this distribution that you sample from in practice is exactly the same as what you really want to sample from.

And so that's very important because it just tells you that, um, asymptotically, um, as, as the number of samples just rose to infinity, uh, you're going to recover exactly what you want it to recover, which is the adamant run to Google.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome i remember the metropolis hastings and the monte carlo markov chains in phylogenetics where you might have many many species and many many locations in the genome that you're doing phylogenetic inference over and you just sample sample sample and so all these techniques help accelerate what's possible with any given computational hardware

so how would you bring this towards adaptive agents are we thinking about this sampling process as being guided by an adaptive agent and or are we sampling distributions about an adaptive agent that that's you know a great question and i think it sort of brings


SPEAKER_02:
us to the conclusion of this work is you can so in order to have adaptive agents and to scale adaptive agents so so that they're able to solve complex problems and you're able to implement them with like finite computational resources one useful tool is sampling

And we'll see many different places where sampling can be used and has been used in active inference.

But, and that's basically what you said, sampling is at the heart of sampling is, you know, choosing data points intelligently so as to approximate your integral or whatever it is that you want to do with those samples.

So you could think of adaptive agents as solving the sampling problem.

You could think of an active inference agent.

Let's say that you have a problem of sampling.

You could think of an agent, an active inference agent, that's going to choose, oh, I'm going to sample here, and I'm going to sample here, and I'm going to sample here.

So active inference agents in the...

proper sense of the word, they do sampling all the time.

The only, I would say slight difference with what we've just discussed is that active inference agents, they sample observations so that they're, they comply with their preferences and the observations that also bring them new information about the world.

So the objective that active inference agents use to select new samples is the expected free energy.

So typically, we select actions or policies that have the lowest expected free energy, which means that the resulting observations will be close to your preferences or goal and also bring you new information about the world.

But you could also conceivably think of an agent as, you know, selecting actions so that the resulting samples or observations accurately sample distribution.

So how could sampling be used in the context of active inference and adaptive agents?

And so this is actually a great slide.

Because, so if you look at the upper panel,

is what I just discussed.

So in the first equation that's up there, you see that the sequence of actions that you choose in active inference is the one that minimizes this minus log p, this probability distribution over action sequences.

So this minus log p is actually the expected free energy.

So we choose action sequences that minimize expected free energy.

As you see on the equation just below, the expected free energy is a sum of risk and ambiguity.

So you're going to choose action sequences that minimize risk, but that also minimize ambiguity about the world.

And in other words, as shown below, you're going to choose action sequences that maximize extrinsic value, so you could think of that as expected reward, and intrinsic value, so that would be expected information gain.

value that's intrinsic because you gain information.

So really the key here is that this expected free energy, as its name suggests, it's given by an expectation.

So you see this minus log p on the left equals expectation of something.

now when you have a very big genitive model a very big world model which is going to be the case all the time when you have like a real world application or a complex application because the world around us is

so high dimensional, so complex, well, the expected free energy then is going to be a high dimensional expectation.

What is an expectation?

It's an integral with respect to a probability distribution.

So the point I want to get to is that to do decision making, you need to evaluate the expected free energy of different action sequences.

And this expected free energy is an expectation with respect to probability distribution.

It's a very high dimensional integration problem, very high dimensional integration expectation.

And so how do you approximate that?

Well, you use sampling.

And I think the first work that actually used that in the context of active inference is the work by Funtas et al.

Uh, 2020 of, um, I think it's called scaling active inference with Monte Carlo method.

Uh, yeah.

Funtas with F O U. Um, yeah.

F O U N. Um, yeah.

Scaling active inference with Monte Carlo methods.

So this is what they did.

They, and I think it was published in NeurIPS.

Um, so very big machine learning conference.

and you know their observation was okay well we have this active inference method which theoretically is very powerful i mean in the sense that you have this expected free energy objectives that puts a lot of known constructs together so you know the expected free energy has shown in

in figure three here puts together this risk so this is the divergence between your predicted distribution of where you're going to be in the world and your target distribution of where you want to be in the world and it has this ambiguity term as well which has some nice links with phenomena in psychology like the streetlight effect so when you minimize

When you choose actions that minimize ambiguity, you can recover phenomenology that's known in psychology, like the streetlight effect or the drunkard's search.

Risk is also an objective that's used in engineering in control as inference, so you can see it on the left panel.

So there are a few methods for doing adaptive agents that use the scale term.

One would be control as inference.

which is also known as maximum entropy reinforcement learning and KL control and also I think although it needs to be investigated further it hasn't been formally I think so far but with the KL term there you can recover predictions that are made by prospect theory which is a big theory from the end of the 20th century about decision making in human agents

Um, so this is, I think, um, worthwhile to look into further, but, um, I think there's some very clear links between that theory and, and the scale term in the expected free energy anyway.

Um, so you had this expected free energy objective.

That's very powerful, has a lot of, puts a lot of things together.

So I think theoretically it's very nice, um, in, in the, um,

Last line of the upper panel, you can also see that you can view expected PNG as weighing expected reward and expected information gain, so extrinsic value, intrinsic value.

And extrinsic value, it's used in expected utility theory, Bayesian decision theory, RL, optimal control.

So these are all equivalent names for maximizing this extrinsic value.

And intrinsic value, expected information gain,

It's also used in many different places.

And in, for example, in Bayesian experimental design, which is in statistics, it was a seminal paper by Lindley in 1956.

And Lindley basically said, okay, well, suppose that you can do two experiments or many different experiments.

How should you choose between them?

What's the best experiment that you should do?

The answer that he came up with is, you should do the experiment that gives you the most information about the world.

So you have to keep in mind that in that paper, there was no extrinsic goal.

It was not like, we're going to do an experiment to solve this problem or achieve these results.

It was only doing an experiment for the sake of it.

And so he came to the conclusion that the best experiment was the one that maximized expected information gain.

now suppose that you have a goal in mind a target um your target result or or whatnot then you would weigh reasonably only one thing you could do is weigh the expected information gain with your expected reward or expected utility or expected how close you're going to get to your goal and so this is exactly what the expected free energy does it puts these two things on the same footing so

So you have this expected free energy, which is very nice, and which is, you know, what active inference brings to the table.

And what Funtas et al did in their paper is, okay, well, we have this cool method, active inference, let's use it to solve non-trivial machine learning slash reinforcement learning problems.

And so when you actually want to solve those problems, you have some high dimensional giant models, high dimensional state spaces,

that just come up and you need sampling to approximate the expected pre-energy.

So this is what they did.

And they also put together a lot of other cool tricks based on neural networks and so on.

Um, so very cool paper, totally recommend, but I think the point it suggests, and this is also the point that we make, although in a very different way in this paper is that to actually do decision-making efficiently in practice efficiently, but also you want to do take good decisions.

Um, you actually need sampling.

And this is not a new point, by the way.

I think many people would agree with this.

Um, but I think the, the active inference approach is nice because you have this, um, explicit characterization of expected PNG as an expectation of something.

So then it becomes pretty clear that you want to do sampling because this is what the sampling is made for.

Um, so I initially introduced sampling, as you know, wanting to approximate integrals, but expectations are integrals.

So yeah, sampling is really what you want.

It just comes up like extremely directly when you want to do these kinds of things.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks and one sensory example of information driven sampling is the eye saccade the movement of the eyes which also has been modeled in many works from the active inference perspective and it's even below our level of conscious awareness

with the eyes darting around to reduce their uncertainty such that our visual generative model can have high resolution and color throughout the visual field

even though that doesn't reflect the anatomy of the retina which has a blind spot and differential resolution and color detection in the periphery so i kind of see that as slam dunk evidence that our visual experience and by extension other sensory modalities are coming from the generative model they're not just received and processed in an inward bound fashion


SPEAKER_02:
and that adaptive sampling is vital to maintain the coherence of that generative model absolutely absolutely you want to do adaptive sampling in order to preserve preserve the structure i mean you have this beautiful structure in the expected free energy

expect information gain um so let's say we're just like wanting we're just like looking at stuff so we don't have any direct goal the expected energy reduces to expect information gain or you know approximates that and you just want to sample you sampling is the key to approximate you know this expected information gain term while preserving the statistics of the genitive model so it's very um

they're very central to scaling active inference.

I wouldn't say it's central to active inference proper, just the theory.

Because in the theory, you get these expectations and you know how to select actions.

But anytime you want to scale active inference, deploy active inference to solve a problem, you want to, I mean, sampling is going to come into play inevitably.

And if

Yeah, I mean, there's other ways to scale active inference.

One other way could be

what's called amortizing amortization so with deep neural networks so one thing you could do is train a neural network to predict the expected free energy based on your genetic model and your sensory data but this amortization procedure as does any training of neural networks it's going to require a lot of data so it's going to be slow it's not something that you can deploy right away so this is a very nice way of

I mean, amortization is a very nice way of doing things, but it's not something that you can use the first time you use Active Inference to solve a new task.

So a nice way of scaling Active Inference, and it's not the only way or it's not going to solve all the problems, but it would be to

use sampling to approximate the expected free energy to make decisions in real time.

And as you accumulate data, then you can train a neural network to predict the expected free energy.

I think this is exactly what Funtas et al did in their paper, by the way.

So if you're interested, make sure to check it out.


SPEAKER_00:
Figure three, it's something that one can just look at for so long because the imperative, what is being utilized in action selection by an active inference agent is something like a generalization of all the words that we see written lower.

And unless we knew about that generalization or that unified imperative,

it seems like these are quite literally orthogonal or disparate from each other.

I mean, what could be more different than

maximum information gain oriented strategies and maximum reward driven strategies.

And sometimes to get both those flavors in the same model, people might try to coerce one into the other.

Usually we see that in terms of a novelty bonus or an exploratory impulse bolted on to a reward or a pragmatic value driven agent.

And so once you start modifying the models and just adding in these arbitrarily constructed components, you may get adaptive behavior.

It's never been a claim in the active space that other models don't have efficacy.

Rather that by thinking about all of these special cases as being adaptive,

situationally arising from a more general imperative with expected free energy for future oriented policy selection we might gain the ability to do what what will we gain conceptually or or in practice by taking situations where today people are using maybe just one of these terms as an imperative for what


SPEAKER_02:
their models are doing and what do we gain or what might we expect from potentially generalizing those imperatives you know that's um that's a brilliant and very difficult question um it's also a question that i would say everybody in active inference gets asked at some point because people

Um, let's say people doing reinforcement learning, they, they use many different objectives, uh, that would be tailored to solving one particular task or a different task.

And they would, um, have these, um, ad hoc novelty bonuses that would work very well in certain tasks.

And so it's a, it's a different approach.

Um, the.

This approach that I was just mentioning with reinforcement learning tends to be much more bottom-up.

It's like we want to have an agent that solves this problem, makes this work, and so on.

So we're going to start building and test it until it works.

The active inference approach is top-down so it's you know, it starts from the furniture principle and It's very theoretical and the approach is like, okay Well, let's model how an agent interacts with its environment the most generic kind of agent and let's impose constraints that an agent has to satisfy so the

The basic constraint that we have in this paper is that you have three sets of variables.

You have variables in the external world that you cannot directly have access to.

So this would be maybe the temperature in the room.

Then you have sensory variables or observations.

So by the way, the environmental variables, they're denoted as S.

The sensory observations are denoted as O. This is what belongs to the world and you have direct access to.

This would be like your sensations, what you see and so on.

And then you have the actions, uh, denoted in the paper by a, which is, uh, basically what you can do and that, I mean, the different things, the different options that you can choose from at any point in time.

And this is what will enable you to influence the world S and influence your observations.

Oh, so we start from a very generic model of an agent.

and how it interacts with the world, these three sets of variables that evolve in time.

And just by adding a few other, I would say, constraints that agents satisfy or intelligent agents hopefully satisfy, you get that these agents can be described as minimizing, as taking decisions that minimize the expected free energy.

So the expected free energy just comes up from this general theory of how agents behave.

So to answer your question, what does this actually bring in practice?

Well, first of all, there's many methods out there that are similar to active inference.

In some cases, they're almost the same.

The first difference is, which is not necessarily an advantage or a disadvantage, but it's the approach.

These other methods that you see out there that come very close to active inference, they have been designed from a bottom-up perspective.

approach of like we want to model this system or we want to solve this task so we're going to add all the components that are needed until our agent does what we want it to do and it turns out that sometimes all these ingredients turn out to be exactly what we get in active inference or very similar other times maybe the task would be simpler and you would get less ingredients

the disadvantage of that i would say is that it can turn out to be very messy so you get a new task or a new thing to model maybe a new paradigm that some subject would do and you end up using a very different model a very different objective to describe the behavior at hand so it's not very um you know it's harder to have like a unified perspective of what's going on

active inference, the I would say the key, the key contribution is that you get this unified perspective from it, you get this objective that puts together a lot of other constructs that we that we know and love, and put them together.

And you know that with this objective, you can do a lot of things, which is, for example, decision making, that weighs exploration and exploitation.

Now there are some challenges with Active Inference and anybody using Active Inference would be familiar with them.

The first one is the scaling up.

Because you have this approach, Active Inference, which is so complex in a way.

I mean, you need to have a giant model of the world.

you need to have uh to be able to compute all these expectations no first of all you need to be able to compute all these posterior distributions using bayes rule or variational inference then once you have those posterior or approximate posterior distributions based on your high dimensional model of the world then you need to compute some expectations very high dimensional expectations using sampling or whatnot to then get the expected free energy

So expected free energy doesn't come up for free.

It's actually a very, um, I would say it's quite sophisticated.

It's a quite sophisticated thing.

I mean, he puts all these things together, but it doesn't come for free.

It's, um, it's hard to implement on a practical problem.

That's non-trivial beyond, beyond toy simulations and people have done it, but it's a challenge.

Um, so the.

problem the problem that active inference has is okay well we have this nice theory we have this um very nice objective that theoretically works very well and theoretically it's it's like or it's similar to what you would like to have for any kind of um yeah any kind of agenda but we need to find ways of scaling this up and and so here comes

Here comes the beauty of this is that in scaling up Active Inference, you're going to use sampling.

You're going to use techniques from optimization from inference.

And so you're going to get something that's slightly different from the Active Inference scheme that you started with.

So you had the Active Inference scheme proper, which was in the picture.

in the previous slide.

And so, you know, this is active inference as you would like to implement it if you could, but because the problem is complicated and you have a high dimensional state space and so on, you have many things that are computationally intensive

You're going to use sampling, you're going to use optimization, you're going to use inference.

And so you're going to get something, an active inference algorithm that scales, but that's slightly different from what you started because it has all these other steps.

Now, in doing so, the active inference agent becomes engineered.

So it becomes closer to these reinforcement learning and bottom-up agents that are built in a bottom-up way to solve certain tasks, you know, because you want to engineer the active inference algorithm to be able to work to solve a certain problem, to scale it in a certain way.

So in doing so, active inference becomes closer to reinforcement learning.

Now, conversely, in reinforcement learning, the amount of compute is increasing.

People want to build reinforcement learning agents that increasingly learn in an unsupervised manner,

Um, you can't always, you know, design all the, um, all the components of your reinforcement learning agent to solve any single tax.

It's just too impractical.

And especially when a task become more and more complicated, uh, you just would like general solutions that, you know, are going to work, um, and are going to handle a lot of different types of situations.

So reinforcement learning is adding or subtracting ingredients to their algorithms.

All these algorithms are evolving, but in some sense you can see, this is debatable, I suppose, but you can see a general tendency towards moving to world models and generative models, moving to intrinsic motivation,

which is another word for expected information gain or or variance thereof and an intrinsic motivation or intrinsic value that's added onto extrinsic value which is your expected reward so you see um many

I mean, I think we're seeing reinforcement learning evolve in a direction also that is closer to active inference because everybody wants algorithms that solve different tasks and not to have to change the algorithms for changing environments and so on.

So in my view, even though we started with

two different approaches, a bottom-up approach and a top-down approach.

These are converging.

Now, to come back to the contribution of active inference, if one reads through the paper and one looks at the derivation of active inference, the point is that it's very agnostic.

It's agnostic to the environment that we're in.

It's an agnostic to many things.

So it's very, very general.

And so if you take, um, many practical reinforcement learning agents, um, you will see that they interact with their environment in a way that's compatible with the assumptions of the 300 principle.

In other words, um, the, uh, reinforcement learning agents can be recast

as specific active inference agents with specific giant models.

So this is really the key thing.

It's this unifying perspective.

I'm not saying it unifies everything, but I'm saying that many different reinforcement learning algorithms can be recast as active inference agents.

And so this is not to say that the active inference implementation of those reinforcement algorithms is going to be better, but it's more like a theoretical contribution of like this set of equations given by the expected pure energy is a complete recipe or almost complete recipe to generate adaptive agents.

So in some sense, you don't have to go any further than that.

And so you can view all these reinforcement learning algorithms that comply with the assumptions, so that can be recast as active inference algorithms, as ways of scaling active inference and making active inference work.

So it's not like I don't see any kind of conflict between active inference and reinforcement learning, but it's more like

the reinforcement learning algorithms that work well and that can be recast as active inference algorithms.

And there are many, I mean, I would say more algorithms that can be recast than algorithms that cannot.

When you look at the assumptions of the pre-energy principle that are super generic,

So you can view all these algorithms as specific implementations of active inference in a way that active inference is meant to scale well.

So this is kind of like the thing.

And so I think ultimately, again, these two fields are going to converge.

But I do not see any tension between them.

It's more like the tools from one can be used in the other.

And, and yeah, I see, I mean, I see great work going forward.

And this is kind of like, what do we want to do with this paper, you know, put this active influence where it comes from very succinctly.

And also, you know, make it accessible for people who don't know the jargon from the French principal and active influence community.

And yes, see, see, I mean, the exciting developments that that will follow.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow, great comments.

Two things that that reflects to me.

The constraints that you mentioned, which we sometimes call the particular partition, essentially cleaving the particle, which you show in figure two.

cleaving the particle from the environment this is something that's widely applied in agent-based modeling just anytime you're talking about some field of action and a player we're basically at least qualitatively within the space of partitioning agents from environments and then further saying well there's no edge between the internal and the external states so there's no telepathy and there's no telekinesis and

incoming information we're going to call sense outgoing we're going to call action that qualitatively and formally is basically consistent with almost any cybernetic formulation of adaptive action so the constraints are really quite minimal and seemingly being generalized year after year with the work so many colleagues are involved in so the constraints are not onerous

And I think it's a really interesting question which reinforcement learnings are compatible.

And then coming from the other side, in a lot of active modeling contexts, we find ourselves sometimes proposing like auxiliary variables.

Like, let's just do a parameter sweep over this.

And then we'll look back to the textbook or to the paper.

We think, well, where was that in expected free energy?

We just proposed this random thing.

Where was that in the equation?

Or we'll look at step-by-step guide to active inference, where it's all written in terms of matrices.

It's all very...

read it like a sentence and all of a sudden it's like, wait, A could be a neural network.

It doesn't just have to be a matrix.

So it's kind of like we bring in these methods and ingredients that are being used widely empirically.

And these are the two approaches.

Do we build the bottom up mosaic of approaches stopping when it works?

and or do we start with this most general agent-based cybernetic formulation and then kind of build the castle in the sky and meet in the middle again with something that works it's just incredibly laid out and this paper is at that saddle point

because it has one hand or antenna or whatever in this smooth information geometry conceptual area, but the motivator of all of the conceptual moves that are made, which honestly are extensive, like page after page, it was just like, where's it going?

It's going somewhere that can be simulated on everyday hardware.

so many of the moves were about reshaping or reframing what was to be done in a way that could be simulated and so those two paths are connecting and like you said there's not necessarily attention but it'll be quite interesting to see how this develops on the theory practice and social frontiers


SPEAKER_02:
as more and more of these threads start to combine yeah i agree i think it's um particularly beautiful when you know theory meets practice um you oftentimes have you know practice that works but you have no theory or you have a theory that's beautiful but that doesn't work in practice and you know this just happens all the time um

Typically, you would have practice that works and then you would try to build a theory out of it.

But then often the theory turns out to be too hard.

So, you know, make some extra assumptions and so on.

You end up with a theory, but the theory turns out to be quite removed from the practice.

You kind of get that gap.

It's very beautiful and quite unique and also quite rare when the theory meets the practice.

And I would say when the theory meets the practice and in particular meets the state of the art, then you kind of have a complete theory.

So what we wanted to do in this paper is review these different fields in a way that we could show how far the community has gone between making a

state of the art.

And every section was started with theoretical considerations about what should be when you need to solve a particular problem, let's say adaptive agents or sampling or optimization.

And then from there and from logical steps about, okay, well, it should be like this and not like that because there's this,

you know, whatever kind of geometric argument or or other arguments.

And so from there, logically arriving at state of the art methods that are used in practice, the the other kind of like sequence of logical steps was, OK, well, we're going to start with optimization, which is, in my view, at the root of everything.

So sampling, it could be about optimizing samples to obtain the best approximation to your integral.

Inference is about optimizing beliefs and decision-making is about optimizing decisions based on their counterfactual consequences.

So we started with optimization because it's the simplest thing, both conceptually and also in terms of use case.

you need optimization to do everything else we then went to sampling and to inference and finally to decision making because it just brings all these three ingredients together we didn't go as far as showing okay well this is how you should scale active inference in order to solve all the problems in the world because

But we listed a few ingredients that have gone into the literature and also a few ingredients that this perspective offers to, you know, how to scale active inference and make it more effective.

So it's actually future work and an open problem to, you know, use the techniques that have been developed in the sampling section and the sampling literature to make

active inference even more scalable and same with optimization and same with inference so there's many things many things that have been put forward in this article and also elsewhere that can be used to you know scale active inference but at least yeah the goal was to be

comprehensive as possible without sacrificing too much of actually understanding what's really going on and show how the theory meets the practice throughout and really where the field stands.


SPEAKER_00:
So one kind of reflection on this again is

If we start with reward as our basal imperative pragmatism, I mean, after all, don't we want to get things done, achieve results in the world, realize our preferences.

We start with pragmatism and then it is empirically ad hoc how people introduce these novelty bonus or intrinsic motivations.

In contrast,

we can start with this information gain approach and then the thumb is put on the scale to bring more and more emphasis onto the alignment with preference so it's like two roads two paths and

maybe this is our bias or corner of the information space that starting with a broader epistemic imperative allows the careful introduction of pragmatic value whereas a pragmatic foundation that uh it's hard to then recast

epistemic value in terms of pragmatic value.

That's kind of like the question of valuing basic research.

And the approach taken here is develop an imperative that can look entirely like one or the other or mixtures.

But what's always so perplexing is that it has this extrinsic and intrinsic value

phrasing but there are other ways to decompose the function so even intrinsic and extrinsic value are not necessarily the ingredients that were put in it's more like they were two ingredients that were split out of something else that is much more integrated it wasn't like the free energy was constructed

by composition of any given decomposition of which there are multiple for variational free energy and expected free energy and so then a question that i've often wondered is there might be two policies that are very close or have essentially identical expected free energy but they could be radically different for example one could be

having a good expected free energy because it realizes a lot of preferences another might because it provides a lot of information gain so is it really as simple asterisk asterisk asterisk as a unified imperative or how do we make sense of the fact that one value

could rank policies that might have for example extremely different danger profiles or envelopes of outcomes how can that seemingly multi-dimensional space be projected into essentially a ranking


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's a complicated question.

I would say, as we can see, the Expected Free Energy does this in some way.

It provides an answer to this question based on your preferences and how much you would gain by observing this new data, how much information you would gain.

You can put these two things on the same footing.

This is what Expected Free Energy does, and it gives you a ranking.

You're right to say that

you're right to say that two very different courses of action could have the same expected free energy.

And so how do you choose between them?

Well, the standard formulation that you would see in textbooks or papers has, okay, well, G of action sequence equals this and G of action sequence equals that.

So these two action sequences have the same G and you don't know what to do.

But here,

the theoretical development in this paper makes it very clear that the expected PNG is a minus log probability.

And this is why, so to make it more transparent, instead of using the letter G that's commonly used in the literature we used, we kept the minus log P throughout.

So we never used the letter G. And so the expected PNG is this minus log P of action sequence.

so it says okay well if two action sequences have the same expected free energy well then you have let's say you just have two of them with the same expected energy the lowest one well then you choose probabilistically like half of the time you choose one and half of the time you use the other actually it's uh even a bit more complicated because if you since it's a minus log p you could have like um an action sequence with a very high

expected free energy and so this means that you can still take it but if you would take it like not very often so you have an exponentially low chance of taking that action sequence so it's it's a probabilistic description it doesn't say it says that the most likely action sequence would be the argument

the minimum of the expected free energy so this is like the top line in in the figure and so if you have uh two most likely action sequences well then you choose like half of the time you choose one half of the time you use the other but then in general

if you didn't want to simulate the most likely action sequence, then you choose probabilistically between all of them, and the action sequences that have the lowest expected free energy have an exponentially higher chance of being selected, and the others don't.

So there's another very nice perspective is that

the probability over action sequences, so this p of a greater than equal to t, is then the exponential of minus the expected free energy.

Because if you take exponential minus of what you get in the equality on the left,

then you recover this probability distribution over action sequences.

So this probability distribution over action sequences is exponential minus expected free energy, exponential minus what's in there.

And we saw before that Gibbs measures, they arise everywhere.

And so this is an example of a Gibbs measure.

You have exponential minus something.

Basically based on the formalism of the free energy principle,

it comes up that the probability distribution over actions is a Gibbs measure.

It is the Gibbs measure where what's inside is the expected free energy.

So, yeah, it's kind of like a full circle thing.

And this is basically this sort of like connections that just happened all the time when we were writing this paper and discussing because this

so many things that just there's so many crossovers at so many different levels, like on the sort of like object level that you're studying, but also on the methodological level, like methodologies that are used in some field, they're used in a different field to do something else.

So there's so many crossovers.

And so this is, I would say an interesting example of why

you know, gives measures, it gives distribution.

They just arise everywhere.

They arise in active inference.

And as we saw before, they're hard to sample from.

So if you wanted to, so let's say you have your Gibbs distribution that says, okay, well, this is my distribution of our action sequences that I get from the expected free energy.

Now you have two choices.

Either you sample from it to sample like, um,

um yeah an average i would say not a typical a typical action sequence or you could optimize the distribution or optimize the expected free energy to sample the most likely action sequence in in the two cases after you've done your planning with the expected free energy you have a choice between sampling and optimization so you kind of go back full circle of like

Um, if I want to select my action in the end, I either select the most likely action by optimizing the expected free energy or the Gibbs measure.

Uh, this, I mean, by optimizing this minus slot P by taking the, the, yeah, the action sequence with the minimal expected free energy, or, um, I have my Gibbs measure and then we'll sample from it to like get a typical action sequence.

So it's all like super interrelated.


SPEAKER_00:
very interesting in the par at all textbook from 2022

that dialectic is mapped onto the mammalian nervous system where policies can be selected by essentially passing through habit proportionally or expected free energy can be applied to sharpen or optimize the posterior on action and um

Does this influence how you select micro, meso, or macro actions?


SPEAKER_02:
Do you mean like for a human being, like actions at the cellular level, actions at the global level, or is it something different?


SPEAKER_00:
Like at the personal, grasping a coffee cup at the micro,

larger scale decisions, attention allocation, communication emissions?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think

I think all of these things can be formulated in this treatment.

So for example, attention would be where you choose to place your focus or your mental eye, so to speak.

So that's an internal action.

It could be unconscious, it could be undirected, but it's still happening.

I'm not an expert, but there's a lot of talking

consciousness research of like you being conscious.

I mean, there's a very low amount of processes that are conscious and these change according to where your inner eye or your conscious eye, whatever you want to call it, like moves.

This could be thought of as a mental action or an inner action that you may or may not control, but it's still an action.

All other actions, whether it is planning at the short timescale, taking a coffee cup, standing, or planning

at the longer time scale, like what am I going to do after my PhD and so on.

All of these things are actions.

So typically, and as you know, of course, we model that by using hierarchical models where you have different levels in your gianted model.

So in your model of the world and the higher levels that are like more

represent more abstract representations more and also longer timescales.

So it could be, let's say, at some higher level, I'm going to take the plane to go to Amsterdam, for example.

And at the lower level, okay, well, once in Amsterdam, I'm going to do this, this and this.

It's like this action at the higher level of taking the plane predates everything that you're going to do at the lower level.

And so factorizing these different decisions into different levels of a model allow you to be computationally practical and practically implementable when you make those decisions.

And presumably this is why we do in our everyday life factorize decisions and representations into low level and high level things.

The beauty of the free energy principle and of the treatment here, but the treatment here is again just the free energy principle in its most bare bones and general form, is that the expected free energy is formulated for any kind of generative model.

The generative models that you have in the figure on the bottom right there, they could be arbitrary.

So you could use this form of expected free energy for hierarchical generative models that have all these high-level, low-level decisions and representations.

But you could also use it for any other kind of generative model or world model.

The only difference is that with some world models, it would be very hard to implement this in practice.

and with other world models.

And in particular, those that are highly factorized and distributed

like hierarchical models, like the ones we just talked about.

With these, it would typically be much simpler to take decisions that minimize expected free energy when it comes to practical computation, just because when you have factorized representations, computations just factor out a lot, and it's just way simpler to do.

But the formulation here is entirely generic, and it could apply to


SPEAKER_00:
um all kinds of models and all kinds of situations very interesting well in our last little segment on the dot one let's hear your perspective or overview on the roadmap just walk through what the sections are

And you mentioned some related topics, but what do the subjects probably cover?

Why are they structured in that order?


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

Um, so the, well, first of all, the, the introduction, it just puts like everything in context, um, the kind of the, the conducting line or, or one of the

common points between all of these sections is that there's a lot of geometry.

So this was not purely, you know, because the journal is like the handbook of statistics.

It was called geometry and statistics.

So this is not just for that, but it's because geometry just comes up naturally, you know, in all these places.

So this is what we explained in the introduction, like the, how geometry comes up

the different branches of geometry that come up in these different fields and how they're interrelated.

And so just from there, you kind of get a picture of, okay, well, this branch, let's say, simplex geometry, for example, it comes up in accelerated optimization, and it also comes up in sampling.

And so you can already see from there, like,

what is going to be discussed of course but also like which branches geometry of geometry occur where and what what kind of like parallels there are um already um so going from the introduction to accelerated optimization so optimization it's um conceptually it's a very simple thing

It's like, okay, we have a function.

So coming back to, let's say that my state space come back to where we started with, and you have a function and a landscape over it, let's say like a mountain.

And so the goal is to find like the minimum of the mountain, like go from where you start to the minimum.

There's so many different ways of solving this problem, practically speaking.

The main challenge, of course, is that you don't know, you cannot see anywhere else except where you have been.

So you start somewhere and you're completely blind and you need to find the minimum.

So how do you do that?

There's so many ways, so many approaches to optimization.

I mean, it's a whole field and it's, in my opinion, a very messy one.

And this is understandable because there's the no-freelance theorems that are very well known that say that under some hypotheses, two ways of doing optimization will behave the same on average if you test them again, all possible sorts of problems.

So this is to say that

then the optimization methods that will work well are those that implicitly use the prior information that you have about the problem.

In other words, according to the theorems, there's no optimization methods that will beat everything.

Um, it just doesn't exist because they're all on average the same, but this is not to say that you cannot make any, you know, practical, meaningful steps by doing optimization because, um, not all optimization problems are, you know, the optimization problems that we have in life, they're not completely random.

not completely random landscapes that we need to optimize but that they actually have some structure so we can actually exploit that in algorithms and have things that just behave they just work a lot better for the type of problems that we're interested in than others so this is what um kind of like the starting point for all optimization so the

the the type of optimization that we considered here is optimization of smooth functions this is already like a big restriction there's so so many methods that are designed to optimize functions that are rugged

or non-smooth or have discontinuities and so on.

Um, when, when you actually get rugged or discontinuous landscapes, it's a whole different problem here.

We chose to focus on smooth functions.

And, uh, so the idea is that, well, so you have a smooth landscape.

You want to find the minimum and.

One way to do so and to do so well is through the use of a tool called geometric integration.

So I'll walk through the main ideas of this section.

The idea, first of all, is that you may design a method that theoretically works very well.

But when you implement it in practice on your computer, your discretization errors, because you can only implement it in discrete time, what you actually end up implementing ends up differing significantly from what you initially wanted to implement.

This is a problem that we discussed previously in sampling, and it just comes up everywhere in applied mathematics and numerical mathematics.

The fact that you can only do discrete computations on your computer is a big limitation and it's something that needs to be looked into.

It's maybe even the most important thing that needs to be looked into when building a numerical method.

You want the numerical, you want

to be able to implement numerical methods that are very close from what you theoretically would like to implement.

So typically, you would have some theoretical algorithm that would have some convergence guarantees or performance guarantees.

And so you would like a way to implement it on your computer so as to preserve those guarantees.

And this turns out to be very hard in general.

The one way to do it, I would say maybe the most powerful way out there to do this is through procedures from the field of geometric integration.

And so geometric integration is a set of techniques that allow you, under certain conditions, to discretize your theoretical dynamic or theoretical optimization procedure, your dynamical system, and make it into an algorithm that you can practically implement on a computer that's going to respect the performance

guarantees that you already have.

So now the tricky part, geometric integration is based on geometry.

So you need to find, it's not as simple as like, okay, well, I have my landscape, my function landscape.

i'd like to just go down and find the minimum one way to do that is just by you know doing like gradient descent and continuous time and you know that that's gonna like go down until it reaches a local minimum at the very least so it's not too bad if you were to implement gradient descent numerically wouldn't be exactly the same

as the continuous time dynamic.

It could be that actually by implementing gradient descent numerically, you get all sorts of numerical problems or whatnot.

Maybe gradient descent, it's so simple, it's not actually a good example.

But the point I want to make is that it's not as simple as like, okay, well, I have this dynamic that works really well and that gets to the minimum.

And I know that it's going to get to the minimum this fast.

And so geometric integration will give me will give me an algorithm that

I can implement on my computer and that's going to get to the minimum this fast as well.

It's not as simple as this.

Geometric integration works by preserving geometric structures in the dynamic that you started with.

So in order to be able to apply geometric integration to have algorithms that work for optimization, you need to design a dynamical system that converges to the minimum and that has some geometric

some important geometric features that can be preserved in this way and so this is basically the goal of the whole section and it goes into into the following steps um so one thing that can be um

you know, discretized or implemented on a computer in a way that is close to the true dynamical system is what's called Hamiltonian flows.

So if you specify a Hamiltonian, which is a kinetic energy and potential energy, then you get the Hamilton-Jacobi equations of motion that gives you the behavior of the system that has the prescribed Hamiltonian.

So for those who've taken a course in physics, you probably know or may have seen that all of Newtonian mechanics can be reformulated as Hamiltonian mechanics.

So all of that can be described as with Newton's laws of motion can be described through Hamiltonian mechanics.

It's a very general framework or a very general way to look at physics.

Because it's such a general point of view on physics and just Hamiltonians, they come up everywhere, this mixture of kinetic and potential energy to concisely summarize the behavior of a system.

Because they occur so much, they have been studied extensively, and it turns out that Hamiltonians and specifically the motion they entail, so the Hamilton-Jacobi equation of the motion,

they can be discretized or implemented accurately on a computer using symplectic integration, which is a part of geometric integration.

So, in short, you can use symplectic integration to accurately simulate a Hamiltonian dynamical system.

Now, the problem is

These dynamics are conservative, so they preserve the Hamiltonian.

So if, if you're at some point in state space with like a certain kinetic energy, potential energy, and you run the dynamic forward.

your overall energy is not going to change.

So that's standard physics.

Energy is always conserved when there's no friction.

So all kind of like ideal physical systems with like no friction, the energy is conserved.

So when you're going to run this symplectic optimization scheme to simulate these Hamilton-Jacobi equations of motion, the energy is going to be conserved.

Now we're in trouble if we want to do optimization because in optimization, if you think of the function as the energy, you want to dissipate energy as much as possible to reach the minimum.

So you want to lose energy.

So what the section does, so this section, by the way, is a review of more technical papers.

What these papers do, it's a very clever trick, is they say, okay, well, we want to minimize a function.

Um, we're going to say the function is a potential energy.

And so we're going to add a kinetic energy on top of that to get a Hamiltonian.

And so now this Hamiltonian, we could stimulate it through, um, Stimplactic integration, but actually if we did, we wouldn't dissipate the function.

So now, um, what the, what the section does is it introduces like, um,

a higher dimensional state space with the Hamiltonian that if you simulate those dynamics, it actually optimizes the function.

So this was a convoluted way to say it reformulates optimization

as a conservative system with a different Hamiltonian.

Because we know how to simulate dynamics with Hamiltonian so well, a good way of doing optimization is by finding a Hamiltonian so that when you discretize it, you get the optimization process that you wanted.

And so if you do that, you get a numerical method that's stable, that works well, that has good convergence guarantees.

And it turns out the numerical methods that are developed, they work for optimization on any kind of smooth manifold, for smooth functions on any smooth manifold.

They work well.

They're generalized gradient descent, in the sense that you recover gradient descent in a certain limit.

And they can be seen as accelerated because they have this notion of acceleration.

in a sense that if you if you let's say the function that you want to optimize it like a hill and you want to go down if you just did great in the scent you're like blindingly going down at the same speed or or your speed is like proportional to the slope of the of the landscape but when you actually let a roll ball

a bull rolling down this is not really what happens the bull is going to roll faster and faster and it's going to accelerate it's going to go down it's going to overshoot the minimum and then it's going to like oscillate until it converges to a minimum and so these are the kind of optimization methods that are developed here they're optimization methods that are accelerated in a physical sense that has a physical sense acceleration of physical meaning

because they're gonna accelerate as they go down, overshoot and then stabilize.

So this is the whole point of this section.

Now briefly, because I think we're running out of time, but we can of course revisit these sections later.

So in the third section, we have sampling.

So we talked extensively about sampling.

The sampling, as we discussed, can be seen as an optimization of probability distributions.

So we have this distribution that we want to sample from.

And we just run a process that is random.

So it can be described by its own distribution.

We want the process to converge as fast as possible to the target.

So we want the distribution of the process to converge as fast as possible to the target distribution.

So in a way that it can be seen as, I guess, complicated for many people, I think it's pretty abstract.

But it's been known for a long time that you can reformulate sampling as just optimization of distributions.

Now it turns out that when you use the accelerated optimization method of the second section to sampling, so when you do accelerated optimization on the space of probability distributions,

in order to solve the sampling problem, you get a process that's called underdumped Langevin dynamics.

So if you solve that process, you're basically going to get good samples, very good samples of your target distribution, because that process can be seen as doing an accelerated optimization on the space of probability distributions.

In other words, the distribution describing the process is going to accelerate towards the target.

So you're going to get there very fast, and your symbols are going to be very good.

So this is 2.6, where this is kind of derived.

In 3.1, we basically talk about the good properties of samplers in general.

So sampling is not like a complete field, but there's

lot of work showing that certain processes have i mean certain characteristics of processes make them better samplers and others make them worse so this is what we discussed and then in 3.2 we put this all together in hamiltonian monte carlo which is a state-of-the-art method for sampling um where where um so hamiltonian monte carlo is a way of using

If you use symplectic integration under damped Langevin dynamics, which is your accelerated sampling method that you cannot simulate directly, again, you get the same problem.

If you use symplectic integration to simulate that, then you get Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is a tractable way of doing accelerated sampling that's based on ideas of symplectic integration.

Now, very briefly, so the section four is on inference.

So inference, the inference in its most general form is variational inference, so what we typically do, know, and love from active inference.

And it's, I have a target probability distribution that I'm not able to compute directly, so I'm gonna approximate it as best as I can.

Now, these distributions, they're often used to compute expectations.

Or in other words, in statistics and machine learning, we often need to compute expectations with respect to some probability distribution.

What this section does is it derives a whole bunch of

divergences, like the KL divergence.

I mean, the KL divergence is not discussed so much in this section.

I'll explain why.

But it derives a whole bunch of divergences that can be used to approximate this unknown distribution with some other distributions that are tractable.

So

to like put in a different way you have this abstract variational inference problem where you have this target distribution and then you have this family of distributions that you know and you want to select the distribution in your family that best approximates your target distribution now you in order to do this you first need to

derive a measure of similarity between distributions to know, okay, well, what is the best distribution?

Like, how can you quantify being the best distribution, being the best approximation to your target distribution?

And to do that, you need to specify a divergence, like the KL divergence.

But the problem is the KL divergence

is not always practically applicable.

One example is when the target distribution is just given by samples.

So maybe you don't even know the target distribution.

Maybe it's a Gaussian, but you don't know it.

You just have samples from the Gaussian.

So you cannot just have a histogram.

And you need to best approximate the histogram with the distribution in some family.

So when you have a problem like this, which

which just happens all the time, you cannot use the KL divergence.

So you need to think about other divergences.

And so what this section does is deriving other classes of divergences that are more generally applicable than the KL divergence.

And they have also some very nice properties and then showing, okay, well, how is it that I can minimize these divergences to solve a variational inference problem?

So I think there's a...

a lot of things to be done there in the sense that in active inference, we always use the KL divergence to do variational inference and minimize free energy.

And this KL divergence is available because we typically have alternative models that are nice and they're expressed in graphical models.

But there's this whole other plethora of divergences and algorithms to minimize the divergences that's out there.

And it could be the case that there's, you know, very interesting recipes and methods that can be either brought back to the KL case that we use or just used altogether in our setting.

In particular,

when uh for example let's say that we wanted to you know approximate the expected free energy in active inference um the expected free energy is an expectation and we want to approximate that expectation it could be the case uh well i think i think these methods uh that are like summarized in section four could be very

useful because they basically develop divergences that quantify how far the expectations are going to be if you choose a different distribution.

So it's all very natural in that computational sense.

And then finally, adaptive agents through active inference.

Well, I think we've discussed that already extensively, but I won't spoil it more today and we can come back to it next time.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks a lot for that overview.


SPEAKER_00:
That was very powerful.

Incredible.

Dot one.

Very informative.

Looking forward to starting with some questions from the live chat and people's comments on the video between now and next week.

If anybody else of your colleagues or anyone in the Institute wants to join, we'll be here next week for 52.2.

So thank you, Lance, for the time.

Really appreciate it.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Farewell.


SPEAKER_01:
See you next week.

Bye.

## RO3XVXqvAII

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome.

It's ACT-INF Livestream 52.2 on March 9th, 2023.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find more information on these links.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn more about getting involved with projects and learning groups.

All right, we are back in live stream 52.2.

In our third discussion on the paper Geometric Methods for Sampling, Optimization, Inference and Adaptive Agents,

we had a dot zero background and context video and last week lance joined for 52.1 where we had a great overview discussion on the paper so today we're going to see where it goes see where our last week has taken us and how we're thinking about it or curious about it if you're watching live of course feel free to write questions in a live chat

Otherwise, let us pick up on a mostly blank slide.

And just thanks again, Lance, for joining.

If you want to give any sort of introduction or recap opening here, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, yeah, I mean, thanks a lot, Daniel, for organizing this.

I'm super happy to be here.

I think, well, last time we went through most of the paper.

We discussed a lot about sampling, I guess, the idea of sampling.

We discussed a bit less about Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, which is one of the, I guess, state of the art methods for sampling in continuous space.

We discussed a lot about optimization.

There's a nice figure actually that we can discuss today, which gives some nice intuition about the kind of optimization methods that we reviewed in the paper.

And then there's another section on statistical inference.

So this is a bit of a different section than people in the free energy principle literature and active inference are used to, because here the goal of inference

is about approximating expectations as opposed to just approximating distributions in and of themselves.

These two perspectives turn out to be dual, but I guess here we want to develop notions of divergences and discrepancies that are a bit more general than the KL divergence and that can be used to solve problems that the KL divergence cannot.

And I guess the overall picture for what we want to do that is the KL divergence soon turns out to have a lot of really nice properties that we can discuss.

One of them is that if the KL divergence is reduced, it means that the two distributions in play are more similar in terms of information.

So there is this idea of information monotonicity where the KL divergence sort of gives an ordering as to what extent two distributions quantify.

I mean, so if you have three distributions and you compute the KL divergence between them,

And now KL is lower than KL .

It means that B is more closer in terms of information to A than C is to A. So you have this really nice thing that is captured by the KL divergence, which makes sense when we're dealing with information.

The KL divergence also has so many other nice properties.

it it's not a distance but it turns out to behave a bit like a square distance so you have this kind of like really nice pythagorean theorem um and i won't get into the exact statement but it's like if you have a b and c distributions then k l a b plus k l a c equals k l b c if you have like a rectangle triangle if a b c define a rectangle triangle in information space

You have other properties that the KL divergence gives and so on.

So the KL divergence is, in general, I would say the divergence of choice, but it turns out that in many cases you just can't use it.

For example, when you have samples and you want to approximate some samples with a distribution, then the KL divergence just is not going to work there.

So you need to derive from other things.

So this is to say that we're considering statistical inference a bit more generally than what we do in active inference in general.

And so this speaks to why the section here is a bit different from the standard inference literature that we usually consider.

then i think there's the well then this section five which is about active inference and i think we should discuss that a little bit more because the formation of active inference that's presented there is to my mind the most general and also the simplest concept conceptually that's been out there i mean we sort of like recap the derivation of active inference and also like

The properties of the expected energy properties of active inference and also how to scale active inference and so on, and we do that in just seven pages or five or five pages, I mean it's just very short.

So it stands sure it's like a really concise summary and actually from there, you can really write a lot of you know technical papers on active inference it's like to me it's the most general and if.

If you as a reader can understand that section, then you can sort of really understand what active emphasis is about.

So yeah, this is kind of the overview for today.

I would really like to be discussing questions because last time we really discussed about most of the papers.

So, but yeah, whatever comes up.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

All right.

Great.

Well, let us...

talk about some of the more foundational pieces Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and then on through section four

with the points that you raised about the kl which generalized inference beyond how it may have been brought up in other active and then we can spend most of the time in section five and looking at some of those figures connecting some of the intuitions about the ball rolling down the bowl to the person running so sounds good on hamiltonian monte carlo where do you want to pick up


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, I mean, so last time we discussed a lot about the problem of sampling and why that's a difficult problem.

And we arrived at the conclusion or presented like Monte Carlo methods, how they work.

So you're basically running a stochastic process, like a random motion and sort of the distribution defining the process is gonna convert their target distribution, which means that when you run the process long enough,

then every point that it's going to be in is going to be like a sample of the distribution that you want to sample from.

Now there's a lot of issues with that.

I mean conceptually it's not so difficult, but actually when you want to implement this in practice, it turns out to be really hard because if you just implement the simplest stochastic process to sample your target distribution,

it's going to be extremely slow and I think that's the main bottleneck when developing Monte Carlo methods.

Monte Carlo sampling in general is slow and that's also one of the reasons why one might want to do variational inference instead of sampling.

So sampling is slower, but it's also more accurate.

It can approximate distributions that are completely arbitrary.

So if you care about accuracy and you have time and computational resources, then for sure go for sampling.

If you care about speed, about doing things online, and you don't care about accuracy so much, then variational inference is the way to go.

At least that's my understanding right now.

So let's say you wanted to sample a distribution in a continuous space.

So it could be just as last time, let's imagine the state space is the desk where I'm at.

And you sort of had this distribution, which could be like multimodal, very weird.

And you just want to take samples from there.

Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is probably the state of the art method to do that.

There's a lot of other methods out there, but Hamiltonia Monte Carlo typically just works very well and in a wide variety of situations.

And so the idea of Hamiltonia Monte Carlo is you're going to augment

The state space with.

So let's let's say that the original state space you start with are the positions.

And so you're going to augment that with a velocity state space, so you kind of if your original state space was Euclidean space of n dimensions you just end up with an Euclidean space of two n dimensions, so you double the size of the state space.

And now you say, OK, well, the distribution that I want to sample from actually defines an energy landscape.

So technically, it's like if you have a distribution which is p, then minus log p is an energy landscape.

So points where minus log p is low are points where p is high.

And so these are points that you want to sample a lot from.

And contrary wise, if minus log p is very high, then p is low and you don't really want to go there so much because these are points of low probability.

So I think this minus log p, actually there's many reasons why minus log p is meaningful in physics, but just note for now that minus log p is just like a function and the minima of the functions

of that function at a high probability point and these are high energy points where you basically don't want to go there so much.

So let's call this minus log p potential energy and so this is what this really is in physics.

Technically in physics p would

distribution.

Last time we saw like softmax of minus something.

The something is the potential energy.

Anyway, and so minus log p would be the potential energy.

And then if you add kinetic energy on your velocities, then you get what's called a Hamiltonian, which is the sum of the potential and kinetic energies.

So

What is exactly the kinetic energy?

The kinetic energy is like velocity squared, pretty much.

So if you add, remember that your state space is position and velocity.

If you add, and you take a point in state space, so you would have kinetic energy, which is velocity squared, and a potential energy, which would be minus log t.

Now, if you add the two together what you get is a Hamiltonian, which is the sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy, and this is just standard physics Hamiltonian is a sum of kinetic and potential energy and it gives us the total energy of the system.

So why we started with the problem of sampling and here I just told you something very complicated where.

we get a Hamiltonian, there's actually a good reason why we want to do that.

And it comes back to the idea of geometric integration that we talked about last time, which is that typically

Maybe I have a process that I know will give very efficient sampling, but actually when I implement it on a computer in discrete time, I just lose all the properties that make that sampling efficient.

So actually it turns out that most people working in Monte Carlo sampling, they're working on

efficient discretizations of continuous processes as opposed to on the continuous processes themselves.

Really the bottleneck and the difficulty here is the implementation part.

Implementing processes on a computer like you and I had in such a way that we retain all the good sampling properties.

So one very powerful idea is that of geometric integration, which is preserving geometric properties of a system.

I mean, geometric integration is the field that develops computational methods of numerical integration and numerical discretization in such a way that they preserve important geometric properties of the system.

Here, the geometry in play is the Hamiltonian.

And so you might think, well, that's pretty weird.

I mean, a Hamiltonian is an energy.

And here we're talking about preserving the geometry and preserving the Hamiltonian.

How do these two things fit together?

And so it turns out that the presence of a Hamiltonian and the fact that we have a state space that has positions and velocity

Technically, in mathematics, what we then get is what people call symplectic geometry.

So symplectic geometry just arises when we have those state spaces that comprise positions and velocity, and when you have Hamiltonians.

So this is just a way of explaining why the Hamiltonian is closely and intimately related to geometry.

So geometric integration enables you to discretize processes in such a way that the Hamiltonian is preserved.

Now, when you think about the Hamiltonian, the Hamiltonian gives you the energy of a particular point in state space.

And so if you simulate trajectories that preserve the Hamiltonian, what you're effectively doing is

sampling from the contours of the probability distribution, contours that have the same probability.

So you're basically going around, let's say, for example, in circles in a region that has the same probability.

When we want to sample, we want to go everywhere.

I mean, we want to sample regions of high probability, low probability, and want to be able to go from one to the other.

So what geometric integration allows us to do is to simulate dynamics that are going to preserve the contours of the probability distribution, and they're going to do so very well.

The advantage here is that when we use geometric integration to simulate Hamiltonian dynamics, which are conservative and, again, stay in the contours,

What geometric integration allows us to do is to take time steps that are very long, so it enables us to travel very far in the landscape, while still preserving the Hamiltonian.

So you don't need to take very small time steps to remain accurate and preserve the Hamiltonian, but actually geometric integration allows you to take very long time steps and still preserve the Hamiltonian.

Now we have a dynamic that's Hamiltonian preserving that's just very good, because you can take very long time steps and that enables you to go around the contours of the probability distribution.

So what you want to do next is, you know, to change contours, you want to go to contours that are

of high probability, contours of lower probability, and you want to do so in a way that the contours of high probability are sampled much more and much more often than the contours of lower probability.

So what you do is that you augment your Hamiltonian dynamic with what people call a velocity refreshment or a momentum refreshment.

And so this is how it works.

So you're going to simulate your Hamiltonian dynamic for some time.

And then after a while, you're going to be like, OK, well, now I'm going to change the velocity at random by just drawing a new velocity from a Gaussian distribution.

And so by drawing a new velocity from a Gaussian distribution, you're just going to change contour completely.

And then there's the constraint that I just talked about, which is,

You want to change contours of the probability distribution in such a way that contours of high probability are visited much more often than contours of low probability.

So you want to preserve that.

You want to do that proportionately in a way.

So the third ingredient of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo comes in, which is Metropolis Hastings.

And so Metropolis Hastings is this accept reject that we discussed briefly last time.

And so Metropolis Hastings is just super clever and it enables you to say, it just tells you whether this momentum refreshing step is actually a good one or a bad one and should be rejected.

A momentum refreshment is good if overall your sampling is going to remain faithful to the target distribution, but it is bad if it remains unfaithful.

So actually, running these metropolis things, except reject step, allows you to

change contours of the probability distribution in a way that remains faithful to the target distribution.

And so there you go.

That's basically Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

So to recap, you amend the state space by adding velocities.

This allows you to build a Hamiltonian

by declaring that the original probability distribution gives you a potential energy and you add a kinetic energy on the velocities, which is just velocity squared.

Because you have a Hamiltonian, you can use geometric integration to simulate Hamiltonian dynamics very accurately and with very long time steps.

very long time steps is a crucial thing, because it means that with very low computational costs, you can sample very far.

So it means that you don't get stuck in a region of the probability distribution, but you can actually visit it much more fast and efficiently.

So that's the first part.

The problem with those dynamics again is that they

remain on the contour of the probability distribution, and so you want to sample the whole probability distribution.

So what you do is every once in a while, and I think that's a hyperparameter in your sampling algorithm, let's say every 10 iterations of the Hamiltonian dynamic, every 10 time steps of the Hamiltonian dynamic, you're gonna sample, you're just gonna randomly take a new velocity,

So you're going to change contour in the probability distribution.

And the crucial point there is you want to change contour in a way that's faithful of the probability distribution.

And that's faithful of the sampling problem that you want to do.

There comes the last thing, which is Metropolis Hastings, which ensures that the momentum refreshment will be good for sampling.

I mean, we'll,

preserve your target probability distribution.

So with that, you just get a very efficient sampling algorithm.

And so it seems a bit convoluted, right?

The one bottleneck, of course, is that you need to double the dimension of the state space.

And if your state space is already extremely large, that could be a bottleneck.

It could be the case that actually

doubling the dimension to add velocities, it could be a computational bottleneck.

So that's a problem.

But still, in most cases, that's not a problem.

So again, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is convoluted, but the overall take-home message, I would

want you to take from this is that it is a method that remains faithful to the probability distribution they want to sample, and this is crucial.

And it is also a method that through geometric integration, it enables you to take time steps that are very long and still get accurate sampling.

So this is the really cool thing.

Um, if you, you could come up with a whole bunch of other methods that did not require to, you know, double the dimension of the state space or that didn't use geometric integration.

The problem that you would probably run into is that the over that, that the thing that you came up with when you implemented in the computer, it doesn't exactly preserve the, the, the probability distribution that you want to sample.

And so the problem with that is that this would lead to bias sampling.

And bias sampling is like you're going to sample a different probability distribution, which might be just a bit different, but still a different probability distribution than what you really want to sample.

And this would bias your predictions.

So the really cool thing of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is that you're actually able to

have unbiased sampling through the Metropolis-Hastings step.

And this is a crucial thing.

So it's computationally implementable.

In general, there's no computational bottlenecks apart from this doubling of state space.

And it leads to unbiased sampling.

It's also relatively simple.

So this is why this is really used all over the place.

there's um there's another few perspectives that might explain why it works so well so in in the paper in in section in the last subsection of of uh of section two which is about optimization um so the the section on optimization is about how to accelerate optimization how to

derive an optimization algorithm.

Yeah, yeah, 2.6.

Yeah, that's the one.

So the whole thing about section two is about deriving an optimization algorithm that accelerated in a physical way.

And by I mean, accelerate what I mean by accelerated, it's not about just going faster, but it's about having acceleration.

which means that, so if you go slightly up in the paper on the figure, I think this figure is great.

And by the way, I wasn't the one who came up with this figure, but I think this figure is great.

It really gives a lot of intuition for what acceleration really is.

So if you look at the green cup, I don't know how you call this, the green well on the left,

This would be like a bowl rolling down the well, and the well is filled with honey to a certain level.

And so there you get a lot of friction.

So your bowl would just roll down very, very slowly, and the speed of the bowl would be proportionate to the slope of the well.

um so this is not accelerated because there's a lot of friction and so the speed is just proportional to the slope of the well and this so this is actually what grade in the sand does but now if you go on the right you get what people call in physics on under them system which is also an accelerated system a system that's meaningfully accelerated so if you replace the honey

in the well by some water, then there's going to be way less friction and your bowl is actually going to accelerate and overshoot the minimum of the well, and then sort of stabilize.

But the point here is that this, this bowl is just going to get so much faster to the minimum.

Now, um, so let's say that we just, um, I mean, so this optimization, this idea for optimization is, is just extremely powerful.

And, um, and by the way, on the right hand side, in the graph, you can see the improvements that you get when you, when you implement these sort of ideas.

So this was on... I'll come back to sampling in a bit, I promise, but this is actually very related.

You can see on the graph on the right what kind of improvements you get when you go from an under...

damped first order gradient descent system to an underdamped second order accelerated system.

And so you can see the curve, right?

So the black slash orange curve is overdone.

There's no acceleration.

It's very slow.

The last curve, the blue one, it's accelerated and it's just super fast.

So you can see it sort of gives you quantitative data as to how many improvements you can get by implementing this acceleration in a physically meaningful way.


SPEAKER_00:
Could you just describe the axes of the graph and also what the Lie group is here?


SPEAKER_01:
So the Lie group is, so in the figure legend in the fourth line, you see the Lie group is S-O-N.

So technically that's the special orthogonal group of dimensions N.

And so if I, if I remember correctly, these are all the matrices, all the square matrices of size N by N that have a determinant equal to one.

So the determinant is just like, um, a function where you give it a matrix and it gives you a number.

The fact that, um, the fact that the determinant is equal to one

means that here we're just taking matrices which produce not translations but changes of coordinates that preserve the geometry in a system.

So just to elaborate on this a little bit because for people who are not intimately familiar with matrices it might seem a little opaque.

So when you have a matrix

A matrix can multiply vectors.

So a square matrix takes in vectors of dimension n, and it outputs vectors of dimension n by multiplication.

So if you have a square matrix, it just induces a transformation of your state space, because each vector, each point, which is a vector, gets converted into another point, which is another vector.

Now, so there's a lot of, I guess, properties there, right?

You could have all sorts of translations of state space or rotations in state space or transformations of state space.

If the determinant of the matrix is equal to one, it means that the transformation of state space that the matrix induces will preserve the geometry of the state space.

It will preserve distances.

if you and it will preserve crucially orientation as well because if if you only asked um the determinant to be equal to one or minus one then you would the the matrix transformation would preserve the geometry but it would not preserve the orientation it could like mirror things

So if you only asked the determinant to be equal to 1 or minus 1, you would get a Lie group that's called the orthogonal group, which is usually denoted O .

And here we require the determinant to be just equal to 1, and so you get the special orthogonal group.

And so it's this group of matrices that have this property.

Now this is not

really i mean this is not really important for the example here because you could have taken any other d group and got something similar and got a similar difference in performance but but um yeah i guess it's just interesting for its own take um and so the graph though the k is the number of iterations so the number of time steps so that's the x-axis and the um

The y-axis is how close you are from the minimum.

And it's in log scale.

So as you can see, the blue curve is going to get like, in 100 iterations, it's going to get basically 10 to the minus 4, 10 to the minus 5 distance from the minimum.

So it's like super, super close.

It basically gets there in 100 iterations.

When you take the other normal gradient descent methods, where you see that it's going to

So yeah, this is really the advantage of using second order methods.

And what I mean by second order methods is that by second order means that you actually double the state space to introduce velocities so that you not only have a dynamical system over positions, but you have a dynamical system of velocities.

And so it means that you have a physical notion of acceleration.

because acceleration is a movement of velocities.

And so if you double the state space by saying, this is position, this is velocities, and you say, I have a motion in this, like a state space that's twice as big, then you have a meaningful notion of acceleration.

And this is really powerful.

And so you can see already a parallel here, which is that

Antonio Monte Carlo also has this notion of acceleration in some way, at least just intuitively, because we also double the size of the state space to introduce velocities.

And so it turns out that this intuition is actually, you can make it into a formal correspondence.

And this is, I think, this is something that quite interests me, to be honest.

so if you if you remember if we come back to the intuition for sampling the intuition for sampling through monte carlo methods is we have a target distribution that we want to sample from so we're going to run a dynamic a random dynamic towards that towards that distribution now what makes sampling efficient

is that the distribution that characterizes the process, because again the process is random, so that each time it is at a random location that is characterized by a distribution, what makes sampling efficient is that the distribution characterizing the process just converges as fast as possible to the thing that you want to sample from.

So there is

This is to say that you can think of sampling as an optimization on the space of probability distributions.

You want to move your probability distribution of the process as fast as possible to your target.

And so you can see from there that sampling is actually not so different from variational inference.

It's just the same idea.

Only variational inference, you're typically going to take a parameterized family of distributions and approximate the target, while here you have a non-parameterized family that's given by your dynamic that's going to perfectly match the target.

So again, so with that, I want you to have the take-home message that sampling, you can think about it as an optimization on the space of probability distributions in the sense that you have a target distribution and you want to get there as fast as you can with the process.

Now, let's suppose, and so here is the crucial connection between sampling and optimization in the way that we've described it here.

Let's suppose that you run this accelerated optimization scheme on the space of probability distributions.

Then the process, so you would get the dynamic on the space of the probability distributions that has a meaningful notion of acceleration through the accelerated method that was shown here.

So if you look at what kind of dynamic this really gives you,

It gives you a process which is given by a stochastic differential equation that is known as underdumped Langevin dynamics.

So there's an equation for it in, I think, subsection 2.8.

But the point is underdumped Langevin dynamics is a stochastic differential equation whose density or probability distribution stalls this accelerated optimization problem on the space of probability distributions.

So just from there, you know, that under that long dynamics is going to be a very efficient sampler because it meaningfully accelerate and it gets to the target.

I mean, quite fast.

The problem is under large band dynamics, you cannot simulate it accurately.

Well, you can simulate it accurately, but you cannot simulate it exactly on your computer in practice.

So this comes back to the numerical integration problem that we discussed just before.

um and so you have to to find a way to to discretize or or in other words implement underdumped longer bound dynamics on your computer in such a way that you retain that the thing that you implemented on the computer retains this meaningful notion of acceleration and so it turns out that you can see

on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo as a faithful numerical discretization or numerical implementation of underdamped Langevin dynamics that's going to preserve these acceleration properties and therefore this efficient sampling.

So this is all like a lot of interesting connections.

But basically what I want to get at is you really have this notion of acceleration that permeates, well, I guess physics, but here it permeates sampling and it permeates optimization.

And so the method that was shown here about optimization and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, they're just the same in a way.

Only one is applied to optimization.

The other is applied to optimization on probability distributions.

sampling great i guess last question on this part what is the shadow hamiltonian and why does it sound so cool i know right yeah it's uh it's really cool um it's a really cool name so the shadow hamiltonian is um okay so so let's go back to the hamiltonian

Um, so we have a Hamiltonian and I want to simulate the dynamic that preserve the Hamiltonian.

We want to implement that on the computer.

We're going to do that through geometric integration.

Geometric integration gives you a bunch of algorithms to preserve the Hamiltonian.

I mean, a bunch of algorithms they can implement on the computer and they're going to preserve the Hamiltonian.

Um, do they actually really preserve the Hamiltonian?

It turns out that no.

So what I, what I said before is a bit of a shortcut, like because the numerical integration or that you get through any, any numerical methods, including geometric integration is not going to exactly preserve the Hamiltonian, but it's going to preserve

what people call a shadow Hamiltonian, which is almost the same as the Hamiltonian, but with extra terms that sort of vanish if the time step is very short.

So this is to say that your numerical dynamic implemented through geometric integration is going to exactly preserve the shadow Hamiltonian and approximately preserve the true Hamiltonian.

And so in the papers, we show, I don't know if it's, well, it's probably algorithm dependent.

But basically, depending on the algorithm that you choose, you want to show to what extent the shadow Hamiltonian truly approximates the true Hamiltonian.

The virtue of geometric integration methods is that actually the shadow Hamiltonian turns out to be extremely close to true Hamiltonian.

which means that you can take a very long time steps and still be very good at preserving the true Hamiltonian.

So here you don't, when you implement these methods, you don't exactly preserve the true Hamiltonian, but you do, you still do it pretty well.

And so in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, the momentum refreshment and Metropolis, crucially the Metropolis Hastings accept rejects that.

is going to correct for those failures of truly preserving the Hamiltonian.

So even though you don't exactly preserve the Hamiltonian in your numerical integration in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, the Metropolis-Hastings accept-reject step is going to correct for this inaccuracy.

And so this is really the true beauty of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

is that even though you get a lot of things that are not exactly preserved when you implement things on a computer thanks to metropolis hastings overall your sampling is going to be perfect in the sense that you're going to truly preserve your target distribution so this is really the key

Now a follow-up question to that is, okay, well, if Metropolis-Hastings is just so crucial and it just gives your dynamic...

the property that it's going to preserve whatever it does even if it samples really badly if you add metropolis hastings it's still gonna um preserve your target distribution then why can't you just come up with the average process like whatever kind of process and that metropolis hastings at the end

and so you can do that you can take any kind of process um and after and so let's say you take a random process it could be the worst in the world let's say you wanted to sample from a gaussian and you actually take a brownian motion now this is clearly not going to work because brown emotion just goes all over the place it could go infinitely far brown emotion it's just like random motion right completely random motion

No, there is structure to it, but there's no, the structure in Brownian motion means that it's touched that Brownian motion is just going to just spread really, really far.

So Brownian motion is not going to preserve your target distribution.

So it's going to, and it's also going to be very slow by the way.

So it's not going to be a good sampler.

If you add Metropolis Hastings on Brownian motion, which is

You integrate Brownian motion, so you simulate a step of Brownian motion on the computer, and then you do Metropolis-Hastings to know whether you should accept or reject that step.

Metropolis-Hastings will tell you whether you should do it or not.

You either accept and you stay and you keep going from that new position or you reject and you start from where you started from and take a new sample, accept, reject.

If you accept, you keep going.

If you reject, you go back and you sort of go like that.

So if you do metropolis hastings there, your stumbler is going to be exact.

So it is going to preserve the target.

And so you're going to have accurate sampling.

And so this is crucial.

This really highlights the importance of Metropolis-Hastings.

But, and there is a big but, your stamper here is going to be extremely slow.

And it's going to be extremely slow, first of all, because random motion in and of itself, it doesn't at all preserve the target distribution.

I mean, it just goes all over the place and you just want to sample a lot around the mode of the Gaussian, for example.

So it means that Metropolis Hastings will reject a lot of your steps, because a lot of your steps will try to go further away while you want to stay around the mode, typically, of the Gaussian.

So you're going to do a lot of steps for nothing.

And also, Brownian Motion just does not have the qualities that make a sampler efficient.

And so the reason why Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is so good is because it's able to integrate Metropolis Hastings and still preserve a lot of other properties that make the sampler efficient.

So if we remember Hamiltonian Monte Carlo has this geometric integration that does not exactly preserve the Hamiltonian, but

it still does it pretty well, approximately, by preserving a shadow Hamiltonian.

So this means already that integration step is going to be really good.

So there's going to be a lot of acceptance in the metropolis Hastings.

So and also the way the way the scheme is set up, there's going to be a lot of acceptance step in the Metropolis Hastings.

So it means that most of the samples that you would draw will actually be used instead of being rejected and you have to start over again.

So that's one advantage.

The other the other advantage of Hamilton and Monte Carlo, and this is a crucial one, and we kind of discussed this last week, is that

One crucial thing to be a good sampler is this idea of time irreversibility.

And so I'll emphasize it again because it's really crucial and there's a lot of literature on this and it's something that we reviewed also in the paper.

So a sampler that is time irreversible is always going to be

better or it's at least not going to be worse than a than a sampler that is time reversible so what do we mean by this a sample is time irreversible um if and only if uh were you to play the dynamics

forward or backward, there will be... So going on your bullet point here, a sample is time-reversible if and only if you were to play the dynamics forward or backward in time.

So forward in time, and then maybe you would play them by reversing the movie, by playing the movie backward.

uh if you were to do that then you um then the the two movies that you would see would be qualitatively the same and statistically the same so the process is time reversible if and only if the process if you run it forward or backward it's basically statistically the same now what does this mean in practice well if your process is time reversible then it's going to backtrack very often actually

So it means that you would be somewhere in the probability distribution just sampling there and you will go forward and then you probably go backward and so on and you kind of get stuck in a region until you go somewhere else, but it's just going to be very slow to move around.

It's going to be very slow to get good sampling because it's going to take you a long time to visit all the regions of the probability distribution.

In other words, the distribution characterizing the process is going to move very slowly to the target distribution.

That's another way to look at it.

If the process is time irreversible, on the other hand, then it's a lot less likely to go backward during the sampling process.

So it means that it's going to visit the target distribution a lot more.

I mean, it's just going to go around.

Imagine if you're not allowed to go backward just as a human being and you're walking around, you're just going to end up in many more places than if you were allowed to go backward.

And if you were just going backward all the time to where you started, then you wouldn't be able to do a lot of visiting, so it would be a bad sampler.

So I guess there's some straightforward intuition there.

So one idea in sampling is we want to optimize the extent to which a sampler is time irreversible.

increase time irreversibility as much as we can to force the sampler to just move around as much as possible so that's an idea and and it is explored currently i guess it's a bit of an open problem of how do you really do that and how do you implement that on a computer in a way that you know works and preserves all the properties um but the point i want to i wanted to get to is that

Um, Metropolis Hastings is a blessing and it's also a curse.

It is a blessing because when you add it to any kind of process, you will make your sampling unbiased.

So it means that you will sample the right distribution, even though you're implementing this on a computer and there can be a lot, uh, so many issues with the numerical, numerical integration, numerical approximation and so on.

But it's also a curse because whenever you add Metropolis Hastings on a process, it's going to make it time reversible.

So actually, yeah, if you just took a random process and added Metropolis Hastings, you would get something that's inevitably going to be quite low.

Um, and so now you get to the, you know, the problem or the conundrum where, what, what do I do?

Um, do I go for unbiased sampling?

Do I care about accuracy?

Um, and then I should add a metropolis Hastings or do I not care about accuracy so much?

Um, and then I should not have metropolis space Hastings and it's going to go faster generally.

Um, and so Hamiltonia Monte Carlo actually.

of the blessing and does not have the curse.

And this is why Hamiltonia Monte Carlo is just so good.

again it's also complementary to all of the things that we've been discussing and the reason why hamiltonian monte carlo is blessed and not cursed is because the momentum the how do you call this the metropolis hastings is just done on the momentum refreshment step as opposed to being done on the overall dynamic

So, because if you remember, you do geometric integration to simulate Hamiltonian dynamics.

Now, every once in a while, you will take a momentum refreshment and then do Metropolis Hastings on that momentum refreshment, as opposed to doing Metropolis Hastings on both the Hamiltonian dynamic and the momentum refreshment.

So it's not something that I can really explain how that works.

But it turns out that by just doing the metropolis, I mean, not only Monte Carlo is a way of having metropolis Hastings in a way that you preserve the unbiasedness so that your sampling is accurate.

But you don't sacrifice the time irreversibility, and so you get both.

And this is because the metropolis hitting is just on one of the components and not on both.


SPEAKER_00:
To kind of connect that to an example, as we move into active inference,

here we have some probability isocontours some we have the high probability carpool lane and then we have some lower probability lanes and uh we can go different speeds in these lanes and we want to have a full accelerated model here

it's almost like the mh is is refreshing our velocity just asking when we want to change the lanes but it's not our full self-driving car metropolis hastings algorithm but we're able to use our position and acceleration when we're in our lane

to take full advantage of the acceleration following the shadow road, not necessarily the true road, but the shadow road is close enough or the shadows on the road.

And then lane changes are these computationally costly and reversible, but still super useful propositions.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

And they're actually not computationally costly.

They would be if you were to reject many samples.

But here in Hamilton and Monte Carlo, typically you don't get to reject many samples.

So yeah, that's such a great picture.

So the car follows the shadow road by just doing geometric integration and following the shadow Hamiltonian.

Every once in a while, you get a momentum refreshment, a velocity refreshment, which is, oh, now I move to the first lane or the second lane, third lane, and so on.

And you get a Metropolis Hastings correction step that says, do I accept this proposal of lane change or do I reject it?

And so on it goes.


SPEAKER_00:
So how does this connect to active inference?


SPEAKER_01:
well i mean great question uh so in active inference in active inference proper you don't have any sampling in active inference uh whenever you want to scale active inference to implement it to solve any kind of problem in the world you want to do something because there's a lot of computations that are not going to be tractable otherwise and so one

One cool example is in the figure after this, actually.

So for any kind of decision-making in active inference, you need to approximate the expected free energy.

This figure?

No, the one just before.

Here.

Yeah, perfect.

So if you look at the second equation there, you get this minus log p of an action sequence equals expectation of something.

This minus log p of the action sequence is our notation in this paper for the expected free energy.

So the expected, I mean,

you probably all know this the expected free energy is given by the expectation of something now typically and when you have a very high dimensional model which happens in in most applications i would say you get a very high dimensional expectation what is an expectation an expectation is an integral with respect to a probability distribution

How do you compute expectations?

Well, you do that through sampling.

Or at least, sampling is the way to compute high dimensional expectations that's the most efficient in statistics.

And this is the reason why sampling is studied in statistics.

It's because that's how you solve these problems.

I mean, expectations just come up everywhere.

just like so many things about machine learning boil down to computing expectations and so here in particular the expectation that is very dear to to us very close to our hearts is the one that gives you the expected free energy the expected free energy is the expectation of something so how do you compute that in a high dimensional model uh where you have to use something and so

There comes the usefulness of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

If you have a discrete state space model, you're not going to be able to use Hamiltonian Monte Carlo because Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is on continuous state space models.

It's on continuous state space, right?

We talked about continuous positions, continuous velocity.

I talked about sampling of probability distribution on my desk, which is a continuous state space.

So you're not going to be able to

use Hamiltonian Monte Carlo if you have a partially observed Markov decision process and you're doing active inference there.

But if you have, for example, I've been talking recently to Ryan Smith who does a lot of active inference and he's really leading a lot of the modeling work with active inference and real data of patients of all sorts.

Many medical data and also using active inference to

model psychological experiments.

And one of the things he told me about, well, is, okay, well, I have a bunch of data and partially observed Markov decision process is just not going to do it.

Why is it not going to do it?

Because the data that he has lives on a continuous space.

I don't remember exactly what it was, but let's just say for the sake of example, that that data was, you know, the temperature in the room.

And people had to, the subjects had to infer the temperature in the room based on their sensations.

So that's a continuous state space problem.

Now imagine that you asked someone to infer the temperature in a room, then maybe you would change the temperature in the room or not, and you would ask them again, change the temperature or not, and ask them again, and so on.

In when you have this sort of setup, you have a discrete, you have a phenomenon that unfolds in discrete time, because you just repeatedly ask some question and some time elapses between the questions.

But you also have a state space that continues.

When you have this sort of data, then the kind of model that you want to use is a partially observed Markov decision process that like we know and love, but the state space is going to be continuous instead of discrete.

The time is still going to be discrete.

Now, when you have this sort of model, I just want to say it as an aside that

For the moment, a lot of the modeling work and simulation work in active inference uses discrete state space POMDPs, partially observed Markov decision processes, just because it's been sufficient.

And when you simulate agent, it's often like in grid worlds.

And when you maybe have state spaces in experiments, they often by design discrete because it's just easier to handle.

But that's not an assumption, a simplifying assumption that we're going to be able to keep for that much longer.

There's just so many things that you cannot account with these sort of models.

So one other model that is interesting to have is a partially observed markup decision process, but with a continuous state space.

with those you get the problem of you know estimating the expected free energy which would be then an expectation or in other words an integration an integral in a continuous state space and so how do you do that efficiently if you are in a high dimensional state space where you use Hamiltonian Monte Carlo i think this would be really the the best method so this is how you join the dots

In this paper, we didn't talk about sampling in discrete space because the methods are quite different.

So we really had to choose what to focus on.

There's, of course, a lot more methods in the literature than there are in this paper.

We just wanted to sort of review what were the main ones and what people really used in practice.

But, you know, when you have the expected

computing the expectation that defines the expected pre-entity can often be a little bit easier because it comes down computationally to a bunch of matrix multiplications, matrix vector multiplications, which generally is doable unless

I mean, the state space is enormously high.

And then we'd have to think of sampling methods in discrete space.

But as soon as you move to a partially observed Markov decision process with a continuous space, which I argue and Ryan Smith argues, and I'm sure a lot of people have run into this, as soon as you have this kind of model,

Well, yeah, you just have an integration problem in continuous space.

And so Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is the way to go there.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And your 2020 paper was a synthesis on some of the discrete state space formalisms of active.

So it's very interesting to see how you're now talking about where continuous time, continuous state spaces can come into play.

And

How interesting that active inference has the capacity to deal with discrete and continuous state spaces.

And sometimes we lean on one leg or the other leg more, but it spans the gap in a way that's actually like a value adding, not like there's some sort of missing piece from one side or the other.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah, definitely.

I think active inference is great because it's so flexible in the sort of models that you can consider.

But yeah, I mean, historically, the first models to be developed were continuous space and continuous time.

And then it works quite well because you can take gradients of the free energy and just minimize them over time.

So you could get around basically everything by doing a gradient descent on free energy.

And then after that, around late, so that was like 2010.

And then around 2015, people started thinking, Okay, well, how do I model discrete time decision making with active inference.

And typically, the decision making tasks, at least the simple one, there's

studied in behavioral neuroscience, just to make things simple, the number of actions that you have is discrete.

So you have a finite number of actions, which is pretty small.

You would also have a finite number of states, which would be pretty small.

And then people started to think, okay, well, how do we use active inference to actually account for that?

And so that's how the whole expected free energy and partially observed market decision processes came into play.

And now the community has grown a lot and there's more and more data that we want to account for.

There's more and more projects that are going on.

And you know, people are realizing, and I think, I mean, it's an obvious realization.

It's just not surprising at all that these two models developed in 2010, 2015, they're just not going to account for everything.

Think about other kinds of models.

It really depends on what kind of data you have at hand.

important and obvious type of model would be partially observed Markov decision process with continuous space.

And actually, this is not a new thing.

I mean, people have been using these kind of models in reinforcement learning and control for a long time.

I don't know to what extent they've arrived at practically, I mean, they've arrived at practically implementable algorithms.

I don't know to what extent they're used to what extent they're state of the art.

Um, but the point is they, it's something that it's a kind of model that, you know, has existed for a long time.

Um, and so this sampling is, would be a way to actually practically implement this and scale it when you want to put that within active inference.

So I think, yeah, it's an important thing to think about.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah, Thomas Parr also recently in a discussion on the textbook was sharing some timelines and it's just so interesting how these things have been developing and from continuous through characterization of the discrete.

in a sense, not culminating, but being synthesized in your 2020 paper.

And now there's, with an increased emphasis on empirical data, the desire to bring in a lot of these methods that actually help us implement it rather than just think about it really parsimoniously.

So what is your active inference method?

representation in the figure of the running person and then how do the variables and the processes described in this figure relate to all of this you know five hours of talking about shadow hamiltonians and all of this


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Yeah, that's a broad question.

We might need another 10 hours to answer that in detail.

But just very short, well, so the active inference section was meant to be as complete as possible, even though it was very short.

And by completeness, I mean that we started by deriving active inference.

And deriving active inference from first principles

So this is really what the Free Energy Principle does, even though we weren't able, of course, to review the whole Free Energy Principle in like one or two pages, but we

What we focused on was deriving the expected pre-energy from first principles.

And then from there you get the full active inference algorithm.

So proactive inference algorithm, I think you just went past it.

It's just below.

If you go slightly below, I think maybe page 29 or page 30.

Yeah, still I think next, yeah, realizing adaptive agents.

Yeah, so this is the active inference algorithm, like 0.1, 2.3 or something.

So just from a duration of the expected free energy, you actually get as a corollary from there, the active inference algorithm that we know and love.

This is actually a more general version than what people use.

And I'd be excited.

And I'm actually talking to people to actually implement that.

But this is actually the most general version that has been established in the literature.

It is more general in a meaningful way, in the sense that all the beliefs, all the probability distributions, they are over trajectories or sequences of events.

So it means that all the computations, they not only consider events at a particular time,

in the future, for example, where they consider trajectories, so sequences of events.

And so this is equivalent to considering different events at different points in time and their kind of independencies and dependencies between them.

So this is just to say that if you would take then this algorithm and you would perform a mean field approximation over time, which is saying that all the things that you see in the future are sort of independent of each other at different points in time, then you would recover what people typically use in the literature, which is easily implementable.

The point I want to make here is that you can actually not have that limitation and have things that are a bit more complex, that are able to capture more complex relationships in the time series and input that they might be receiving, like the kind of sensory data that they might be receiving, and the kind of generative models that they would have.

So anyway, this is the active inference algorithm, the most general one.

We derive that from first principles by deriving the expected free energy from first principles.

And so this relates us to that figure that you just showed.

So that figure that you showed with S, O, and A is the starting point of the free energy principle described in this paper.

And so the point is that we want to describe decision making.

We want to describe actions as a function of sensations.

And we want to come up with the most general description of actions as a function of sensations to be able to account for everything.

That's kind of the idea of the 300 Principle.

So what do we do is we consider a world, a world in which there is an environment and an agent.

And so the environment here is denoted by S.

and S is a stochastic process.

Why a stochastic process?

Because a stochastic process is the most general type of dynamic that exists, at least as far as I know.

It's really a random dynamic and it could be random in all sorts of ways.

It could also be non-random.

We sort of take the stochastic, the random aspect as an extra ingredient just to include a lot more types of scenarios and things you can be confronted with.

You partition the world into the agent, which is O and A, and the environment, which is S. And the agent, then you subdivide it into two more components, which are O and A. O are what we call the observable states.

So these are like the sensations of the observations that you get at any point in time.

Also a stochastic process.

And finally, you have the autonomous states, or you could think about it loosely as the active states.

They turn out to be the active states in the implementation.

But so the active states, they're really, you know, like the models, the things you can actually activate and make.

and then activate to influence the world.

So we just partitioned the world into these three sets of states that interact and evolve in some way.

They're both really stochastic processes that interact.

And then the goal of the theory principle, at least when applied to decision-making, is that you want to describe A as a function of O. So what happens as an organism,

you have control over A,

you have access to O but you don't have direct control of O over your sensations and you don't have access to S because that's the environment and beyond the mark of like it beyond you beyond your envelope so you don't have access to S you know O and you can control A, A is what you can choose from and so the free energy principle just answers the question okay well if I take this very general description of the world

what is the equation of A as a function of O?

How can I describe A as a function of O?

And so it turns out that there's some mild assumptions in this, and these assumptions, they're guided by physical considerations about how humans are and how humans interact with the world.

they're very mild but whenever you take these assumptions you get that the active states or the autonomous states minimize expected free energy so so this is like a very succinct um derivation of the expected free energy from first principles we start with the partition of the world we describe active states as a function

of observations.

And so it turns out that the expected free energy is what describes the active states as a function of observations.

And so the basic active inference algorithm which everybody uses and which we have also in the paper is about, it's all about computing the expected free energy and then selecting actions that minimizes expected free energy.

So the expected free energy

As we saw, I think it's in the next figure, so the one with all the panels.

We've seen it a couple times already.

It's an expectation with posterior distributions in it.

What I mean by posterior distributions here is that these are distributions conditioned on the history of the agent, so on the observations that he has already seen and on the actions that he has already taken.

In any case, so you have the expected free energy is an expectation with posterior distributions within.

So it means that to compute the expected free energy, you have two problems.

You have computing posterior distributions through Bayesian inference, Bayes rule, and you then, once you have them, you can plug them in into this equation, and then you need to compute the expectation.

and then you get the expected free energy.

So the first thing is about computing the posterior distributions.

Now, what has been proposed in the literature so far is, well, how do you do approximate inference?

How do you actually approximate distributions?

You do that through variational inference or approximate inference by minimizing free energy.

The treatment here, the derivation, and our aim was to provide a derivation that was as conceptually simple as possible.

Actually, it highlights that the free energy is not the most important thing here.

The important thing is really the expected free energy.

The free energy is just a tool to approximate the posterior distributions to then get the expected free energy.

But you could actually use any other type of divergence.

The free energy is just like a KL divergence plus some term that makes the whole thing tractable.

And so you can minimize the KL divergence to approximate the targeted distribution.

But actually, what this view highlights, and by the way, I'm not at all against the free energy.

I think it's really cool.

And there's so many methods to minimize free energy.

and if you can do that then fine and sure go for it like way to go but imagine you could not do that it would not at all be a problem because you could use any other kind of divergence to solve those inference problems um so so that would be the first step you're going to approximate those procedure distributions by doing some kind of approximate inference which would be through minimization of the energy or through minimization of something else

And then you have the second step, which is computing the expectation.

Now, either you're in a low number of states, discrete states, POMDP-like thing, and it's all a matter of vector matrix multiplications that are tractable.

Either you have a very, very high number of discrete states, and then you need to think about sampling in discrete states, which we didn't discuss in this paper.

either you are in a continuous state space and then you have an expectation in continuous state space, and then you want to think about Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, for example.

So now with these two steps, you have now an estimate of the expected free energy, which gives you the quality of any action sequence.

And so it's not only the quality, but it's actually the

negative log probability of any action sequence regarding in this formalism because if you remember the you know the premise of all this was to describe actions as a function of sensations in a physical system in not even a physical system but in interacting stochastic processes um

And so the answer to that was, well, the expected free energy gives us, you know, gives us how actions relate to sensations.

The expected free energy, and this is why we used the letter, we used minus log P of A as opposed to G to emphasize that the expected free energy is not just like a function of action sequences, but it is

really the negative log probability of an action sequence, given some sensations.

And so once you have computed the expected free energy, you had this minus log probability of an action sequence.

If you take the exponential negative of that, the exponential negative of the expected free energy, you get the probability distribution over action sequences

And so, by the way, this exponential negative of expected free energy is what we use all the time.

You might recognize this as the softmax of negative expected free energy.

This is just all the time kind of fundamental thing in active inference models.

So I'm really talking about the same thing here.

So once you take the softmax of negative expected free energy, you get p , which is the distribution of reaction sequences.

And now you have two possibilities.

Either you want to stimulate the most likely action sequence, in which case

you want to simulate the action sequence that maximizes the probability distribution.

So in effect you have an optimization problem.

You need to find the action sequence that is going to maximize this probability distribution that's given by the expected free energy.

or um or you want to simulate a typical action so what do I mean a typical action a typical action or a typical action sequence is just a sample from the distribution and so if you want to sample from I mean if you want to do that then you have a sampling problem

over action sequences given by the expected free energy.

So this is really how all these methodologies connect.

Yeah, I think that's kind of it.

Yeah, one last thing is typically when we simulate active inference, we never do the sampling at the end.

We always take the action sequence that minimizes expected free energy.

In other words, the action sequence that maximizes that probability distribution.

And this is because when we simulate

things we it turns out i mean this is how people have done in the literature people are more interested in the most likely action sequence that um that an organism or an agent would produce but if you want to model data if you want to use active inference to model data then you actually want to not just simulate the most likely action sequence but simulate

any kind of action sequence that would fall out of this and so this is really the case where you need to sample from that final distribution as opposed to do optimization so depending on the use case you either have a sampling or an optimization problem

after you've um you've computed the expected free energy so this is how these whole things um fall together and and so you might be asking okay well you talked about sampling and optimization there's also a section about inference where does that fit in and so it fits in to uh it fits in on on the remark i gave that

you know, we have these posterior distributions within the expected free energy.

How do we compute them?

How do we approximate them?

One way is by minimizing free energy.

Another way is by minimizing any other kind of divergence.

And in that section over there, we just reviewed some kind of divergences that are very popular in the statistical inference literature, mainly because they have desirable properties.

And so if you weren't able to use the variation of free energy for some reason, or maybe something to be explored,

is just to use other types of divergences and just see what happens.

So the open problem to be explored is whether we can get better performance by using different kinds of divergences and see what we get.

Maybe there's powerful algorithms that are out there with these other types of divergences that we can make use of to do better performance, to get better performance.

Can we actually describe and quantify the improvement in performance that we get by using these other types of algorithms?

When would these be appropriate and useful?

These are all open questions.

Another open question that I think is interesting is, can we model maladaptive behavior by using different kinds of divergences that would not work as well as the free energy?

And there's an interesting paper on that by Noor Sajid, I think, and colleagues.

I think it's called Bayesian Brains and the Rainier Divergence.

It's been published on neurocomputation, I think, last year or the year before.

And so in that paper, instead of using the variational free energy to approximate all these posterior distributions, she used the Rennie divergence, which generalizes the KL divergence in some way.

and showed that for different rainy divergences, you get different types of approximate posteriors.

And she basically looked into what kind of differences you get from there in terms of perception, in terms of decision making.

And she showed that for that particular divergence, I think the conclusion was that you basically get different phenomenology.

You get different behavior.

So just something to be explored.

I think the upshot was that maybe, I don't remember how far the paper went in this, but I think kind of the goal was to model maladaptive behavior using some kinds of random divergences that did not work as well as the free energy.

so this is to say so this is an interesting work um one could examine other kinds of divergences and see whether you actually get better or worse performance than with the free energy uh one thing one word of caution though is the the free energy is is just so good in the sense that it uses the kl divergence

And as I mentioned at the beginning, the KL average has so many properties and it's just so fundamental.

It's not straightforward to see that when you first come up with it, but I guess the more I read,

in different disciplines and the more the KL divergence comes up and the more I see properties of KL divergence in different disciplines that just make it so interesting.

Like for example, the KL divergence in statistical physics is the relative entropy.

So it quantifies the amount of entropy that a distribution has with respect to another.

Entropy, as we know, is just a very fundamental thing.

In information theory, the KL divergence quantifies the difference in information between two distributions, the amount of bits that you would need to... I mean, if you take two distributions A and B, the KL between the two

quantifies the amount of information that it takes to go from one to the other.

So now you might object and say, okay, but KL A and B is different from KL B and A. And so how can it be that, you know, it quantifies the amount of information they need to go from A to B or B to A because it's not symmetric.

So the answer is,

It's either KL of A and B that has this meaning or KL of B and A that has this meaning and I just can never remember which direction.

But it's one of them that has this interpretation in terms of the difference in information.

Anyway, so KL is just like something, it just comes up everywhere and it's just...

so useful and it has all of these nice properties which makes the free energy really a construct of choice.

Um, but that said there's other divergences, one of them, which we describe a bit in the paper, call them the maximum mean discrepancy, which I think also has nice properties.

It's not necessarily, well, it's a bit different.

It's very different in terms of how you construct it from the KL divergence.

But I think my current understanding right now.

And my current understanding right now is that if you cannot use KL, then maximum mean discrepancy is just really nice.

But yeah, so the word of caution was that probably most divergences out there are not going to do as good of a job as a free energy, but some clever ones might.

And it's an open problem of determining which

And yeah, so this is how we get the link between all these different sections.

So to do perception, we need inference.

To do decision making, that is computing the expected free energy, we need sampling typically.

And then to do action selection, we either need sampling or optimization.

And also inference is...

An optimization of beliefs sampling of that we as we've discussed is also an optimization of probability distributions.

You can see that as an optimization of beliefs as well.

So it's all very tightly interconnected.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Thank you, Lance.

That's very informative.

brings up a lot of

ways to go and it it really shines a different light on even what learning active inference or learning free energy principle it was a roller coaster just listening when you describe the figure of the running person

And the new generalized representation here, which is so sparse, it looks like it's pseudocode, but it's actually basically necessary and sufficient to describe action.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it is pseudocode, and it is also exact.

This is really what active inference boils down to.

And that was kind of where we got at.

We're like, okay, well, we have this mess of papers of active inference,

not that they're actually a mess but you know there's so much information and we're you know really thinking reading

free energy principle literature that I've also worked on a lot and also the active inference literature and really thinking okay well how do we strip all that of the neuroscience how do we strip all that of the cognitive science how do we just retain the math and present it in the simplest way possible that would be appealing for a mathematician and also hopefully for a computer scientist it turns out that we got a way simpler perspective than anything that's out there I think

And really, yeah, so this is the active inference algorithm in pseudocode and in detail also in a way.


SPEAKER_00:
So I totally agree.

Again, thanks for the work and for sharing it this way because it is the fewest pixels for the highest resolution picture.

So then to describe the...

fundamental cybernetic challenge as a partition an axiomatic partition which one can then say also has grounding in the spatial temporal boundaries of the world or in geometric boundaries in informational spaces but the particular partition is used to separate

in the map not necessarily making claims about the territory and the actual nature of the objects and their articulations or anatomy but on the map which we get to construct we make it in a way that's amenable to the particular partition which is not too much more than the separation of figure from ground or agent-based modeling it's just a separation of some autonomous entity from some external process

then the task of the free energy principle applied to decision making as you said was to describe action as a function of observation and everything in between is broadly considered cognitive but for any given system it's going to play out in this immensely nuanced way with a lot of bespoke mechanisms and why do we take that particular partition step

Well, it's kind of like read, write, access in the computer system.

There's things we don't have access to, hidden states, and also the reverse of that, which is we can't access hidden states, nor them influence or affect us.

So I think of that as like no telekinesis, no telepathy.

You can't go directly across the blanket.

You have to intermediate through the blanket of observation action.

And then with respect to our particular states,

our blanket and internal states.

We have access to observations, but not direct control, nor necessarily would we want to, because if we had the lever to change what we directly received, then algorithms might learn strategies that basically self-deceive so that the observations look good, look good, look good until the whole system crashes.

So we want access to observations, but not direct control.

And then the autonomous states are what we in the optimal ideal situation have total control of, which is like our mind and our body, what we think and what we do.

It turns out,

through the pragmatic turn and the inactivist insights in cognitive science that a lot of action sequences have to do with changing what observations are sought after like epistemic affordances so there is an enmeshment of action but it's also really important that we have access but not control of observations we don't want to have like our control on the thermometer

but we want the best possible thermometer, and then we want to control the best possible interpretation, that's like signal processing, and the best possible action sequence, which is like decision-making and control theory.

And then free energy principle is addressing that question.

What is the equation of action as a function of observation?

But then it was quite a roller coaster when you said that the free energy wasn't even necessarily the only way to do it.

But it's absolutely true.

The properties of the free energy are inherited from one of the terms being KL divergence and the other having the ability to basically ignore in certain relative expected free energy calculation contexts

so then in that situation differences in free energy do come down to differences in the KL which does have all these properties but that doesn't mean that the free energy is itself axiomatically posited it's actually downstream of the particular partition to use free energy or anything like that at all and other discrepancies may have other properties in different ways


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

And so there's a bit of a nuance in the sense that

describing decision-making, as you summarized, describing A as a function of O. And by the way, about that, we didn't even talk about Markov blanket in this paper.

I would say that the Markov blanket is under the hood because we're saying, okay, well, these are the states that you have access to, and these are the states that you do not.

The states that you have access to are A and O, the states of the agent.

The states that you do not have access to are the environment.

So in some sense, there is a Markov blanket, but we didn't even have to mention that in the paper.

It's just you partition the world into three sets of states, S, O, and A, that are by definition A. And you just, yeah, just from this tripartition, you want to describe one as a function of another, ignoring the third.

And so that, yeah, that

how you derive expected free energy, you see that action sequences are described by the expected free energy, and this is a function of sensations.

If we went further in the, and so this is just what you need, crucially this is just what you need to derive the active inference algorithm.

if you if we went further in reviewing the free energy principle then we would see the fundamental role that the free energy plays and so actually when you know reading the latest papers on the mathematical theory of the free energy principle the role of the variation of free energy is pretty clear

But here, the point is that if we just care about decision-making, if we just care about the normal active inference algorithm, then we don't even need the variation of free energy.

So sure, the free energy should be preferred.

Why not?

If it is available, but if it is not for some reason, then there's no reason why not to use another kind of divergence.


SPEAKER_00:
So, very interesting.

It's making me think about linear regression.

and the sum of squares the l2 norm is one approach that's often used to fit a regression line because it has good optimization properties there's good software packages there's good education there's good communication around it and so on but one can select other norms and choose to fit a linear regression with an l1 norm or with an l3 norm and so that

entire question of fitting the linear regression is a degree of freedom how the regression is fit that's downstream of a commitment to for example model a system in a generalized linear modeling framework

so analogously the upstream commitment or the first principles which yes can be understood as axiomatic and also have some empirical status in terms of this partitioning a figure from ground the particular partition can simply be accepted axiomatically which is to say without appeal to evidence or somebody might have another upstream axiom and choose to model uh things according to a particular partition

from there just like we could have chosen the l123 norm there are different discrepancy criteria or measures that we might want to use and some of them apply better or worse or not at all depending on what software hardware data set and generative model we have

And so it makes sense to pull back into the upstream understanding of active inference as a process theory for particular partitioned systems.

And then for those who want to engage in the modeling to have that

a discussion about the garden of the branching paths well you could use a discrete time or you could use a continuous time and then from here you could do this sampling or you could do that one and if we have this computer access we can do that but if we have to do it this way we'll do it like that

And that's all operational and logistical, but it's actually all under the umbrella or under the auspice of the theoretical or conceptual commitments that are actually not being questioned once one is in that modeling discussion.

Just like you could have the L123 norm conversation and maybe a reviewer asks you why you chose the two norm versus the three, but it's a broader level of questioning

why one took on the linear modeling framework at all.

And our analogous upstream bottleneck, not in terms of rate limiting, but just in terms of like eye of the needle, is the particular partition.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, definitely.

And I just want to add something actually about the choice of divergences or the choice of discrepancy that you might want to use to solve the inference problem.

I think the analogy with linear regression is a really good one.

When you do linear regression, yeah, you can use all types of norms, and it's really a design choice.

And here in the algorithm, you also have that design choice.

Are you going to use KL, so free energy, to do these inferences?

By the way, the inferences are really equation 43 and 44, which are approximate.

Actually, you had them in the slide already.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, 43 and 44?

Oh, here, got it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Which are approximate, you know, some posterior distribution with an approximate posterior distribution.

So you can do that with the free energy, which is the same as the KL divergence, or you could do that with a whole bunch of other divergences.

One that I mentioned and that I think is particularly interesting is the maximum mean discrepancy.

And so

Here's the difference between KL and maximum mean discrepancy, at least, I guess, an important conceptual difference.

So the KL, when you look at distributions that are very close to each other, it's basically going to become symmetric when the distributions are very close, and it's going to measure the amount of information that differs between them.

The maximum mean discrepancy, when you take two distributions that are very close, it reduces to what people call the earth movers distance, also called the Wasserstein distance.

So here is the intuition.

If you take two distributions that are very close, just imagine distribution A as a pack of dirt and distribution B as a pack of dirt or sand with some shape.

the maximum mean discrepancy is gonna tell you the amount of work that you need to put all that dirt from distribution A and pile it in the shape of distribution B. So of course there's so many different ways in which you could take all that dirt

from distribution a and remodeled in distribution b but you're interested in the minimal um the minimal energetic cost that would take so like the optimal way of doing that movement people call that optimal transport um now if you're if you're familiar with optimal transport you know that the vasterstein distance um is a distance between probability distributions that regardless of how far they are

is going to give you this cost of optimal transport.

So the energetic cost of moving all that pack of dirt from place A to place B in the optimal way.

So the Wasserstein distance is something that we could use here.

But maximum mean discrepancy, it has a lot of very nice properties and basically reduces to the Wasserstein distance when we consider very close distributions.

So this is not something that just a mathematical curiosity, but it says that when one builds

When one builds a distance out of a divergence, what one does is one takes very close distributions, measures the divergence between them, at which point the divergence is pretty much symmetrical.

and then you basically keep adding divergences along a trajectory until you get to the final one and this way by aggregating divergences between very close distributions and doing that and you know adding that along a trajectory you get a distance a meaningful distance between you know distributions that could be very far if you do that with the KL divergence you get what's called the Fischer information distance which measures really the

the amount of information that took you to go from one distribution to another distribution, regardless of how far they are.

If you do that with advanced search time distance, you will get the optimal transport cost, so the amount of energy that you need to put all that dirt

they say to place me in the optimal way.

If you do that with the maximum discrepancy, you would also get that.

You would also get the optimal transport thing.

So I just want to say that the maximum discrepancy, minimum discrepancy between two distributions that are far away will not coincide with the Wasserstein distance, which gives you this optimal transport cost.

but when you actually derive a distance from these divergences the distance derived from the maximum new discrepancy and the Wasserstein distance will end up being the same and this distance that you actually get or the topology

that is derived from the distance, so by topology.

But topology is really a notion of closeness.

And so to understand closeness, you need to understand infinitesimal distances.

So the infinitesimal distances derived from Wasserstein or MMD, they're the same.

The topology that results is the topology of what people call weak convergence, which is the standard topology that's considered in probability theory.

So MMD and Wasserstein, they are very natural in that sense, in the sense that they

People say that they match rise with convergence, like they give rise to the standard topology between probability distributions.

So coming back to the choice of divergences, if you're interested in approximating distributions in the sense of approximating their information content,

then KL is very natural.

But if you were, for some reason, and maybe it would not be in this kind of application, but another kind of application, if for some reason you're interested in approximating distributions for the sake of how close they are when you look at them, then you would use MMD or Wasserstein.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Great.

information and i'm just thinking about we're switching lanes on the highway we're trying to get from here to there yes we want to know about the informational closeness of this tale of two densities but we also want to know about the transport closeness because we have a schedule and a budget and decisions to make and there are trade-offs so being able to move the earth

optimally while we're switching lanes and accelerating and slowing down i know this is mixing many angles informally we want to have a lot of options for how to think about that challenge of moving dirt between the tail of two densities and make sure everybody is driving in the right lane at the right time


SPEAKER_01:
Definitely.

And yeah, it's a, it's a design choice and it's an important one because it depends on, you know, what kind of properties we want to preserve.

And, um, yeah, so all these, all these divergences, some, some are not so useful, I guess, but, um, some of them, they're, they're just very natural and, um, Western shine and MMD, they're very natural in that sense.

Um, so yeah, very important to keep in mind.

And not only for active inference, but just in general for any kind of inference problem.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, let us each have a closing round or reflections.

Any thoughts or any next steps or any suggestions or other information you'd like to provide?


SPEAKER_01:
it's hard to say i feel we've you know we've covered so much already um there's still i think to me what's most exciting about is um scaling active inference right now um because you know you get this active inference algorithm in the paper

that's derived from first principles.

And just from the derivation, you see, okay, well, there's actually so many things.

I mean, the assumptions are so small that there are so many things that you can model with this active inference algorithm.

And basically you, and all the heavy lifting is done by the generative model.

So if you use one generative model, you will get one behavior.

If you use another generative model, you will get another behavior, but all the equations will remain the same.

um so so it speaks to generality now in in having something that's very general you get something that's also very non-specific and i guess for for neuroscientists and people who are interested in intelligence you just um generality comes at a cost of being you know non-specific and non-specific about the brain in general

So really the big question to me long term is what kind of genitive models do we need to simulate brain-like behavior because this is really the interesting behavior or the most interesting behavior.

So it speaks to a big research program that a lot of people are carrying and have been carrying for a long time but you know it's about what kind of representations do we have

of the world what kind of priors do we have what kind of can we identify the priors that we are born with there's a lot of research on computational or just playing cognitive science like normal cognitive science just studying babies and seeing what kind of priors what kind of you know basic information they have when they come out of the womb there's a lot of things that they can already do there

our genetic code is preconditioning us to operate efficiently in this world and be able to flexibly adapt to any kind of situations that might arise in the natural world.

And so it's a huge research program to understand and model these priors and not only the priors, but also the likelihood, all the representation, all the state spaces.

So I think that's the way forward.

The free energy principle is very elegant because it gives you a very succinct description in terms of a generative model that enables you to simulate pretty much everything.

But we're not interested in simulating anything.

We're interested in simulating brain-like behaviors.

So now we need to drill down even more onto the kind of generative models that would be amenable to that.


SPEAKER_00:
great my closing reflection i feel like i know less about fep but more about something else for what we've discussed earth was moved bayesian mechanics were called in decisions were made

And it's been a really great series.

So I'm appreciative and thankful that you suggested this paper in our correspondence as one to discuss.

You were absolutely right that it is relevant to bring to the attention of the active community.

And I hope that everybody who reads or listens this far has


SPEAKER_01:
shifted lanes so they can be where they want to be too well that yeah i mean uh thank you so much um i also really enjoyed this session and i think we had a really cool discussion um so thanks again and hope to just do this again soon excellent anytime you'd like farewell see you lance yes
