## INRaCBikpso

Hello and welcome to the Active Inference Lab to our first ever Applied Active Inference Symposium.
Today it's June 21st, 2021, and we're very honored to be here with Professor Carl Friston and many of our lab participants.
Just as a way of quick introduction, the Active Inference Lab is a non-profit organization that is a participatory open science laboratory
and we're working to curate and develop applications related to the Active Inference Framework,
something that hopefully we'll be going into a lot more in detail today and this is a screenshot of our website.
As far as the overview of the symposium, there are three organizational units in the lab.
.edu, education, .coms, communication, and .tools.
And each of these units are going to facilitate a 45-minute or so session and we'll have a short break in between sessions.
So in our weekly meetings over the past weeks for each organizational unit, we've been developing questions and getting excited about things that we wanted to talk to you about.
As far as a few overarching themes that were kind of spoken to, really through the whole journey of our lab, but also across organizational units.
The first theme is applying active inference across systems. Again, something that will come up probably in all sections.
The idea of research debt. The idea that we don't want to be developing research frameworks that have a huge burden on those who are learning and applying.
And that especially early in the formalization of frameworks, it's extremely valuable to increase the accessibility so that we don't end up with major headaches and incompatibilities later on.
Collective intelligence and the ways in which that is manifest across different systems.
Transdisciplinary teams, transdisciplinary teams, projects, and communities, which are kind of like nested levels of organization.
But transdisciplinarity is something that is necessary for the type of work that we're all interested in.
And also just modern challenges and opportunities for research and all that that means related to online and everything else.
And of course, anything else that you have tumbling around and wanted to bring to the table thematically.
So there we are with our sort of lab overview and introduction.
Let's go to our first organizational unit dot edu.
The goal of dot edu is to scaffold and create a participatory and dynamic active inference body of knowledge, which we'll talk more about in a second.
And our progress and actions this year have been to release a terms list, V1, which benefited greatly from your feedback.
And also we're now updating the terms list to version two, which now includes five complete language translations and many references and citations for the terms.
The way that we're approaching the development of the terms is by using approaches that place ontology and progressively more formalized versions of ontologies as kind of the backbone of an educational body of knowledge.
So we started on the left side here with a terms list in the first quarter of 2021.
And the ontology working group is like a train that's pushing to the right as they're learning ontology by doing and developing progressively stronger and stronger ways of relating the terms and the concepts that are essential for understanding active inference.
And this will help us develop principled educational material that's also able to be translated rapidly.
Alex, do you want to give a quick thought on where knowledge engineering comes into play?
Yeah, thanks.
Thanks.
At this slide, we are showing this work with ontology, with system engineering approach which we are also using in the lab and considering possible deliverables of working on educational materials and creating them.
We should have at some point of time textbooks and educational courses.
And actually maybe this lab is started from the idea that a textbook for active inference should be created.
Also, we see some connection that can be applied to organizational management for creating translations to make it multi-language from the beginning.
And also, we should see some domain specific use cases that we can understand in terms of that ontology that we are going to create.
Thanks, Alex.
So on to the questions section.
We're going to start off pretty broad here in the .edu.
How do we go about determining the core ideas and terms for active inference?
This will be the format of the question slides, Karl.
So feel free to jump in.
Right.
I guess it will be structured around the key ideas and essentially ingredients that underwrite the free energy principle and how that translates into active inference.
So, you know, without thinking about it too deeply, my mind just goes to what are the things, what are the basic ingredients you need to explain to somebody what active inference is and why it works.
And it normally starts off with the notion of a generative model.
And then from that you spin off all the appropriate mathematical ideas and constructs and descriptions that would attend that.
I mean, it may be best to reflect the question back to you.
So this is a neat idea having an ontology.
And it's certainly my experience that people are entertained by sometimes the poetic use of phrases and descriptions such as epistemic affordance when trying to grapple with what are the fundamental ideas behind active inference.
Some of them are fundamental and some of them are not.
So it's certainly an interesting idea to try and tie down the ontology.
But let me ask you, this ontology just means what it says in the sense that you're trying to define the essential concepts and how they relate to each other.
Is that the basic idea?
Yep.
Going back to this slide here, we want to have a continuum from a list of terms potentially that could be developed into coherent and again, principled course material and competencies, but also develop a logic.
And we're developing within the sumo ontology development framework, which defines not just relational edges, but actually a actual logic.
And so we hope to be able to ask, like, is this a complete active inference model?
Do we really checked off all the boxes and use those kinds of logical tools that are accessible to the well developed ontological frameworks?
Okay, well, that's very compelling and very clear.
It strikes me then that, you know, it would be useful to link that operational ontology to the underlying maths.
So, you know, much of the conceptual steps, both in understanding and implementing active inference, usually in terms of simulating, you know, interesting behaviour or using it as an observation model to explain some empirical data from a study.
Much of it can be developed in terms of a series of methods, that usually, or in fact, almost universally, inherit from the, are framed in terms of either information theory or linear algebra or differential equations.
And you can just build the story from that.
And you can just build the story from that.
So if you're looking for that degree of formal and useful detail, then it would be one principle you might refer to is basically what your, where does one equality assertion or description or variable or object, where does it come from in terms of inheriting from the more basic formalism?
So what I'm thinking of here is where does active inference start and how do you get to the calculus and the Bayesian mechanics that you would, you'd, you'd associate with active inference?
And my guess is, given the structure or the way that you have approached the ontology, you've probably actually done that already or are in the process of doing that.
Are you going to go through some examples that would sort of highlight the strategy and the, and the problems, which are usually more illuminating than the solutions that you've encountered so far?
Sure.
Sure.
I'll switch here to this screenshot of the current state of what it looks like.
And we're starting just in tabular form by compiling up to five references and citable definitions.
First, just looking for exact cases where a term is used.
And then we'll go from how the term has been used towards synthetic definitions that capture different senses of the term.
And then along with the concise narrative of the field and also ontology experts who are here with us, we're going to then be working to make the actual logical underpinnings elucidated in terms of specifiable code, rather than just concise English definitions.
And then from that sort of generator of the formal relationships, we'll be able to descend into mathematical formalisms or other natural human languages.
Yeah.
We'll, we'll keep you posted on this project though, for sure.
Sure.
Let's go to this next question and imagine that we had that set of terms in development.
It's going to be a work in progress our whole lives.
How would we go from core terms and ideas to an interactive and enlivening education that speaks to people from many different backgrounds?
So I, I'm going to answer this question from the point of view of my experience as a supervisor, which is probably a little bit of narrow of a narrow remit from your more general ambition.
And I imagine that this is related to this notion of research debt.
I can't remember now, but this notion that you don't want to put too much pressure on people when becoming acquainted with the utility and application of either the code or all the ideas.
So in my experience with, in an academic setting, just having toy simulations is usually the best way to give people a feel for what these, what this approach does and how it can be used.
So it's, you know, enormously potent in terms of demystifying and also illustrating the functionality at hand or that can be accessed.
So, you know, having a sort of, you know, a working, a working or at least a toy model,
sort of provides a proof of principle that can strip away the magic as well.
And I think your, your, your, your ambition to try and make this accessible to people who are not necessarily fluent in the underlying,
the underlying information theory or dynamical systems is,
is very lawlable and perfectly feasible.
So again, in my experience, you know, some of the most creative applications of active inference are,
can be by people who don't really necessarily wonder too much what's underneath the hood.
It all comes back again to the design of the generative model.
So if you get the, if you get the generative model, right.
And it's apt to describe the thing that you want to understand or to simulate.
And then usually everything else follows, follows suit.
And I mean that in the sense that you can just take off the shelf software,
which I presume that you, you know, your ultimate ambition is to make available.
And make it work in the service of sorts of,
and what would this agent or this synthetic creature or person do in exchange with her environment,
if this was the generative model and this was the generative process.
So a lot of this, a lot of this really, I imagine in terms of answering your question,
how do we go from core terms to interactive and enlivening education is just establishing a language,
a lexicon that allows you to talk through somebody in constructing their own simulations
that speak to the issues that engage them either academically or beyond academia.
So clearly then the core terms play the role of literally a language in terms of communication,
which brings us back again to the, you know, the importance of the ontology
and having the terms linked in a formal way to the, you know, the mathematical expressions
and also procedures and processes.
So I guess that a precondition to do the, to use the core terms in an interactive and enlivening educative sense
will rest upon getting that, getting that ontology right.
In my experience, you know, the, the, the best way to get the ontology right in the sense of it being enabling,
is just to talk about the terms until everybody, until there's some consensus
and everybody understands them in terms of either that teleology.
Well, sorry, no, in both in terms of their teleology, but also in terms of where they come from,
from the point of view of the code and ultimately the maths that under, underwrites all this.
Is that the sort of answer you're looking for here or thinking along with, are you thinking along the same lines?
It sounds great. There's so many dimensions there.
Just to provide a summary or just jump in at one place.
What is active inference and what does active inference do?
Right. So that's perfect.
Cause I was just thinking it would be really useful just to go down the sort of the terms that you had in the,
in the previous, but one slide highlighted in green, because I think, you know, all the heavy lifting here is,
is really just shouting about what, what are the core aspects and claims or the thing, the core of the,
the core things that you're trying to communicate with any one of those terms.
So for me, active inference would be a description of a process that can be seen as something that arises from the free energy principle.
So you can either tell that story from the point of view of a physicist and say that active inference,
active inference is a teleological description of processes that systems that self-organized must possess,
or you could tell the story or define active inference from the point of view of neurobiology and ethology.
You know, from the point of view of say predictive processing and describes what, what it entails.
And I've used the word Bayesian mechanics before, because from the point of view of the, you know, the physics definition,
it would be a teleological description of a Bayesian mechanics that necessarily arises,
you know, with some certain, with certain assumptions from any self-organizing system.
One key thing about active inference, which I think would be important to put in the definition in the ontology,
I'm not sure it's, it's already there, but you know, if you're in charge of sculpting that ontology,
then you're in the position to make sure it's there.
It's about, it's beyond predictive processing, it's beyond sentience and emphasizes or reflects the pragmatic term
at the beginning of the century, really, sort of epitomized by the sort of the four E's, you know, embodied, embedded, extended and the like.
To make it clear that sentience is, is active and that you are talking about, you know, the circular causality
of engagement of any particle, personal plant with whatever is out there.
So that would be certainly one thing to emphasize in terms of the, you know, what active inference means.
The inference is interesting in the sense that it does imply a process and a process with purpose,
which is to infer, which is why I keep using the word, you know, a teleological description of something
that's actually underneath the hood from the point of view of physics.
One final point here is there's an easy confusion, I think, between first of all, active inference and passive inference.
So that's certainly something which probably needs resolving certainly in the philosophical literature.
So I often come across the philosophers who say, well, there's this passive inference or perceptual inference,
which is just basically inferring states of affairs in the world on the basis of some sensory evidence.
And then there's the extra bit, which is the active bit, which is now you're in charge of gathering that sensory evidence upon which you are now going to prosecute your perceptual inference.
That's an interesting dichotomy, which I'm not sure is, you know, is the right, is a correct dichotomy.
If it's not right, I'm not sure that it is not right in the sense that it is a useful distinction,
but certainly is not what active inference was originally termed to mean.
By conjoining active and inference, there were a number of motivations.
First, it was a generalization of David McKay's active learning.
But probably more importantly, it was it was a nod to the notion of active sensing and active, active perception that perception is in and of itself an active process, a constructive process that you have to put policies, plans and action into the game.
So that I think would be one important aspect of active inference to define.
And I don't know that it has been defined so far.
So, you know, perhaps it's your job to to define that.
The other thing which is important, I think, in terms of emphasizing what active inference entails actually comes from that inactive perspective,
which is inference about the consequences of action.
And that has an important but really simple concomitant that the consequences of action are in the future.
And that means you now have to think if you're thinking from the active inference in terms of teleology or as a normative theory of the theory of the theory.
of of behaviour of sentient behaviour.
And you have to now think about I'm sorry, and I should say qualify when I say normative.
I mean, it can be operationally defined in terms of as an optimisation process that in turn requires you to define the objective function or functional.
And that's important practically because if you're now thinking about sentient behaviour or active inference, and it's inference about things that haven't yet happened because you haven't yet acted, then you're necessarily talking about objective functions or functionals that are about states of affairs in the future.
And that is an important move and something that active inference embraces, which goes beyond predictive coding.
So much of the literature in the 20th, you know, in the 1990s, you know, and subsequent, much of the literature that inspired that sort of inactive perception or active sensing take situated cognition, take on sentience,
originated in your in things like predictive coding, but predictive coding is not what is meant by active inference.
You can do predictive coding just by if you're a statistician just minimising variational free energy.
That's only half the game. Once you move into the world of active inference from a teleological perspective, all your you are, you have to do that.
You have to form beliefs about hidden states of affairs in the world using sort of the perceptual side of perceptual inference.
You have to form beliefs about active inference, but that is only in the service of rolling out into the future and deciding what the best thing is to do next.
And that running out into the future and deciding calls for an objective function.
So in active inference, that would be the expected free energy, which may or may not be unfortunately named, but that's that's what it is.
And therefore active inference sort of implies that you are committed to optimising an expected free energy and implicitly it's all about choosing the next thing to do.
So for me, those would be two would be two sort of cardinal things that should be embraced by definition of active inference that transcend other normative approaches.
So, for example, with reinforcement learning and behavioural psychology would be all about what the good things are to do.
And you'd commit to a loss function or a value function of states.
If that was the kind of behaviour that you're trying to describe.
If on the other hand, you were all about the psychophysics of perception or just building face or digital terrorist recognition systems where you weren't in charge of gathering those data,
then your objective functions would be would be very, very different.
But what active inference says is, well, you can't you can't carve up the two problem domains because they're just both sides of the same coin.
And thereby, you're you're now facing the problem of defining an objective function that is fit for purpose.
That does both the belief updating about latent states or hidden states generating the data and also the best way to.
Solicit solicit solicit or cause those data or outcomes under some prior preferences or some goal directed constraints.
Is that a good long winded answer?
Thank you for the comprehensive answer.
It leads directly to our next questions, which are what is the free energy principle?
And especially what is the relationship between active inference and the free energy principle?
Well, that's that's I think a slightly easier question to answer.
I mean, the free energy principle is just a variational principle of least action.
It's why is it special or not formally identical to all the other variational principles that we use?
So, you know, if you look under the hood, right from quantum through statistical and stochastic to classical mechanics.
Well, the only thing that differentiates really the variational principle of least action that is the free energy principle is that you're paying careful attention to the separation of states to which you apply that principle.
The separation of states to the states to the states to the states to the states of an agent or a particle or a person and the outside states.
So technically, if you were in statistical thermodynamics, for example, you'd normally assume that separation in terms of some idealized gas that was contained within the container or heat reservoir or or a heat bath without really worrying about where the heat bath or the the the the heat reservoir came from.
But the free energy principle says, well, no, you can't really do that.
You've really got to attend very carefully to to what licenses a separation of different kinds of states that you can assign to the inside of something on the outside of something and the states that mediate the exchange from the inside and outside outside.
And then you get into the Markov blanket and Markov boundary literature.
So just to summarize, a free energy principle is just a principle of least action, by which I mean that there is a description of dynamics in terms of the most likely paths any system will take.
That is the special provenance of a partitioning or a separation of the states of some universe into the states that are owned by an agent or a particle and those that are not and the states that mediate the exchange between them.
So that would be the free energy principle.
Active inference, as I say, is a sort of teleological spin off from the free energy principle in the sense that in the same sense that you have now at hand a principle of least action.
You know, that allows you to identify, simulate, define the paths or trajectories or the narratives that a system, the most likely paths, trajectories or narratives that a system will pursue under certain conditions.
And those conditions are just that there is an attracting set of states to which that system will will converge to or will look as if it's attracted to.
So, sorry, what I was working towards was the notion of an attracting set as a metaphor for equipping that physics with a teleology.
And that teleology is nicely illustrated by the notion of attraction.
So, you know, when mathematicians talk about attractors in the particular case in the free energy principle, these are these are sort of pullback attractors or the kind of attractors that you get in random dynamical systems.
There's a proper and natural tendency to think that these particular states of the attracting set literally attract in the sense of, you know, gravitational attraction or any other kind of attraction.
They pull states towards them.
So that to me would be a teleological interpretation, which I think is much closer to active inference, that you're saying that inference is a process that has a purpose.
And the underlying free energy principle looks, allows you to say the way it looks as if self-organizing systems show these certain properties.
They're attracted to certain states.
They show that, you know, they're attracted to certain paths.
And we can describe those in terms of the teleological ontology.
And that would be active inference.
One practical difference between active inference and the free energy principle is that the free energy principle is just a principle.
It's neither right nor wrong.
It's just like, as Beryl Millage has noted, it's like sort of Noether's theorem or Hamilton's principle of least action.
But as soon as you start to say, well, I think that this principle applies to this population or personal particle, that suddenly commits you or requires you to define the attracting set of states.
So pull back a tractor in another jargon, the equivalent would be a generative model.
And as soon as you commit to a generative model to explain the technology of this system or this agent or this person, then you've moved into the world of non-falsifiable principles, into falsifiable hypotheses, because you could have chosen the wrong generative model.
And thereby, there will be evidence for choosing this generative model or that generative model.
So the relationship between active inference and the free energy principle is operationally quite simple.
Active inference is the application of the free energy principle to a particular system.
But in that application, you're bringing a lot of teleology to the table.
And more specifically, you're having to commit to a particular generative model.
And as soon as you do that, that becomes your theory or your hypothesis about what is an apt description for this system.
So a number of, I think, sort of interesting distinctions in terms of the relationship between active inference and free energy principle that I imagine your ontology is already addressed or is certainly addressing.
Okay.
Well, we'll get there.
Thank you for that excellent answer.
For the next question, Lorena, please read it out.
Oh, hi.
So still in the spirit of broad questions and broad terms, and that I think comes in line or came before.
So how and where does the idea of information play a role in the free energy principle?
And how does it relate with active inference?
In the sense, what is something to keep in mind when thinking about information dynamics in active inference?
Right.
Well, these are great questions.
I'm getting the hang of this now.
You just want me to talk.
I present a question to a lot of talking, which I'm very happy to do.
Are you sure you want me to do that?
Or should this be a conversation?
Perhaps this will turn into a conversation at some point.
Anyway, so information.
So it plays a dual role in the sense that information theoretic formulations underpin most of the derivations behind that principle of least action.
And it can be no other way in the sense that all mechanics from physics is really articulated in terms of probability densities or distributions.
And as soon as you have a mechanics that is or a calculus of probability distributions, you're effectively in the world of information theory.
And you see that at many different levels.
So one nice example of this is the central quantity that we often use to score the likelihood of being in a particular state.
If you're a statistician, that would be the marginal likelihood.
If you were fluent with an FEP ontology, it would be surprisal, almost simply surprise.
And if that is just basically the self-information.
If you're a physicist, you'd look at this as a potential.
It's a negative lock probability.
So you start really when thinking about the physics with this central concept of self-information,
which the IEP can be read as a potential function or a surprisal function or surprise.
And it is the thing that the variational free energy is a bound approximation to.
So at that level, and then everything else, every other move you make mathematically in terms of the expected self-information being the entropy and, you know,
why that is important as a characterization of various probability distributions in the setting of self-organization,
would testify to the fact that information theory is absolutely central to all the maths that underlies the physics of the sentience that emerges from having a distinction between the states of the system and states that are not in the system, namely the Markov blanket.
Having said that, I think information to most people's minds usually means more, certainly in the folk psychology context.
It's really information about something.
And the FEP active inference has, I think, something quite special to bring to the table here that goes beyond information theoretic treatments of,
you know, that you get in communication and signal processing and rate distortion theorems.
All of that kind of information is just your extensions of information theory that inherit from self-information or the implausibility of a particular event or message.
That would, you know, or in your more abstract domains such as sentience and consciousness,
you would go to something like integrated information theory, but that is all about this Shannon-esque kind of information.
The opposite, the other kind of information, which is information about something.
So what I wanted to try and put on the table is the very fact that you've got this Markov blanket or separation of states on the inside and states on the outside,
means that now you can equip the states on the inside with the role of encoding posterior conditional Bayesian beliefs about states on the outside.
And that introduces technically a different kind of information geometry, a different kind of information theory, where crucially now you can read the internal dynamics as containing or having information about what's going on on the outside.
And this is a really important move equipping your neural dynamics or variational message passing or belief propagation in a computer with an information geometry that now allows you to read off the state of the computer or the state of the neural activity in terms of what it is encoding or belief or the information it contains about the outside.
And so that sort of dual aspect information geometry has been celebrated to a minor extent in the philosophy literature by Vanya Weiss.
You know, asking the question is, you know, is this really the maths of sentience where you now have information about things?
And in a sense that you know, that really is the heart of the free energy principle in the sense or active inference anyway, in the sense that it equips that dual, that information geometry.
I mean, technically what you are saying is that any particular internal state of a computer or a person or a brain now can be read as encoding a Bayesian or a posterior belief about other states, namely hidden or latent causes outside the Markov blanket.
And that defines technically something called statistical manifold.
And as soon as there is a statistical manifold, there's an information geometry and any movement on that manifold necessarily implies a change in your Bayesian beliefs, namely Bayesian belief updating, which means now there's an interpretation of neuronal dynamics movements on a statistical manifold on the inside in terms of belief updating.
So the notion of active inference as the process of belief updating.
So the notion of active inference as the process of belief updating really, you know, rests upon this fundamental notion that there's information about stuff going on, about stuff that is encoded or parameterized by the internal machinations and the mechanics and the dynamics of the inside.
So I think it might be quite important to, if you're trying to describe or educate people in terms of how they should understand information as playing a central role in sentience.
I think it would be important to differentiate between the mathematical notions of Shannon information and self information and the calculus of probability and neutral information, for example, and say that this is not the kind of information that is implicit in information geometry and the sentience that is afforded by active inference.
When now you're understanding neuronal dynamics or message passing in the computer on some sort of factor graph.
And because in this instance, each of those messages or that those neural dynamics can now be read as belief updating, namely changing your mind about other things so that the stuff on the inside has information about stuff on the outside.
Thanks for this important answer.
And we're going to pass over a few questions and go to 18 with Stephen reading the question to continue on this theme about the separation of the inside and the outside.
So thank you, Stephen, and please read off 18.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I was going to ask, how can the integrity of the active inference process theory be maintained when blankets, blanket states and generative models are being interpreted in novel ways?
So we were thinking about what do you think of discussions around Markov or Perl, Friston blankets, etc.
Right.
That's an excellent question.
I mean, I have a quite a technical answer.
So if it's going to technical, tell me now.
I'll try to get back to what you were really trying to unnerve.
We're really trying to unnerve.
So this is not a fast moving field, but certainly been a delicate and important area of discussion over the past few years.
So in the original introduction of Markov blankets, there was an explicit nod to Perl's construction of Markov blankets and how Markov blankets are used practically in terms of simplifying message passing in computer science.
However, that may have been something of an oversimplification because the from the point of view of the free energy principle, it is the kind of causality that the free energy principle deals with is not the kind of causality that people, particularly people like Perl, but also people dealing with things like Granger causality deal with.
So we're not from the point of view of the free energy principle that starts with a stochastic differential equation or a random dynamical system written as a random dynamical equation.
OU processes being simple examples.
In physics, these would be Langevin like equations.
Common to all of these starting points is time and evolution and dynamics.
Now there is nothing in Perl's formulations.
Well, certainly there's nothing in Perl's book on causality that deals with time.
And I know that because before the days of PDFs and being able to go and search particular words, I had to go through and find out there's one paragraph that mentions dynamics.
So, you know, if you were in statistics computer science, you know, these, this will be the world of dynamic Bayesian nets.
The, the, the, the, is their take on something which is actually much more universal, which is, is basically the universe as a Markovian dynamical process.
So the, the, the, the, the, the challenge now is to articulate, um, independence, uh, independences that, um, underwrite, um, Markov blankets in the sense of Perl, um, in terms of dynamics.
So you've now got to, um, um, um, link to quite distinct fields, which is basically the fields of dynamics and Langevin processes, um, things that have, um, paths of least action to the world of statistics and, um, Perl-esque, um, independences, um, and causality cast as interventions that have observable consequences.
The, the problem in doing that linking is that you have to, um, really abandon the notion of causality in the world of Granger causality in Perl.
Because causality is baked into, is herent in writing down any, um, uh, differential equation, be it stochastic or random or deterministic in the sense that states cause motion.
So the causality in this context would be a more controlled theoretic causality.
So, um, um, that means that you can't then use the causality concept later on, but it does mean that you've now got to, um, derive from a dynamical Markovian calculus, um, the, um, the necessary, um, conditions that would lead to, um, the conditional independences that are necessary to define Markov boundaries, um, just to slip
in here, um, in here, um, the, um, the mark of blanket, um, um, um, is, um, um, if you, uh, is composed of minimal blankets, namely, uh, boundaries in the sense of Perl.
And on most recent analysis, it looks as if the blanket is actually two Markov boundaries, um, uh, in the sense of Perl.
But to get to the sense of Perl, you've got to think very carefully about what are the constraints that, um, lead to the, um, the conditional independences, where those constraints are specified in terms of equations of motion.
specified in terms of equations of motion and things like the amplitude of
random fluctuations. So once you've seen that that is the link that
needs to be made, that actually simplifies the thing, it simplifies things
in the sense there's no real attitude for interpretation. So I'm going back to
your the part of your question, you know, blankets and genitive models are being
interpreted in novel ways and I don't think there's any latitude for any
novel interpretation other than that the, sorry, if in novel ways you mean the
best way or the correct way and we just haven't got there yet then I would, you
know, I'd concur entirely with that. If you think that there is some latitude, there's
some library of insightful reinterpretations and redefinitions
all of which have equal veracity, then I would suggest that's not the case. There's
only one way and there's only one Markov blanket and or there's only one
particular partition that will give you, that can be articulated in terms of Markov
blankets and the only novelness there is really in tying down very precisely and
defensively how you get from a Langevin formulation to a Markov blanket. At the
moment the novel way of doing that looks as if it's a, that the conditional
independence is a rise from sparse dynamical coupling or causal coupling. So if you read
the causality as the influence that a state has on the motion of itself or any other state in this sort of
minimal Langevin like description of the universe, then it is the sparsity of influence or the sparsity of coupling
conditional independencies and implicitly coupling, then it will have a particular petition and if it has that particular petition then the free energy principle holds.
So I think the discussions around Markov, Perl, Perl, Fristen and blankets are essential, they're fascinating and the conclusions of those discussions that I think are going to probably have to refer back to the underlying maths and that maths is all about connecting Langevin formulations of physics to the kind of
calculus that Perl has established in a more statistical sense.
Thank you for the educational answer. This brings us almost to the end of the dot edu section. So I will pass to the final question to be read by Dean who had several excellent points and questions. So Dean feel free to ask however you would like.
Good morning. So the question is what's the difference between a subject matter expert
and a prediction, prediction matter expert and how does this relate to your mode of interaction.
You're going to have to unpack what subject and prediction matter experts means for me.
Yeah. So
for me, interesting, you become subject matter expert by gaining a certain amount of concentration in a
in a particular field or area. And you become a prediction matter expert when you are able to think more distributively, more dispersively.
And so I think what, when I read some of the things and listen to some of the stuff that I've heard you talk about, you've brought these two worlds together. And so I'm kind of interested in, in hearing what you think in terms of introducing a
the ideas and principles that you brought into a world where traditionally we focused on concentrating, whether it's materializing something from an engineering perspective or deciding what's in and what's out, you've brought in another aspect to look at. And I'm just curious what you think of that.
Okay, that's a fascinating distinction. I mean, you know, I'm not sure it's terribly important when I think about it, because clearly you're the expert on this, but it certainly would be fascinating to consider
the conditions under which you were able to simulate the emergence of a subject matter versus a prediction matter expert in silica, for example.
This is a proof of principle that these are both effectively Bayes' optimal ways of responding to a particular environment. And my guess is that you would be able to do that relatively easily by appealing
to the ideas that you would be able to apply some of active inference notions to structure learning and development, where the basic idea is, if you've got a very volatile environment, by which I mean that there are, there's lots of uncertainty in the context of
in the contingencies or possibly there are lots of random fluctuations that are irreducible in terms of your ability to predict the outcome or the trajectory of latent states of the world in which you are becoming an expert.
So, when you parameterized your uncertainty, you know, usually, you know, usually, formally in terms of the precision of various likelihood mappings or probability transition matrices in a sort of discrete state space generative models, when you parameterize your beliefs about that uncertainty, irreducible uncertainty and volatility,
that agents that believe or have inferred that they are in a very volatile, changeable, capricious world, usually become better at the prediction side of things in the sense that they rely less upon deep past experience and assign more precision or more potency to the
the more recent evidence to the more recent evidence. So they have a different style of evidence accumulation that enables and also they have the right level of uncertainty about what will happen next. So it looks as if in their predictive engagement and epistemic foraging in that world, it looks as if they are better at predicting changes because they're not committed to a particular
a particular explanation or understanding of how their world. On the other hand, if you create a world which is incredibly predictable and learnable, then over time, the natural pressure to minimize free energy translates into
a pressure to minimize complexity, namely a way of modeling your world and your exchange with it in the simplest way possible according to Occam's principle. And what that then leads to is somebody, it sounds as if it's somebody who becomes a subject matter expert. So the subject matter is their lived world. It has now become so predictable that they do not entertain all possibilities.
They do not entertain all possible other outcomes because they have precise beliefs about the way that things will unfold. And they can make very wise, very parsimonious or using parsimonious degrees of freedom. They can make moves and become very expert in the way that this particular non-volatile predictable, i.e. precise world works.
And the link with ageing here is if you allow for the fact that we create our own environments and you know, at many levels, active inference will permit or is a way of framing our eco niche construction. What tends to you know, what people, the story people tend to tell is that as you get older, you basically make your world more predictable and you become a subject matter expert in your own lived world.
So I like the example, I no longer go bungee jumping or go to discos because my world is very, very predictable.
You know, you're very much an expert in your own lived world.

You take me out on your own, you know, to disco and I will not, I will not be able to predict what's going to happen next because I am old.
Whereas, you know, where's, you know, adolescence and children and certainly, you know, newborn infants or newborn artifacts discovering their world, which is full of uncertainty.
And they are not yet subject experts and the epistemic pressures or motivation for them to learn about, you know, what happens if I do that?
And what can I control? And what can I control? What can I control?
That will make them very quickly into prediction experts until they become, until they become sufficiently fluent that they can now engineer their world to make it non-volatile.
And then they presumably will become subject matter experts. So, you know, I'm sure that would be, that would be fairly simple.
Simulate using, you know, all the sort of toy active inference schemes that we currently use.
And it would be really interesting if these two different kinds of synthetic agents did develop some cognitive styles and confidence in what they were doing that looked exactly like the distinction you're talking about.
I'm not sure it would work, but if it does, that would be, you know, I think an illuminating proof of principle.
Thanks for this answer and for this session from the lab and .edu. That last answer really spoke to the importance also of intergenerational learning.
At this point, we will take a five minute break and we will return for .coms.
So thanks again, and we'll see everybody in five minutes right here.
.

## X2GwqUVLlcs

Hello, welcome back. This is the second session of the ACT-INF Lab Symposium on June 21st,
2021, and we're here in the .coms, or Communication Organizational Unit. The goal of .coms is
to organize the lab's internal projects and activities, as well as to carry out all forms
of communication with external entities. So it's like our connective tissue and our neuroectoderm,
in a way. What has been done so far is that we've had about 75 live streams, variously on presentations
and participatory discussions, since July 28th, 2020. And we're taking an active inference approach
to communication and learning by doing. Our very first live stream was on the paper, Narrative as
Active Inference, and shortly after, A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as Active Inference.
So that's something that we like thinking about here and that we want to explore.
And also, some of our lab members framed online communication and team collaboration in terms
of active inference in the 2020 paper, Active Inference and Behavior Engineering for Teams.
Our aim here is to make active inference accessible, well-known, and well-understood.
So let's get right to the questions, Carl. The first question is, how can we show, not tell,
the idea of active inference? For example, through embodied experience, experiments, or what other
mechanisms? How can we best communicate in a way that makes it resonate?
Well, pursuing that very interesting notion and using the principles of active inference to
optimize the role of the dot-coms team, then at its simplest, active inference means that the
imperatives for all behavior, and it's likely that most behavior is of an epistemic sort, is to resolve
uncertainty. So if you want to engage people and be a service to the people you want to engage, which may be
internal members of an internal member of your own team, then you've got to know what they don't know.
Because that will define the epistemic affordances that will get them engaged with you and you with them.
that will incur the best kind of belief updating.
So, you know, practically what that might mean is that it may well be that you,
one has to identify didactic or informative illustrations that are tailored or specialized to the person or people that you're talking about.
So, you know, I have never thought about using embodied experiences before, but that's a brilliant idea.
You're just illustrating to people who want to know how my body and my mind works to illustrate to them the mechanics of it working.
Using the language of active inference can be very, very powerful.
So as I'm talking, you know, one example of this would be using saccadic suppression as an illustration of the potency of getting your beliefs about the predictability of sensory evidence right.
So if you're a physiologist, you would know this is sensory attenuation.
If you were in machine learning, you're working with transformers, this would be, I think, attentional selection.
Basically deploying the gain or switching on the right channels in order to select those data that are going to resolve the most uncertainty or maximize the information gain subsequent on this sort of covert action.
So that mental action is, you know, often sold as sort of mental action in the philosophy literature.
So that mental action is really endemic and a vital part of our sensory engagement with the world and beautifully illustrated by saccadic suppression.
So this is the, speaks to the notion of attenuating the sensory consequences of your own action so that any evidence that you're not actually acting is precluded from your belief updating.
So a clinical example of this would be Parkinson's disease, for example.
If I'm sitting still and I wasn't able to ignore all the messages from my muscles that tell me at the moment I am sitting still, then I am never going to be able to realize in a priori intention that I'm going to initiate a movement.
Because as soon as soon as I initiate a movement, I have, I put in place a plausible hypothesis that I'm lifting, I'm going to stand up immediately, all the evidence at hand suggests that I am not standing up.
So I'm going to revise my belief.
No, I'm not standing up.
I'm not in the process of standing up and it becomes impossible to move.
So that would be an example of what would happen if you didn't have this capacity to attend to or to select or apply the principles of optimal Bayesian design in terms of selecting those data for your own belief updating.
But a really pragmatic and easy example of that is saccadic suppression.
When we do the simplest of movements, epistemic foraging, which is moving our eyes, making saccadic eye movements.
Because when we do that, we actually induce masses of visual information on the photoreceptors in the retina, sometimes referred to as retinal slips.
So when I look from the left to the right, there's a flood of information that I have caused.
And yet it is not useful information because it doesn't tell me anything I didn't already know.
So what the brain does, it suppresses that information by transiently suspending the precision.
If you are the Kalman gain, if you are taking a Kalman filter like perspective on predictive coding as what kind of variational filtering.
And that's really easy to demonstrate to an audience.
You know, just get them to either fixate on a central stimulus and then pay attention to something that's moving around or the converse.
They fixate on the thing that's moving around and then ask some questions about the central stimulus.
And with the right timing, it's a very potent illustration of beyond just gathering information, but actively selecting and triaging that information in accord with the principles of optimal basing design.
So I haven't thought about going beyond that, but I'm sure there are lots of lovely examples of embodied experiences that really do illustrate the active inference in action, as it were.
I'm just reminded, because active inference could be read as if you like, a 21st century version of idea motor theories, which were very popular in the 19th century.
And of course, that was demonstrated through embodied experiences in a very alluring way through hypnotism and the like.
So I can imagine somebody doing a 21st century version of hypnotism and all those wonderful Victorian illusions about the way you use your sense organs or deploy them actively.
But now in the service of just illustrating some basic phenomena under right under right active inference in terms of experiments or the classic ones that immediately come to mind that are really engaging are visual illusions.
So on one reading, all visual illusions are just ways of getting at your perceptual priors in the context of Bayesian inference.
If you can conjure a particular pattern of sensory information that you know was caused in one way,
and yet you think your subject or your audience has sufficiently precise prior beliefs that it could only be caused in another way,
which is not the way you caused it, and then you let them experience that, and then you reveal how you actually generated those data,
then that's a very powerful way of demonstrating the innate priors, the sort of formal priors in terms of the connect term or the sparse coupling on a factor graph.
And again, it's part of the lived experience.
So I think visual illusions would be, and there are loads of beautiful illusions out there,
and all that one would have to do is to harness their beauty and allure and use them as a vehicle to give people insight into their own,
usually sub-personal priors about the way that the world is constructed.
And then, I mean, in my world, what you generally try and do is to actually put this in silico by just creating little in silico creatures.
Because you've now got active inference with this information geometry,
you now have the opportunity not just to simulate what these creatures do,
but what they perceive, because now you've got the quantitative estimates of their posterior beliefs.
So you can actually show a subject who's just experienced a visual illusion that this is perfectly Bayes optimal,
and indeed, when you write down this variational message passing scheme in this synthetic subject,
this synthetic person also expresses exactly the same illusions.
And this is Bayes optimal for this kind of work.
So you can leverage active inference in that sense.
And I'm deliberately referring back to the .edu discussions.
What active inference brings to the table?
Because it's got information about stuff out there in the numerics,
you can go a lot further than you can if you were doing, say, deep learning or machine learning,
because you've got this dual asset, you've got this information geometry at hand.
The state of your variational autoencoder actually means something in relation to a belief about what generated those data,
which you can create lovely little movies, you know,
showing what this simulation of you was actually experiencing.
So, you know, I'm interested.
Are there any other ways that you've thought about in terms of showing people?
Thanks for the answer.
It's like, look left, look right.
Now you're an active inference agent.
And as far as potential avenues for embodiments,
some of the work with Ryan Smith and others,
bringing people into the somatosensory dimensions
and their own priors and expectations about their body and about motion could be very powerful,
as well as auditory modalities.
And indeed, active inference is a framework by which we can think about how our perceptions are related to our inference and our action.
So in various domains, I think there'll be excellent experiments.
And it brings us to our next question.
You actually addressed several areas in your answer.
You addressed machine learning, as well as neuroscience, as well as just everyday lived experience.
So how can active inference engage in better dialogue with adjacent areas?
For example, machine learning, systems engineering, psychiatry, and neuroscience,
as well as any other fields that you think are relevant to?
Then, you know, the obvious answer here is in either academic or commercial collaboration.
And what might you, what would license that?
I think, you know, the simplest answer is that the free energy principle and its, if you like,
teleological chorally active inference is not there and was never intended to replace extant theories.
It was there to prove, to endorse them and to reveal the interrelationships between them.
So anything that's worked and survived into the 21st century has some veracity and a proven utility.
And therefore, it's just a question of reformulating or changing the words so that people can see immediately
how their particular formulation relates to somebody else's formulation,
where both formulations are special cases of the most generic and simplest explanation,
which would, you know, from my point of view, would be the free energy principle
and active inference in the case of sentience.
So I think there's, you know, as an integrative framework,
you're very well positioned to say, look, you know,
can we understand the way that you think about this?
Can we now articulate this either using simulations or, you know, mathematical analysis?
Can we understand what you've been doing in this integrative framework?
And if we can, can we show how it relates to another discipline's formulation of this problem?
And sometimes you can get synergistic or added value from doing that.
So, you know, there must be loads of examples that you've written,
machine learning systems engineering, psychiatry, neuroscience here.
So machine learning, for example, you know,
how would active inference help machine learning?
So at the moment, you know, there seems to be two answers floating around.
And we've already sort of discussed a couple of the key,
a couple of these issues in depth.
And so machine learning commits to usually a normative approach to good behavior
that can be quantified by a loss or a value function.
But we've just said, well, if we now want these machines to learn to act,
then we have to go beyond state action value functions
and consider the belief-based calculus that is active inference,
which is all about the reduction of uncertainty.
So now you are in a position to say, well, look,
if you consider your objective functions as a part of a more generic objective function,
think what you might be able to get from this.
And of course, what you might get from this is a deep learning scheme
that actually can now go and solicit the right kind of data to optimize its own learning.
And, you know, people in Bayesian RL might argue, well, yeah, that's what we're doing,
you know, with a series of bright ideas and heuristics to try and augment classical value functions.
But, you know, you can say, well, OK, you've clearly put a lot of work into that.
But there is actually a simple objective function already out there that is provably appropriate
to describe systems that self-organize and maintain themselves.
That actually has what you want.
Why don't you try this, for example?
So that would be one example.
You have to tread carefully because, you know,
a lot of people have dedicated their lives to solving these problems
and they're very reluctant to change their rhetoric or see their contributions as a special case.
But in many instances, certainly from my perspective, mathematically,
they are special cases.
And sometimes if you catch the entrepreneurs, the innovators, the creative academics
at the right stage in their career before they have committed to a particular church
or ideology or calculus or group or company,
you can actually point them in the right direction and become extremely creative.
I'm not so sure about systems engineering, but certainly I always celebrate the expected free energy
as with just taking away various bits and pieces, various sources of uncertainty
as reducing to KL control.
And then what I say is what KL control is, what grown-up engineers use in the control theoretic setting.
So that would be another example.
So, you know, you could also, I don't know this because it's not my field,
but certainly in terms of introducing, say, a fault tolerance in control theoretic approaches
in engineering where the fault tolerance required uncertainty about the operation of some external part,
you could again motivate a more complete objective function
that takes you beyond KL control and introduces the information gain into the mix.
Because to get from the complete objective function or to KL control,
you have to ignore uncertainty about the latent states that are,
in the mapping from latent states of the plant you're controlling to the sensors or the observables.
So, you know, you're moving from a partially observed Markov decision process, for example,
to an observable one.
And then expected biology becomes KL control or risk sensitive control in economics.
So you could say, well, look, you know, why don't you just augment the KL control and then put this extra term in.
And now what you've got is a kind of anticipatory fault tolerance in the sense that if there's uncertainty about latent causes,
that's automatically resolved in the way that you go and switch on various sensors or switch off various sensors.
And there's a principle way of doing that.
I think to have any influence, you need to be able to show or provide proof of principle that this more integrated,
more universal approach to normative approach to problems can offer speed ups or increased efficiency
or do what the people actually in that field wanted to do.
So, for example, you've got to be able to show that active inference can outperform sort of vanilla deep learning by an order of magnitude,
which is easy to do because, of course, most benchmarks in machine learning are actually inference problems.
So if you just recast it, it's actually quite a trivial thing to do just by saying, well,
actually, what you've been dealing with is an inference problem,
which looks a lot like a one shot learning from the point of view of somebody in machine learning.
But I think there will be some pressure to get people's attention to make yourself attractive in terms of you.
They will now have some, first of all, find you interesting and also have the potential that they can place an epistemic trust in you.
You've got to you've got to sort of give them a clue and a cue as to why they should should engage with you.
And very often there's there's a two way to way or two road exchange.
And so one simple example of that, which I see emerging in the field is the use of deep learning to amortize certain mappings
when they can be amortized in active inference schemes to evaluate the expected for energy, for example,
doing very deep tree searches.
So that's that's the kind of innovation you see in coming out of 20 year olds at the moment who haven't yet decided whether we're going to do deep learning or active inference
because they want to do both and do it very, very effectively.
So that's a nice example from my perspective of a sort of, you know, that integrative role that could be played or you could play.
Thanks. I really heard this.
Yes. And Maxim from communication and improvisation.
It's like, yes, there's been a disciplinary way of approaching it and we're going to be working together to come back to first principles or to make it more efficient.
So that's really powerful.
How does active inference help us rethink the nature of online communication where so much of our communication nowadays does occur?
That's that's that's that's a big question, isn't it?
And certainly in the context of social media, politics, fake news and the like, you could you could take that question in lots of lots of different directions,
which I won't do because that's not my field of expertise.
But just off the cuff in terms of first principles and what is communication?
It's the ability for me to infer what you meant.
It's the hermeneutics problem.
If it's the hermeneutics problem, that's most efficiently resolved in terms of dyadic or multi-system interactions.
And when we come back to first principles, which is the generative model, when we share the same narrative or same generative model.
And so in terms of helping, how does it how does active inference help us rethink the nature of online communication?
And I think just from a first principles point of view, it would be the importance of establishing who is talking to who.
And if you want to optimize the efficiency of that exchange, literally, from the point of view of this principle of least action, the speed with which you can resolve uncertainty and minimize your uncertainty or surprise.
And then it's ensuring that like minded communicators are actually communicating because it's only them that will understand each other.
So everybody has to speak the same language.
They have to commit to a shared narrative and a shared generative model.
And then just by things like rate distortion theorem or rewriting that in terms of active inference, the joint free energy minimization between two interlocutors.
And that's the most efficient sort of shared path of least action.
And how does that help engineer or intervene on things?
I'm not so sure.
So just in reference to communications with people, people like Maxwell and the like and other colleagues, there is this interesting notion that if communication, if the real problem of communication is not really the messages that you send, but the inferring whether to send the messages to this person or not, that itself now becomes conditional upon inferring.
So, you know, how does self-organization say, you know, in terms of social media exchange, how is that underwritten by an inference about the kind of people who I am listening to or I am talking to?
And what are the basic principles of that?
Wikipedia page or this news channel?
So understanding how people carve up whether they are like to the degree of similarity to them may be very useful in just getting an idea of the dynamics of message passing amongst communities that will be defined by, on average, how each member of that ensemble individual coarse grains and has a generative model of the kinds of people in the communication grain.
And just to finish this, which is something I've heard, I find a really interesting notion that again would be great if people could simulate this and understand the maths behind it.
Is that the only evolutionary stable from the point of view of the free energy principle, the only one that will be selected by a process of Bayesian model selection.
The only partitioning into in groups and out groups is a 50-50 in group, out group.
In the sense that anything that departs from that sort of dynamically unstable, the evolutionary stable partition means that the smaller group, the out group, the old man out will necessarily ultimately be absorbed into the larger group.
So the only stable partitioning is 50-50, which makes a lot of sense when you look at Trump versus Biden, when you look at Brexit versus not Brexit.
In fact, wherever you look, all the important allegiances in terms of political, ideological, and possibly even theological communication, seems to be split right down the middle.
And perhaps it can be no other way.
So it'd be very, very interesting to simulate that and see if that is a truism that inherits from all of these marginal likelihood or free energy minimizing processes implemented at multiple levels of hierarchical,
multiple hierarchical levels, which is, you know, communication is just message passing and message passing is just the way you articulate belief updating and belief updating just is
the process of inference which just is the path of least action according to the FEP.
The 50-50 politics, it's maximally confusing, something we all experience.
And a few key points there about the nature of online communication is that at the core, it is dyadic, even when you're broadcasting to many,
it's actually about that connection and the hermeneutic relationship of unpacking meaning.
And then also you brought up the importance of context and identity and who's talking to who and our inferences about that,
which is essential to rhetoric and something that often gets left off when people take big data approaches to online discourse.
The next question is, how does active inference help us think about science communication and participation specifically as we move into broader citizen science initiatives and as scientists are in the loop,
something you've been recently involved in as well with society and with decision making.
So as science and the nature of science is changing, who is doing it and how they communicate it, how does active inference help us navigate that?
Right, well, I'm sure you've thought about this much more deeply than I have.
It's just drawing upon my experience, you know, in terms of science communication during the coronavirus epidemic.
I think you're absolutely right.
You can see, as with the previous questions, I think you can take the principles of active inference and just think about what does that mean for optimal communication and belief updating and shared belief updating and shared narratives or not.
And use that as a point of reference for the way that you articulate your own science and you've asked all the challenging and exactly right questions about how you communicate,
how you engage other scientists or other other partners within or beyond academia.
I think the same principles apply exactly to the public.
And just to reinforce your beautiful observation that all communication is dyadic from the point of view of the person communicating.
You know, so it's this kind of person as a unitary object I am talking to or this population or this mentality or this discipline.
So it is, I think, fundamentally dyadic from the point of view of the person generating the messages that may or may not incur belief updating in the recipients.
And these kinds of principles, I'm sure, would be useful in terms of science communication.
So at that level, I don't know that there's much I would have to what you already know and, you know, and we'll all possibly already are implementing.
There is another level, though, which is using active inference, not as a model for the way that we work and communicate and participate,
but as a more statistical or observation model of data.
So in a sense, you can use the principles of active inference really to make the most of data pertinent to a particular domain.
So again, I'm thinking here of the dynamic causal modeling of the epidemiological and behavioral data that has been generated by the coronavirus.
epidemic. So you can certainly use the perceptual inference side of it, if you like, the Bayesian filtering side of it.
But also, in principle, the data mining or the optimal Bayesian design to select which data are useful or not in a very practical way.
when assimilating big data in the service of understanding the system at hand.
So if the system at hand is how does a spike propagate from one neuron to another neuron, the neural network, or how does a virus propagate from one person to another person in the neural population or network,
or a network, your population network, then you can certainly use the data to apply active inference to build generative models of how you think that occurs.
And what immediately comes, you know, you've got to put in all of the things that generate those data.
So you can't miss out any factors that are important, be they psychological, be they behavioral, be they viral, be they transport related.
All of these things have to go into your generative model to best explain the data.
So, you know, when we do this in a practical way, we both use the instance rates from PCR testing and Google mobility data and Department of Transport, transportation data.
Anything that speaks to and reduces uncertainty about all the factors necessary that are entailed by your generative model.
In this instance, it's not a discrete space, it's written down.
In fact, this one is actually a discrete state space model.
And the active inference is not explicitly part of it in the sense that we're not trying to predict people's behavior.
But it does serve an indirect guide through the principles of Bayesian optimum design.
And all that basically means is do I invest computational resources and thereby incur computational and statistical complexity by including or attending to this kind of data or not.
And then you can actually evaluate the information gained by including that data or that data.
So, for example, do you need Google retail estimates and or workplace activity or just one?
If you include both, that means that your complexity increases and you're literally have to wait another half hour before you get the results for your dashboard.
Or do you or do you not have a more parsimonious model in the sense that you have now in the same sense of that saccadic suppression of retinal slip?
And you've actually said, no, I don't need that.
I've got anything I need. I've got the like kind of data just by focusing on these data.
And then once you've got that in mind, you can now go foraging for different kinds of data, different collaborators from different disciplines.
You've got different perspectives, but also crucially different data, you know, to try that will inform and shrink your uncertainty about the model parameters.
And also very importantly, about the structural form of the model.
Do I need this node? How many? Is this interaction important or not?
Is this degree of non-linearity justified by the data?
So all of these questions affected the hypotheses about how this system is responding or would respond if you intervene on it.
All of those questions now become amenable to an evidence based analysis because you've got a generative model underneath the hood.
So that would be a more practical application of active, the principles that underwrite active inference, even though your computer program is not actually doing active inference, but it's certainly been deployed using the principles of active inference.
Awesome. And we heard that integrative approach.
Yes, we're going to include multiple data sets, potentially of unconventional type, and we're going to have a principled way of deciding how to include that data.
And also, as you brought up at the end, who to include in the conversation.
And there was one piece you said in there about the dyadic nature of communication, where a speaker is always, I think you said something like speaking to a person or to a group or to a community.
And it relates to our next question, which is how can we appropriately interact with shared and nested generative models potentially across scales, be it person, team or community?
Do we think about these levels of analysis as active inference agents in their own right?
Or how do we, for example, speak to a community or speak to a level of analysis that's broader than the personal?
Yeah, I think that's a great and challenging question.
I mean, clearly, there has been some provisional work in academia, looking at sort of Markov blankets of Markov blankets, which is effectively from a stats point of view, from a physics point of view, at least what we're talking about here.
As a physicist, you'll be tackling this with things like the re-normalization or the apparatus of the re-normalization group, which tells you immediately something interesting that the existence of this nested structure, if underwritten by or if it is a re-normalization group, means that there are certain functional forms that are conserved.
So what that means is from a practical point of view, that there will be certain kinds of behavior that are actually conserved at different scales.
So what works in terms of talking to your children should also work as a president talking to your community or a governor talking to your state or a team leader talking to your assembled team.
Simply because in order for there to be a hierarchical nesting that supports that hierarchical structure, there has to be this conservation, usually mathematically written down as a functional form of a Lagrangian.
It could be this sort of marginal likelihood or the surprise that we're talking about that underwrites these sort of paths, most likely paths or paths of least action.
So that actually paradoxically slightly makes the problem slightly simpler.
Well, because what you're saying is what works at one level will work at all levels.
All you've got to do is find the course grading operator operator that takes you from one level to the next.
So what that would look like, I think would be very, very application domain specific.
So, you know, I think that there is a great challenge ahead, which is taking the single particle FEP approach now to into a world that matter where it matters, where the world is actually an ensemble of particles.
And we've already discussed the importance of thinking about worlds where all the particles are identical, whereas all the particles actually vote for half particles vote for Trump and the other half vote for Biden.
And this is interesting to reflect upon pre 21st century physics that was so powerful in articulating this kind of dynamics because it just dealt with the symbol of the
simplifying assumption that my idealized gas was an ensemble of identical particles.
And then you can spin off from that equilibrium physics and everything that led from the, you know, from, from, kind of cycles and, and, and, and engines through to, to, to, to, to, to current, current technology.
So it's a powerful assumption if you just make some simplifying assumptions, but just because, you know, we've already said, well, perhaps that's not the best kind of assumption to make when you're dealing with political mechanics.
You're at least like one by partition in there.
And so that would require a revisiting of the, of that kind of physics, you know, from our point of view or your point of view, basically simulating active agent, inference agents, or ensembles of active inference agents particles.
But where now there's a heterogeneity in play and then asking the questions, well, what are at the next scale, the free energy minimizing or surprising minimizing or potential minimizing solutions at the next scale up.
So we come back to our, you know, why is it the case that people are all split 50 50, which has an enormous impact on the interactions at the scale below.
So I think to tease, I think, or I'm just hand waving here because I don't think there are any, any formal answers.
And I think those formal answers will probably have to come out of agent based and possibly stochastic agent based modeling initiatives.
But with the twist, you're making each agent itself an active inference agent.
So while each individual member of the ensemble is trying to minimize that free energy.
Also the ensemble through cooperation and the shared narrative is minimizing the joint free energy.
And what that means when you move from one scale to the next scale.
You know, this is, if you're in physics, I imagine that this is the problem of beyond non-equilibrium steady states.
Because you're actually now dealing with the multi scale aspect of non-equilibrium.
So at best we have good models of turbulent flow and B-centered actions and laser physics that take us beyond equilibrium physics where all the particles are the same into non-equilibrium physics.
But I don't know that there's an equivalent maths or metaphor in physics that would really speak to the hierarchical nesting.
So I think this is a really open and important research area that I can only recommend is dealt with by numerical analyses basically predicated on underlying principles.
Thanks for the answer there.
And it made me wonder if agree to disagree is a narrative that can be shared even when there is a 50 50 split.
And I think it brings us nicely to the final question of dot coms, which is how can we move people and teams into a co transformative space or as some of your recent work discussed in interactionist space.
Well, I'm sure you know the answers to all these.
I suspect that I'm now realizing you already know the answers because you're learning smiles when I say something that you recognize.
And so actually answering that from on the basis of what you just what you just said.
So I, you know, I think that's another really useful insight that, you know, agreeing to disagree is a surprise minimising,
phase optimal explanation for the exchange with others.
So, but it does rest upon committing to the hypothesis that you are not like me, you are not like minded and that's OK.
So I've now classified you as somebody who's not like minded and I've resolved the ambiguity in among the hypotheses that you are either like minded or you're not like minded.
Normally we resolve those within a few, you know, first impressions within a few seconds based upon all these epistemic cues we offer each other to define the kind of person that we are.
So we make that job as easy as possible or as a signalling to make this so we know our place.
And I use that phrase because of course, you know, there was a paper called Knowing Your Place that exploited a shared generative model that allowed you to be in a particular position in some space,
even if you should, if you and I share the same understanding of political ideology, but I know my place because I'm right wing and you're your place because you're left wing or vice versa.
And then we can quite happily exchange, but disagree agreeing to disagree.
So I think that that's a wonderful perspective to have and to endorse it.
And that is a base optimal perspective from both sides of the disagreement.
That's resolving uncertainty in a bounded rational way.
So applying that notion to co-transformative space, it reminds me of the problem where certain patients in psychiatry have committed to a particular inference about whether they belong out there in that kind of environment or not.
So they have decided that they do not belong out there and that those people are not like them and they start to avoid.
So in a very simple, by the way, if there are any psychiatry, there's a whole time in this example.
But I think it's illustrative and useful in that respect.
So take depression or agoraphobia, you know, which is a completely base optimal response.
If I have committed to the hypothesis that out there is full of people who are not like me and potentially will upset, confuse and render me uncertain and possibly even injure me in some way.
So withdraw into that corner of your house or into that silo if you're working in, you know, in teams is a perfectly base optimal response that says that you've got a precise belief that this is where you belong.
This is, you know, these are the people that you speak to and not those people.
So, and that's usually perfectly functional.
In psychiatry, that would be a neurotic defence, but it can become pathological.
And when you become housebound or you become safe, you've got a pathological hypothesis, your body got dysmorphic, you get your you nearly die because of a failure to eat properly.
So when you say co-transformative, I imagine what you mean is you want to transform two teams into one team or at least enable them to work together.
If that's right, and you're not impartially, assume that it is, you're facing the same challenge that a psychiatrist faces in terms of enabling people to revise the precision of their precise beliefs about who they are.
Who they can interact with and who they should interact with.
That's not an easy thing, but it is certainly doable.
And it basically usually reduces to presenting evidence to a group or a person that it can be another way so that they start, you start to revise their prior beliefs or at least the precision of their prior beliefs by in a safe space where it's okay to explore other things.
And enabling them to think about other ways of interacting.
And so this would normally be the objective of psychotherapy basically to by illustration very much in the same way you were talking about sort of, you know, illustrating or educating by embodied experience.
Very much psychotherapy is thought to work like this.
Very much psychotherapy is thought to work like this.
You provide a psychologically embodied experience where you can try out different styles and different hypotheses.
And in so doing, you paradoxically introduce the right kind of uncertainty about different styles of engagement and who you are and who you are talking to.
And by relaxing that precision, you enable, you give the patient or the or the naughty team that's become too siloed the latitude to explore other ways of behaving.
So I would imagine that most of the tried and trusted procedures to get teams into a co-transformative space and use one or more of those mechanisms.
What would active infants bring to the table?
It would just bring the narrative that everybody trying to get to talk to each other can come to share so they can see through the process of becoming more collaborative or exchanging ideas more fluently.
Or working to working with the same lexicon or mechanics or code.
And it will enable them.
It will enable them to.
Having the same narrative will actually shape their prior space and understand the mechanics of actually enlarging the hypothesis space in terms of interaction styles.
So that was an incredibly hand waving answer.
But it was in part informed by almost my understanding of the question from the point of view of a psychiatrist who wants to transform the way that a patient relates to her world.
And drugs can help.
I mean that literally.
Those drugs that are responsible neurobiologically for setting the precision.
If you can temporarily suspend the precision in order to reveal other latent a priori hypotheses in terms of the way that I am or the way that I interact and the way that I behave or the way that I perceive.
That can actually have long lasting effects on bringing those other hypotheses to the table in the moment in subsequent interactions.
So perhaps the most compelling example of this, which is trending at the moment, is the use of psilocybin assisted therapy, particularly in terminal care.
So, you know, if you know you're going to die of cancer in the next six months, there are certain hypotheses that are brought to bear in terms of how I would expect to feel and how I engage with the world and how I engage with my loved ones as a dying person who is near death and the ultimate loss.
Those are not necessarily the best or most functional hypotheses or ways of being.
There are other ways of dying gracefully and gloriously, but to get at them, sometimes having a managed challenge to your 5-HT2A receptors via things like psilocybin and other related drugs just allows you to suspend for a moment your very precise beliefs about the kind of thing that you're going to be.
It allows you to experience other ways of being and perceiving, which can be very useful when it comes to just trying out other hypotheses in your, in your, in this instance, your cancer journey.
But, you know, we can also imagine similar scenarios when you get locked in to a particular way of interacting with either within a team or between teams in a larger organization.
So that would mean you have to go on a retreat and take lots of magic mushrooms.
Never thought I would hear it from you, Professor Friston, but there we have it. Drugs for Teams.
Thank you for this excellent interval with Dotcom's unit.
We're going to take another five-minute break and we'll return for the final session for DotTools.
Thanks again, everyone, and we'll see you in five minutes.
That will be five minutes.

## hW9IiOujS1E

Welcome back, everyone. This is our third session of the Applied Active Inference Symposium with Professor Carl Fristen, hosted by the Active Inference Lab, and it's June 21st, 2021.
We're here representing the .tools organizational unit of the lab, the third organizational unit in the lab, and the goals of .tools is to enable effective tool and instrument use for all Active Inference Lab processes, so that's just using the digital tools affordances that we have better, as well as exploring and designing affordances for our niche, modifying our niche, resulting in effective action as well as innovative
innovations in tool development. As with the other groups, we've been meeting weekly in tools and having a lot of awesome insights related to where Active Inference might come into play, and that's what we're excited to talk to you about.
Some of the core insights from the work in this unit relates to learning by doing, the recognition that modern systems are cyber-physical, everything is really intercalated with the digital,
and also we found it really refreshing, kind of like a two-stroke engine, to be sidestepping or complementing or augmenting some of these philosophical discussions with technical clarifications.
And two ways in which we've seen that play out on the left here is a quote from you during a 2019 Dropbox blog post, when you wrote that technology is the natural extension of Active Inference beyond the single person,
which of course brings technology far from being something artificial into the realm of extended and embedded cognition in our niche.
And then on the right side is a slide from a very recent talk by Bert DeVry on Beyond Deep Learning, Natural AI Systems, speaking to several applications in hardware and software of Active Inference, for example, gesture recognition, robotic navigation, and also audiometry for hearing aids.
And one effort that we're starting up now is a net hack challenge.
It's kind of a video game played in text characters, and we're assembling a team with already multiple interested participants to get an Active Inference agent on the playing field, so to speak,
and have people maybe update their generative model when they see that it doesn't have to be a 3 billion parameter neural network trained for six months on the GPU,
but what if it's enough to just be curious and to want to succeed?
Those are the kinds of things that motivate us in .tools.
So we can start right off the bat with asking,
how can we use Active Inference to structure the process of innovation and tool development?
And how can Active Inference concepts help us design for complex agents that are interacting in complex niches?
For example, thinking about niche modification, extension of affordances, reduction of uncertainty, or structuring of communications?
Again, great questions.
So the use of Active Inference to structure the process of innovation and tool development.
That is in itself an entertaining notion.
In the sense that you are a realization of Active Inference, and I'm mindful that your nice use of the combination of,
you know, well, the emphasis on curiosity as the imperative that drives most of our behavior,
is exactly the imperative that as a scientist drives me and most of the people I know.
And in a sense, I would imagine also drives your initiative and your laboratory.
So all the questions you are asking are really,
how do I make the next move in order to resolve uncertainty about your particular model of how, say, artificial intelligence, or human intelligence,
or human communication is going to evolve?
So, yeah, in that light, I think there are two levels to the answer.
The first one is just to celebrate and, you know, acknowledge that you are engaging in the scientific process as formulated by Active Inference,
that you are on a journey of trying to satisfy curiosity that will be never-ending.
And that speaks to your, one of your themes in the previous slide about learning is doing.
The only way you're going to resolve or sate that curiosity is to go out there and see what happens.
And that is, you know, that is exactly the right thing to do.
A more practical level answer, though, speaks to the tool development.
Because one of the, one of the fundaments of Active Inference is the appreciation that if you just want to maximize the likelihood that this,
your kind of world model or gerative model that entails the way that you exchange with and interrogate and ping a world,
is the right world that is articulated out there in terms of the sense of extended cognition, for example,
in terms of the software tools or the educational tools that you're making available,
then all of this is still subject to the imperative to minimize complexity.
So in maximizing the likelihood that these tools will be out there.
And in a sense, you're saying this model or this way of narrating the way that the world works,
provides an accurate description that is as simple as possible.
So there's a, you know, you cannot escape the complexity.
I'm speaking like Juergen Schmidhuber now, which is a good thing in this instance.
So that means you've got to find the simplest tools.
And it's interesting that you, you, you highlighted Bert De Vries's contribution,
because, you know, again, just practically thinking, what's the game here?
The game here is to write down the, or find the best hypothesis, the best explanation for my lived world.
And my, me could be active inference labs.
And the lived world is everything that you have to engage with in terms of educational or commercial or academic partners.
And so you've got to write down, you've got to explore the model space in terms of, to find the right model,
generative model of the way that your, your system or your organization works.
And that, the first steps in writing down the generative model are basically to define its structure in terms of the sort of hidden factors,
the latent factors and their interactions and all that good stuff.
And, but it has to be done in the simplest way possible.
And so what's the simplest way of writing down a, a generative model?
Well, it's to write down a, um, Bayesian, um, um, um, graphical model.
Um, what does that mean for the actual coding, uh, practically and the software schemes and implementation that you would either offer to people or pre-package in terms of, um, user interfaces.
Um, that it's going to be message passing on those graphs.
Um, and that, and I'm, and I'm trying to get back to Bert DeVese's, um, Factor lab, uh, Fawney, uh, Fawney lab, uh, formation.
So to my mind, that's the simplest, most generic, um, bit of computer science that you would come across in the service of finding the right software tools, um, to build absolutely everything.
Because absolutely everything can be written down as a generative model.
If there's a generative model there, there's a Bayesian dependency graph.
If there's a Bayesian dependency graph, you know, there's a factor graph.
If there's a factor graph, then, you know, there's a message passing scheme.
What is that message passing scheme?
It's just a free energy, variational free energy, minimizing message passing scheme.
So, um, I would, I would imagine that as tool development increases, that there will be a move towards a common language that would be a,
common language that will look very much like, um, Bert's, um, um, Fawney style, um, message passing.
And within that, um, you know, you've, you've got very limited choices, um, which is a good thing because that,
again, speaks to this minimization of complexity and just course graining the world, um, and your world, um, at the,
at the, at his coarsest level that will sustain an accurate account or a precise account of what you want to, want to achieve.
Um, so I'm thinking here the tools just have to come in two flavors.
They have to deal with continuous state space, um, generative models, uh, to interface with the,
you know, the, the kind you need for robotics.
Um, but also, uh, the other flavor would be discrete space space, you know, latent states, um, latent, um,
discrete late states, uh, models, uh, that you'll need to do say competition linguistics or, uh, you know, modeling, um, the climate in, in, in the environment.
climate in various states. And we know that the, we know all the message passing schemes that would
be entailed by a commitment to one of those two kinds of models in the sense of sort of
generalized Bayesian filtering for the continuous state space and by generalized, you know, I include
generalized courts of motion, which generalize things like common filtering. And on the discrete
state space side, you're talking about either belief propagation or variational message passing.
So when you just think about it, what you have to do in providing tools of a software kind or simulation
kind, you know, happily, there aren't many choices you have to worry about. So, you know, in that sense,
all you need to do is to make sure that your tools accommodate both generalized Bayesian filtering
and belief propagation and or variational message passing. And then you're using off the shelf
technology, which brings us back to, well, what's the real problem then? Well, the real problem is
writing down the generating model. What sort of problems, how would you unpack those problems in
terms of innovation and tool development? Well, it's solving the model selection problem. So sometimes I
think you said when describing the space of problems that are faced, say, with generalized AI or AGI,
you know, you can unpack them at different spatial temporal scales into the inference problem,
into the learning problem, and into the selection problem, by which I mean using Bayesian model selection to get the
right structure. You know, do I use six or 12 layers in my deep neural network? Do I use a convolutional model?
Or do you use a transformer? You know, these are basically problems of, that are solved if you have a mechanics
that can score the structure, enabling you to select the right form. So that, I think, is going to be a focus of innovation in the,
in the, already is, but certainly in the near future in terms of development, and in the sense that I think the inference and learning problems,
they're solved problems that you can just go to Bert and get your favorite message passing scheme, or you can keep at the level of, you know, educational or academic
message passing and use the map lab schemes that we generate, you know, here in London for toy problems.
And what is not, I think, a solved problem and will require an innovative solution is the structural learning problem or the selection problem.
Exploring not the right hypothesis, but, you know, in the principled way, exploring the space of generative models you might want to bring to the table.
Exploring not the right, you know, and that, you know, that, that has many, many different issues and, you know, things that come to mind of, of course, that you could do it in, in a, in a bottom up way by trying out new hypotheses, where do you get those from, you get them from experts in the field, because effectively they are bootstrapping themselves
in on the basis of the, you know, on the basis of our prior beliefs or our, you know, knowledge about how, how something works.
You can do it in a, in a top-down approach by, um, having, um, over-parameterized, but, um, um, over-expressive models, but with very weak, imprecise parameterizations,
and then use Bayesian model reduction to solve the selection problem.
These are ways that people are thinking at the moment, but this thinking is innovative, innovative, because I don't think there are any, any clear answers.
So, um, how would you use active inference to solve the, uh, structure of learning problem?
Well, in a sense, um, it's already being used in the sense of Bayesian model selection as natural selection, uh, but you really want to speed that up and make it work within your, within your, um, commercial academic lifetimes.
But I would imagine the exact same principles would, would be brought to bear there.
And, you know, that almost answers the next one.
How can active inference concepts, how to design, um, complex agents interacting in complex niches.
You just have to build these things as, as, as, uh, proof of principle and hypothesis testing.
And the nice thing is, you know, all the, um, the machinery and the tools that would be requisite in building these things,
right from the, uh, variational message pressing using, say, um, for any lab through to now you've got the right, um, fitness function when it comes to using, say, a genetic algorithm to explore a structure space.
Um, and what is that fitness function?
It's, it's, it's, it's the, um, you know, the evidence lower bound or the variational free energy.
Um, so you've got all the maths in place.
This is the question that I think of, of, of, of simulating these things and providing proof of principle, how you would translate that into the real world.
I, I, I, I don't know at this stage of the fact.
Um, I think, you know, a challenging first step would be, um, you know, to, to actually use, uh, robotics, uh, or in silico or, you know, sort of hardware or possibly, you know, a lot of excitement and amount of using soft, uh, soft robotics.
And actually, um, you know, in, you, you design your niche, um, and, um, see what happens and then turn your attention to, um, niche construction.
Um, where you now acknowledge that the niche itself is also succumbing to the principles, not of active inference in of, uh, in and of itself, um, in the sense that niches don't plan.
Um, but, uh, certainly, um, in the FEP sort of, um, uh, vanilla, um, free energy minimizing, uh, approach.
Um, so, yeah, I haven't actually thought about that before, but that's, uh, you know, an interesting asymmetry when it comes to simulating multi-agent interactions, uh, in the context of niche construction, where often it is the case that the, the niche is just the other agents in an ensemble.
Um, um, um, um, but if you now actually include the, the, the environment as part of the niche that is playing host to all the denizens that are the ensemble of, uh, active inference agents, um, then I, you know, I, there is this distinction between, um, the, um, um, the ability, um, um, to plan the consequences of action, um, that would entail optimization of the expected
free energy versus simply reflexively minimizing surprise or by, um, um, um, um, by minimizing, uh, free energy as a, as an evidence bound.
Um, um, um, and put that the more simply, more intuitively, um, you're either with gerative models that support planning or not.
Yeah.
So there's nothing, I think, fundamentally different between these approaches.
It's just, if you've got a gerative model, that is a model of the paths into the future, consequent upon what you, how you act upon the world.
That's a much richer, deeper gerative model than the kinds of gerative models that would be a, applicable to a thermostat or an environment.
Um, and it's likely that the environment that, you know, I have in mind here, which is, um, you know, a warehouse that you've got a sentient robot going around trying to get the right things.
So the robot can plan, but the environment, the niche can't, it'll still conform to the principles, the very, you know, the free energy principle.
There will still be particles and things that are conserved and they will still fall and behave in a predictable way.
There may even be a thermostat controlling the temperature.
None of these things are planning.
So there's a, there's an interesting asymmetry that gets into the game when you're talking about complex agents interacting in complex niches.
Part of that complexity has to be a specification of whether the complexity entails planning or not.
Um, and it just creates different problem spaces, um, certainly in the context of multi-agent, uh, simulations.
So that's, that's how I would, um, sort of carve up the, the problem spaces, um, you know, in terms of implicitly, um, problem spaces that will only be explored by doing.
And by doing, I just be, I mean, actually realizing physically these processes in the kind of situations that you think are going to be useful for, for the future.
Thanks for the answer.
And it's really fascinating about using simulation so that selection can happen within the generation of, for example, a startup rather than between generations, because of course we can let organisms or startups proliferate and then let pruning occur at the generational scale.
Or there could be ways to design so that that selection occurs within a generation, more like learning and development rather than intergenerational selection.
So awesome points there.
This could be a broad question, but we're curious what areas of applied active inference you think just might be exciting, promising or important.
So, um, my, my personal usual response to this, um, comes in, um, in two flavors.
The first is from the point of view of a theoretical biologist, um, and a psychiatrist.
So if, you know, if you can understand how a, a normal sentient artifact or person behaves, then that creates a space in which you can think about, um, false inference and false learning.
Um, or certainly, um, or certainly, um, or certainly, um, suboptimal from the point of view of, um, minimizing surprise or, or free energy.
So that's a fancy way of saying understanding the computational basis of psychopathology.
So, you know, there's a, you know, there's a whole, um, literature on using active inference as a, if you like, a normative, um, framework within which to, um, provide an ontology of false inference, um, or failures or aberrant active inference.
Um, and why would you want to do that?
Well, if it can all be reduced just to the good belief updating and the good message passing, we actually have a very, um, quite a comprehensive understanding of neuronal message passing and all its physiology and all the, um, uh, the roles of various neurotransmitters and, you know, microcircuits and your anatomy that underwrite that kind of neuronal message passing.
Um, and implicitly we also then have a fairly, um, uh, a fairly fine grained understanding of, um, the role of neurotransmitters and the pharma, uh, the consequences of pharmacological interventions in the context of, uh, experience dependent learning and, and, um, an influence of the kind we've been talking about.
So from a translational perspective, um, literally translating, um, the formalism on offer from active inference into the clinical domain, that would be one, you know, one motivation for, for, for developing this theoretical framework.
The other one is more, um, you know, uh, more in the line of technology and artificial general intelligence.
So then the question is, well, if I now want to build sentient artifacts and not only build them, but build brothers and sisters, so they are complex and interact and learn to, to love each other in a complex environment that could include me.
Um, um, you know, um, the, the, then you've got, you've got, um, a, a clear offer from active inference as to the design principles you might want to use to, to actually, um, build these artifacts.
And then there are interesting questions about, um, what the, um, what kind of artifact do you want to build?
Um, and we've already discussed the difference between a thermostat and a, uh, a sentient robot going around collecting your, um, your next sort of, um, home delivery.
Um, the, you know, there are different kinds of generative models.
So now you ask the question, okay, what are the promise, the exciting and promising kinds of artifacts, uh, as defined by their generative models, um, that one might expect to see, uh, in the future.
And then we get into the world of, um, you know, generative model support planning.
So we're talking about, um, deep generative models where they have a temporal depth.
What, what, what are the next stages that you might be looking at?
Well, there's also a sort of hierarchical depth, um, that would, um, at some point, um, first of all, include the capacity to deploy precision.
Um, and why is that important?
Well, as soon as you have, um, um, the, um, deploying the precision as a process of inference, you are now, um, you have now a normative theory or this kind of mental action or covert action.
So one example of this would be, I don't know how the, the, the technology, but I can almost, um, I can be assured that I know, I know, um, what it's trying to do.
But thinking about transformer networks and, um, the, the way that attentional selection operates in this, in this context, what you're saying is you can actually optimize the attention selection.
As an inference process using active inference or an evidence lower bound, um, where you're now predicting what things to attend to and what, what does, you know, what particular ways to switch on and which, which ways to switch off.
Um, um, um, um, and at that point you can understand that as mental action.
So when, when the transformers or variation auto encoders start to now optimize their estimates of the posterior precision, lower layers, say in an auto encoder.
It's now acquired the capacity for mental action.
And it now will pay attention to various representations and possibly even various data sources.
That's not magical.
We do that every day in the sort of MDP, uh, you know, and use it to explain a lot of, um, the attentional mechanisms, um, implemented in the brain.
If you can migrate that technology into deep learning, you would have taken one baby step towards true sentience, which is mental action.
The next step would be, um, okay.
Um, okay.
So, um, how can I now minimize the complexity of my generative model where my generative model now actually includes this, um, meta inference in the sense I'm now providing predictions about my inference because I'm controlling the precision of hierarchically subordinate message passing.
Um, and at that point you start to think, well, perhaps one simplifying, um, one way of simplifying, uh, the computational complexity or the, you know, the complexity part of the, um, the, um, the, the inference, um, would be to carve up different states of attentional deployment in exactly the same way we're talking about carving up people into Biden versus Trump voters.
Uh, you know, a simple, uh, a simple, uh, complexity, uh, uh, complexity, minimizing carving up, which suddenly, um, suggests to you that you can now equip, um, an artifact with states of mind.
Um, so that they can be in four states of mind.
They can be happy, they can be sad, they can be confident, they can be unsure, and they will have to infer given all the evidence at hand, including the message passing there in the hierarchy, what state of mind it is in.
And if you now include in terms of the sensory evidence, you know, the voltage on their batteries or, uh, you know, some measurement of their interoception, you now have something that's getting very, very close to say Ryan's, um, notion of, um, of emotions.
So now you've got, um, a part of the generative model is now inferring what state of mind am I in as the best explanation for all these interceptive, um, embodied sensations, not just the proprioceptive, you know, state of my actuators, but also, um, you know, are they getting a bit sticky?
Uh, you know, um, are there some wear and tear, you know, are my batteries charged?
All of these things come together, um, as part evidence in conjunction with all the usual visual, you know,
um, auditory, um, uh, sort of, sort of acoustic inputs, um, to, to, to, to actually, um, supply evidence for a posterior belief.
I'm in this state of mind. I'm anxious. My battery's running out.
Uh, this immediately, uh, creates different prior preferences, cost functions, if you like, that would be applied to your policies because you've got a deep generative model that comes into the future.
So now you've got an artifact that not only has the capacity for mental action, it's now got, um, the capacity to be in different emotional states.
The next step is to say, hang on. So there are these different states. Can I now equip it with a, with a minimum selfhood?
Can the hypothesis that I am actually an artifact provide empirical priors that reduce the complexity of my message passing at subordinate levels that is generating, um, that is inferring the state of mind that I am in, that in turn, um, um, um, uh, you know, optimizes the, uh,
of the precisions of various likelihood mappings or, or preferences over policies.
So at this point you're starting to get to artifacts that could have minimal self-awareness.
The next stage would be that's only going to be ever, um, um, that's only going to be, I think, useful, um, when, when you consider dialect interactions again, because the only rationale for having self-awareness is to disambiguate, um, um, um, uh, self from other, which means that there must be some confusion.
Um, um, uh, uh, or some uncertainty, um, um, uh, at hand in order to justify the resolution and certain justify that complexity of the model.
that complexity of the model which means that you have to be interacting with or exchanging with
things that are sufficiently like you to license the inclusion in your genitive model of a self
versus other or that you are like me or not like me so we actually come now back full circle to
what we're talking about before in terms of inferring who am i talking to so this i think
there's you know structure is something quite fundamental about this inference problem are you
a creature like me or not or are you like one of those are you a pet are you a plant um you know
just being able to carve up this world in a way with his self-referential necessarily entails a minimal
selfhood in the inferences of these that speaks to the importance of getting the necessary evidence
from the environment that would um be if you like license that degree of complexity and the only
kinds of environments that can supply that degree the license that degree of complexity are when that
environment that you can is actually just is actually um comprises other agents like me that make it if
you like worthwhile me in fact oh it's me not you doing that so i would imagine then the most promising
applications um of active inference in constructing sentient artifacts pets and you know carers or or
convert people things that you can converse with and will be to grow them um certainly um with themselves
but but more importantly with you there so they can learn by their doing with you there so they they
want to they're curious about you and you're curious about them at that point they're real one could
argue that's the only scenario which you're going to have any empathetic interaction um you know you
you know with these artifacts so uh i'm sure there are other applications in terms of um you know climate
change or commerce or whatever but in terms of imagining what you could produce you could sell
i would i would imagine that you know a mindful robot that actually is curious genuinely curious
about you because that will teach it something about itself thanks for that answer um the idea of tools
for attention and of design and engineering for regimes of attention to use an active inference term is
really essential and what you were talking about there with the phone first off before the internet
when there weren't other devices of similar kind there was no need to communicate out and what we've seen
is that as there's more and more devices of similar or interoperable kinds new levels of organization have
to emerge and then i thought about the anxiety that a person might feel when their phone is running low on
battery right now that sensor reading is getting emotionally offloaded to the human so we could have that anxiety
on device so let's have a more relaxing relationship with our phone and then as you pointed out it would
be the um incipient steps of selfhood or perhaps what they could even call a self phone if i'm allowed one
pun per symposium the next question is what kinds of tools have been most helpful in your work in research
which includes many areas such as spm and dcm that a lot of people who are just learning about active
inference might not be very familiar with and what kinds of tools don't exist yet but might be helpful
for active inference work um so the the mathematical tools so you know and i'm often asked this question
uh of students you know do i need to be able to do maths to contribute to this field um and if so what
kind of maths um i won't tell you what my answer is but what i have found useful is certainly mathematics
but not not necessarily very high end this is always um wikipedia level mathematics and in particular
um dynamical systems theory information theory and linear algebra are probably all you need to
to do everything really um and indeed you could read most of quantum electrodynamics as basically linear
algebra with a bit of probability theory theory underneath it so that that has been the mainstay
that that is you know you know if if there's one tool that it would be the tool and the language um of
of maths and relatively simple maths and the second thing is to um the learning is doing um you know
a see one do one teach one um ethos i think applies very pragmatically in this context um which means
it you know it's actually um very useful if you can get students to actually build their own little um
simulated artifacts um and even more useful when you know when they can actually code it up themselves
which means you need access to a high level at least third generation programming language um that you
know a student can get um fluent with should they want to um not only to use the existing tools but
you know try and write it down themselves without having to spend years of training as a computer
scientist so i found matlab very useful in that respect not because it's terribly efficient although
i have to say actually some of the matrix operators and under the hood tensor operators are actually much
more efficient than people give them credit for um because it actually came from um x-ray crystallography
however um what's really useful about it is it uses the same syntax that you would find in a book on
linear algebra um which didactically or education is really quite important when it comes to writing
and reading the code um so we have deliberately stuck with matlab not because it's computationally efficient
or that it's open source um it should be i don't think it is um uh but simply because it's it's
configured in a way that that people reading um standard texts 101 texts and in the algebra and the
like would be able to see how it transcribes into a computer language so that's been a really useful
um a really useful tool and looking ahead um i imagine that you know you one's going to need open access and
possibly more it's um i i um i don't know it could go out the way i'm thinking about first of all people
like bert and fawny lab in terms of very generic very high-end specifications of message passing um
in computer science um that may maybe that that's the level you want people to actually compose their
generative models and their their artifacts and they don't even need to know about linear algebra and even
less information theory what they need to know is the language of relational you know the object
relations and and how to specify just different classes of exponential probability distributions and
you know is it categorical is it continuous is it always positive or can it be positive and negative
and that may be quite sufficient to write down a factor graph or a generative model and then everything
else is just off the shelf and if you write itself um so um that would certainly be um
um possibly helpful in the future and so i'm moving on to what kinds of tools dead is this at the
moment so i'm thinking of it um what i never used it but i what i imagine would be that um burt's um
forney lab facilities but uh offered as um an application or a user interface uh allowed you to compose
generative models and then you see it compose a generative model compose a generative process the
actual world that's going to be modeled and then let's click run and see what happens that you know
that would that would be that would be really useful i think um having said that the other side to to to
to um future scoping here is i repeat this sort of um leveraging um more specialized or other fields
uh and the you know um amortizing certain parts of of of inference or learning to infer um as a or indeed
inferring to learn or learning to plan or learning to infer how you plan so or starting to sort of see
what parts of the inference process are so concerned that they could actually be amortized and learned and
certainly that looks as how as though that's what the brain has done for example there are people who
think that the cerebellum has basically learned how the motor cortex does its online kl control or um
common filtering and therefore lends a fluency and a computational efficiency to the message passing which
um you know which in its absence um it doesn't mean you can't do something it just means you can't do
it as fluently and as gracefully as quickly as you know as you know as you could with a cerebellum
indeed when you um have a cerebellar lesion all that really happens is you become a bit clumsy um and slow um
um so um that those kinds of tools you know a quick and cheerful um integration or importing um various
amortization and deep learning technology um into a um a four needs style message passing scheme that could
support you know any kind of generative model i think you know would be really really useful
awesome thank you approaching this nexus from another angle what kinds of tools and platforms
could inform transdisciplinary highly contextual and engaged teams that are working with these
approaches act inf lab we hope to be working with others to be developing the active uh inference
curriculum and body of knowledge more broadly but when teams are actually using these kinds of
approaches what kinds of platforms might exist to enable their work um again i have a strong suspicion
that you know the answer to this much much better so i'm trying to guess at the answer that you you know
is the right answer and i'm not doing very well here um so um i you know i think that you've you you
you we've already talked and and certainly implicitly um in the way that you've presented the ambitions uh
and implicitly send the questions and you know all the answers are there whether that's trying to engage
through education whether it's trying to engage through insight um using say you know embodied experience
illustrations of the basic principles whether it's supplying um um games or user interfaces graphical user
interfaces to facilitate the designing and enacting and the playing with um um generative models and
an active inference i think these are all um uh your obvious and laudable ways of um of you know
uh of leveraging um what what what what um active inference has to have your house has to offer um
um participatory yeah it's um i mean the the learning is doing thing and the see one teach one do one
you know keeps coming back to mind um and and the course completely licenses the participatory aspect
um but what what kind of participation did you have in mind are you talking about sort of hackathons are you talking about
some um playing games with active inference computers that that start to start to uh
um hate you or love you or or what what what what level of participation were you
yes steven do you want to give a quick thought on a few kinds of participation or what does that mean to you
yeah one area is quite interesting is in psychodrama they use action methods like action
sociometry or spatial activities to look at how people relate to their experience in a dynamic way
so physically so i've been looking at ways that um spatial participatory approaches can unpack
people's relationships to different niches or different workplaces or different types of embodied experience
and then that could be visible um to be put into active inference type geometries
i see okay right i right well there's a great example so um so two things um that i've come across before are the um architectural design um and the um the importance of um
not just uh you sort of pragmatic affordances you know can i walk up that or can i sit there but also the epistemic affordances
you know if i look over there um what would i learn about the space around me if i go around that corner
so um there is um you know embryonic interest um in in you know in my world um from um this the
architectural sciences and you know and architecture in and of itself that um is is is could in principle
be motivated it's an odd discipline because it's half like art and half like science but
the certainly some of their ideas are very much um aligned with certainly gibsonian notions of
affordance and also um the um the affordances the dual aspect affordances brought by expected free energy
under active inference so it's not just you know am i the kind of creature that can sit on this on this
particular chair but also what will i learn if i if i so do and so things become epistemically
attractive to engage with the other domain um is um in entertainment and in music and in particular
um the joy of synchronization and mutual predictability or minimizing free energy through mutual
prediction when singing or dancing together or indeed um interacting with a slightly greater
um asymmetry in terms of being a member of an audience um watching a band for example so um you know
one of the key things that comes out of that kind of research in ways of um measuring the implicit
generalized synchrony that you get from having um this information geometry that i was talking about
before that rests upon there being um a synchronization manifold between the inside and the outside
if the outside is another inside from another person's point of view what you now have is something
called a synchronization manifold so there's a mathematical image or space um to actually talk
about mutual inference and mutual active influence and engagement and communication singing together for
example or um diachronically exchanging um messages uh that does actually translate mathematically into
movement and belief of uh updating on a synchronization manifold and that has real world correlates you can
measure that using um um kinematic um measurements you're putting leds on people who are dancing together
for example or um measuring heart rate variability or galvanic skin responses or uh doing eye tracking or
indeed eeg and start to so there's quite a lot of work in um um in things like hyper scanning and in um in it you
know sort of ethology and dance uh um disciplines um where uh in the arts in the life sciences uh where they
do use a lot of these techniques to quantify the degree of generalized synchrony what it would be nice to do
is actually try and model that synchrony or understand that synchrony in terms of um movement on the
synchronization manifold which is sort of the mutual uh belief updating and one thing which comes out of that
just in discussion if not if no if no further is the reciprocal the circular causality that is necessary
um to maintain um to maintain um that generalized synchrony um the particular synchronization manifold
we're talking about for the from the point of view of active inference of course is mediated across
the markov blanket as of the active and sensory states um but in general the the um you need to have
reciprocal coupling um um in in order to to get to get synchronization so directed coupling doesn't work
um and if that's true what that means is that engaging as an audience for example or participating
as a spectator will only really work in terms of establishing that generalized synchrony that you are
chasing and why you're chasing it well as soon as you have a generalized synchrony you've got predictability
for for free for all uh and that's a good thing because that minimizes free energy you know the
more predictable you can make the world the better the better it is um from the point of view of free
um but you can only do that if as a member of the audience um or a witness to something you can actually
actively intervene on it so that brings to mind how could you get for example a discussion discussing
this with um friends of of maxwell yeah if you wanted to promote virtual uh concerts on your online
for example during the pandemic what you don't have online which is what glues things together things
like mosh pits in in sort of carnivals and and uh festivals um is you don't have the audience participation
the the applaud the wars the you know the um the lighter waving or the light waving um so how would
you get that back into into a virtual um virtual experience because that would be absolutely essential
you know i think to actually engage people otherwise you know you you'd be you'd be looking at a pop
concert on television so you know more than just if you like um revealing the underlying correlates of that
generalised synchrony in terms of the eeg traces of the the dancers or um doing some sensory mapping from
the uh their motion to auditory import you know just making it making the sensory evidence that supports
the mutual inference um more precise and more available uh just by having it displayed say by putting
um putting motion in sound or sound in motion um or eeg electrocapographic measures of performance or the audience
um um visualizing that and that has been done by people like paul mishore in in barcelona more than that
to actually um enable the audience to change what the performers are doing you have to make you know or perhaps what other members of the audience are doing so you have to empower them to close the audience to the audience to change what the performance are doing
you have to make you know or perhaps what other members of the audience are doing so you have to empower them to close that um that circular causality to get that dynamical coupling place so you get you get the right kind of generalised synchrony so that um you know that that sort of um dynamical systems perspective on synchronization and free energy minimization certainly speaks to a particular kind of participation of the audience and the audience is
that does indeed um rest upon action oriented approaches but crucially it's the action of the audience on the performers not the performers action on the audience uh that is is is usually what you need to pay more pay more attention
i don't know if that was that the kind of thing you were you were thinking about yeah that's really a useful answer actually yeah we were thinking about that and and some participatory immersive theater type events
and other participation in collective meaning making so that's the type of thing that we're looking at and it reminds me of the live stream affordance which is relatively novel but allows people to be asking questions and it enables not just efficient production of material in a one-shot approach but it allows the feedback and i can't help but add that it's that affordance for participation for example speak now or forever hold your peace
that expands the wedding into the community because there is the opportunity for feedback it's not just a breakaway click it's actually something that remains integrated through the affordance for participation
so i'll turn to the last question for this section
how might future modeling involve large-scale patterns in social data sets and working backwards to infer their hidden causes for example in the case of pandemic modeling governance economic other situations
well this is a very practical and very prescient question because of course a lot of people are asking themselves that now is specifically with respect to pandemic models but also
the people who are exercising and have the interventional clout when it comes to covid are generally also the people who are invested in climate change problems as well so there's a lot of noise out there at the moment about
you know how we can harness the data assimilation and modeling advances made during
advances made during COVID-19 and keep the momentum up to tackle climate change and not just climate but the economic structures that
and financial structures and informational structures that are deeply interwoven in terms of climate change
and climate change and my answer is going to be somewhat deflationary and and i've had this kind of conversation before again with
with Maxwell and John Clippinger and related friends and i'm due actually to have another conversation with them on
um um certainly open um um open world or open i can't remember um um uh in the near future um there's a temptation to take all the high church of the free energy principle and active inference and epistemic foraging and all of that good stuff we were just talking about and say oh well now let's make it work in terms of
in terms of understanding um say the pandemic and you don't need to do that all you need to do is to apply the good scientific principles that things like active inference appeal to to the problem at hand and it all comes back to the
generative model so you know all you're saying here is how might future modeling involve large-scale patterns and social data um to infer the the um hidden causes is just a statement of we need
the right generative models to make proper sense of the big data at hand and um in saying the right generative models we need the equipment both to invert those models in the sense of inferring the parameters interactions um um uh using the simple tools that we've just talked about they will just be lifting it from
from burt's laboratory or um you know continuing to use matlab um but the bigger problem is one we talked about which is the selection of the structural learning problem um so this goes beyond just um
higher you know how many layers do i have in my deep network um much more um important i think is the factorization um it's knowing how many conditionally independent factors do i need
to minimize the complexity to minimize the complexity to get the right granularity the right way of carving up um the latent causes behind all the data that is available to me um so i think the pandemic modeling is a beautiful example of this um because you know the factors that determine whether i infect you can certainly be written down in terms of virology and the um and the ace receptors and the
uh and uh basic reproduction numbers and transmission strengths and transmission risks and you know the spike proteins but that's only half the story the other half of the story is how likely are you to be at work or at home when i'm at work are you likely to be wearing a face mask are you going to are we going to be one or two meters apart so all these behavioral aspects start to become really
important factors and even beyond that when it comes to making sense of the model the likelihood part of the model that actually generates the data become can become extremely difficult to optimize when you start to think about what kind of data is at hand for example just notification rates of um of um new cases per day in the um of SARS of of coronavirus now you might think oh that's that's really great data it's
really difficult data to handle because the different kinds of tests not only have differential um false positive and false negative rates but the different ways in which they are deployed um really confounds that in terms of the selection bias so are you testing people who are symptomatic what's the probability of being affected if you're symptomatic are you not are you doing survey testing are you doing the same amount of testing uh this week as you were doing last week all of these what would be if you like from an epidemiological or a behavioral science perspective
um really interesting factors suddenly now become the most important factors in making sense of those data but you only know that when you start to do the uh the model comparison of the structure learning when you actually commit to writing down the congenitive models and that's certainly what i've learned um over the past year uh now connect through a year and a half um you know the future of modeling is is is is um first of all it's obvious what the future is it's basically writing down the right
kind of um uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh
hand in terms of pandemics or trafficking on the web you know or climate change so it's a really
exciting opportunity why do people want to do it well once you've got the the most evidenced i.e.
that you know the minimum free energy model at hand and you've got posteriors over all the model
parameters and all the right interactions then you can do all sorts of stuff in terms of reducing
people's uncertainty about the future because you've quantified the uncertainty and explained to them
things that were once uncertain about and what isn't uncertain about that has enormous implications
for mental health and well-being and possibly even feeding back into finance because you always hear
well the biggest determinant in terms of the markets is the market confidence it's all about
the uncertainty so if you can do uncertainty quantification in a principled way using
using this kind of modeling you've done a big thing already but then you come to
monitoring putative interventions you've now got a direct handle posterior estimate on the latent states
you actually want to make decisions on so it's not the notification rates or the number of new cases
in California today it's a number of new people that have become infected today and that's a very
difficult thing to infer given all of these complicated aspects of the of the generative model and then of
course once you once you've established the validity of this model and in terms of its construct and
um and predictive validity then you can intervene on it then you can say well what would happen if i
change this what would happen if i change that um and what would happen now what would happen in the
future so that you know you're suddenly in a world of quantitative modeling um um where you can start to
um ask some very powerful questions and also um share with everybody who matters and the products of your
inference so you can now start to think about having supplementing the weather forecast with the uh an
epidemic forecast you know the virus in your area and tomorrow we expect you know the cells you can
also do that to the markets and these kinds of things i think are going to be more important um when
people um or when the current generation get to um your generation i guess yeah and um start to wrestle
more with climate change um because they're going to want to not just know what whether it's going to
rain tomorrow they're going to want to know you know at the level not just the weather but the climate
what are the indicators because those indicators um really contextualize and inform their geriatry
models about their place in the world and that and that global and that global scale but to provide that
kind of weather forecasting that meteorology beyond the weather um you're going to need to have these
you know these state space models properly optimized and you know in a first principle way in relation to
the marginal likelihood of their um or their um um the the the evidence evidence bounds um just read
governance here because governance is just policy decision making based upon counter-factor outcomes so
that is always underwritten by um these these basing beliefs but you can't get the basing beliefs
unless you've got a generative model and that has the consequences of action in the future uh there
would be also um interventions either politically or financially or um or um or otherwise
thank you so much again for joining this symposium it was really a special moment for the lab and we look
forward to continued interaction so much appreciated and we will see you all soon thanks for everyone
who's watching and we hope that you participate in act inf lab so thanks everyone bye