## HK9ZkbxieLY

Hello and welcome everyone. This is Active Inference live stream number 54.0. We're
discussing mathematical foundations for a compositional account of the Bayesian brain.
Welcome to the ACTIMF Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is
communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. This is a recorded, archived,
and published live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work. All backgrounds
and perspective are welcome and we'll follow video etiquette for live stream. Head over to
activeinference.org to learn more about getting involved in live streams and in a variety of other
projects and learning groups. All right, well, we're in stream number 54.0 and we're going to be
learning and discussing the paper that was submitted on the 23rd of December 2022 as part of a dissertation
work, Mathematical Foundations for a Compositional Account of the Bayesian Brain by Toby St. Clair
Smythe. The video is an introduction for some of the ideas in this multi-hundred page thesis. It's not a
review or a final word or a thesis dissertation committee. This 54.0, given the scope and the
complexity but also accessibility of the ideas, we're going to be approaching it in a familiar way but also
with some twists. We're going to begin with some introductions, the aims and claims, abstract and
roadmap as usual. Then we're going to approach the keywords and the context in a slightly different
way than we've done in a lot of other dot zeros. And then we're going to kind of bookend the dissertation
and focus most on chapter one and chapter seven, the first and the final chapter. And chapters two through
six, we're looking forward to unpacking more with Toby in the coming weeks. So we'll begin with some
introductions and warmups. We could all just say hello and something that was exciting for us about
the paper slash dissertation or what brought us to the work. I'll begin. I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in
California. And I have to say that six months ago when we started this journey, hot on the heels of
the dissertation being posted, when along with Ali and Dean and others, we decided to embark on this weekly
learning quest. I was very unfamiliar with category theory. And thankfully, after closing the window,
it all escapes my mind. So it's been quite a six month period to learn and to forget so much. I'll pass to
Dean. Thanks, Daly. I'm Dean. I'm here in Calgary. I think the thing for me, when it was first broached,
the idea of taking this up, about a decade ago, I started just scratching the surface of this idea called
category theory. And to see this amount of work put together to sort of bring a whole bunch of ideas
together. And as Daniel already mentioned, make it somewhat accessible, or I don't know if it's a
beginner's guide or a category theory for dummies, exactly, because there's still a lot in here. But in
terms of giving us an opportunity to get some verifications, or for me, at least, that's what
I got was some validations and some verifications was really helpful. So I am excited about having
a chance to talk about this. And bring the author on eventually and have that conversation get extended.
And I'll pass it over to Ali. Thank you. I'm Ali. I'm an independent researcher from Iran.
Well, I also had just a passing familiarity with category theory and wasn't familiar at all with lots of
terminology and formalism in this thesis. But after covering the whole thesis in our six-month period,
it now begins to make much more sense. I mean, I definitely started seeing category theory in almost
everywhere, both in sciences and in also in some other not specifically scientific areas. So I'm really
excited to have these discussions with Toby and learn even a lot more. Thanks.
Excellent. All right, on we go.
We'll begin here with a meta prompt. So for all of you human and non-human language models,
please fill your context window with this meta prompt.
Onto the big questions. So we have some hidden questions that are in white font below that those
who go to the slides will find and discover. But we raised many questions and
Dean or Ali, what's just a question that strikes you today? What is a question that would lead someone
to come to this dissertation? And we're going to be covering a lot of Toby's summaries in terms of the
contributions, aims, claims and foci of the dissertation. But what does this dissertation ask
or what would somebody ask to get to this dissertation?
Yeah, please, Dean.
Dean. I think the first thing for me was, if we are pattern seekers and pattern
impliers, then if you're going to look at what the formalism behind that is, then this is a good place to
start. If you want to know why we tend to put things into groups, why things have a world where there's
something that's in a category or outside of a category. And most importantly, where are the things
that aren't in either of those two places? This gives you some of the operational backbone to be able to
start figuring that out.
Awesome. All right, on we go.
Aims and claims of the paper. So paper or dissertation draft,
Mathematical Foundations for a Compositional Account of the Bayesian Brain, was uploaded in late December
2022. And just several overview claims of the work. Our main aim in this thesis is to formalize predictive
coding through functorial semantics. And Bayesian lenses will provide an important part of the syntax
of statistical models that we need. In this 54.0 video, we're only going to cover chapter one and chapter
seven. And we're going to review them for some really interesting, bold, and ambitious claims.
And there's a few great overview claims for the entire work that do a great job of just distilling
down so many hundreds of pages and so many technical contributions from page seven. The main individual
contribution of this thesis is the introduction of Bayesian lenses and the proof that Bayesian lenses
compose optically. And the first sentence of the abstract. This dissertation reports some first
steps towards a compositional account of active inference and the Bayesian brain. Anything else to add on
aims and claims?
Okay. Either of you, please start with the first half of the abstract.
I'll read it down.
Go for it.
Dean. Yeah.
Dean. Yeah.























Dean. Yeah.
Dean. Yeah.
Dean. Yeah.
Yeah.
Dean. Yeah.
Yeah.




Yeah.





Bayesian brain. Specifically, we use the tools of contemporary applied category theory to supply
functorial semantics for approximate inference. To do so, we define on the syntactic side the new
notion of Bayesian lenses, I think it's important to get the plural there, and show that Bayesian
updating composes according to the compositional lens pattern. Using Bayesian lenses and inspired
by compositional game theory, we define categories of statistical games and use them to classify various
problems of statistical inference. On the semantic side, we present a new formalization of general open
dynamical systems, particularly deterministic, stochastic, and random, and discrete and continuous
time, as certain co-algebras of polynomial functors, which we show collect into monoidal open-dexed
categories, or alternatively into algebraes for multi-categories of generalized polynomial functors.
We use these open-dexed categories to define monoidal bicategories of cilia,
dynamical systems, which control lenses, and which supply the target for our functorial semantics.
Just one quick thing. If you're like me, you had to spend a lot of time finding out what do these words
actually mean.
We're going to come to talk more about words, words, words.
And Ali, second half of the abstract.
Accordingly, we construct functors which explain the bi-directional compositional structure of
predictive coding neural circuits under the free energy principle, thereby giving a formal mathematical
underpinning to the bi-directionality observed in the cortex. Along the way, we explain how to compose
rate-coded neural circuits using an algebra for a multi-category of linear circuit diagrams, showing
subsequently that this is subsumed by lenses and polynomial functors.
Because category theory is unfamiliar to many computational neuroscientists and cognitive scientists,
we have made a particular effort to give clear, detailed, and approachable expositions of all the
category theoretic structures and results of which we make use. We hope that this dissertation will prove
helpful in establishing a new, well-typed science of life and mind and in facilitating interdisciplinary communication.
Awesome. Okay.
Here's the roadmap.
We're only showing a zoomed out view because if the other papers we've discussed were going on a road trip,
this is the continent scale road trip. The dissertation is 230 plus pages long. It's in seven chapters that are shown here.
And in 54.0, we're going to be focusing on chapter one and chapter seven. So it's quite a piece of work.
And this is just the background and context. There's a table of contents with more information and on what the chapters do.
Let's take a few more steps or moments in the background and context to really set up the reading
and expressing of this work and really this kind of work. So thanks a lot to JR for preparing some of the following slides.
Here we have some selections from several works in mathematics and category theory on reading math.
There's a real joy in doing mathematics. We've all heard it before, but it really comes to be true when we enact it that way.
The challenge of mathematical understanding is to find a way to make new mental images in oneself on the basis of formal definitions,
to make these definitions intuitive, to feel what they are talking about.
And JR's summary of some of the ways that math is utilized in this dissertation.
So in regards to the writing in this thesis, just like with anything else, something is being written for an audience.
Toby is writing to an audience of domain experts and a dissertation committee, ultimately, to demonstrate and embed new contributions to knowledge.
In regards to the writing in this thesis, he also takes a pedagogical approach, a teaching approach.
And JR asked, is this pedagogical approach something you see in most PhD theses?
Briefly, I would suggest no.
And on the reading of this thesis, it helps to be clear why we're reading it.
If to help understand or sense-make active inference models, then aim to read it at one level and take the rest on faith.
If we want to understand the formality better of the really nitty-gritty category theory itself, then read to that level and go deeper.
Any thoughts, either of you fellows, on the first reading math slide?
Okay.
And on the second reading math slide, a few more great tips on just reading math and what we're doing with math.
So, first, eyes on the prize.
Math is a language, and as such, it's there to convey something about the world, about the structure of this thesis.
Overall, and overwhelmingly, there is a plain English exposition of what concepts are needed and why, with nice transitions, foreshadowing, and back references.
There's also a true wealth of beautiful diagrams, which in category theory have a formality that those used to schema-type diagrams will be pleasantly surprised by.
They're definitely challenging to interpret.
It is a new visual language for some.
However, it's one that can be admired without necessarily needing all the formality.
About roles of definitions in reading of math.
What the audience knows as truth is a shared prior belief.
Things start from there.
These definitions are used to build up further truths through logic and the proofs.
And from the Bessis citation.
In a mathematical text, the most important passages are neither proofs nor theorems.
They are definitions.
Mathematical language works as a construction game, where words are truly defined,
that is constructed from other words that themselves have been previously defined.
And about role of proofs in reading maths.
Very similar to providing well-argued evidence in any technical writing,
math is technical writing with math as its particular structure.
And there's other great things to read, but that's all I'll mention here.
Just at an overview, are there any other thoughts that either of you would add just about reading
math or reading this kind of technical work, which can be like getting dropped in the deep
end?
I mean, we're getting dropped into the cutting edge PhD contribution frontier of knowledge.
So how do we negotiate that, especially when there are these esoteric or inscrutable symbolic
systems that seemingly constitute the majority of the words in certain passages?
Dean?
I think this might be a slightly strange metaphor, but what I would equate this process to, as a reader,
I would equate it to being offered to build a 10,000 piece puzzle, except you have to build it
backwards.
So you don't actually have the benefit of having image and contrast at first.
All you basically have is the geometry.
But when all the pieces fit together, you're then allowed to flip it over.
So you have to be really committed.
And my hat is off to the work that Toby has done, because for him to make it coherent, given
the actual volume of information that he would like to pass along, part of my grinding through
this was the thought in my head that if I'm grinding through this, I can't imagine what
the author had to go through.
So even if you're excited about this, it's still a huge commitment.
So true.
Ali, anything?
I just wanted to add that, well, obviously category theory is very abstract discipline,
even for mathematicians.
So I agree with Dean that doing such an admirable task of, I mean, organizing the materials of
the dissertation in such a coherent way is truly a Herculean task to do.
So but another point is that, well, I mean, even in the realm of category theory, most of the
things done so far is done in the purely mathematical world.
So applying those concepts of category theoretical concepts to some realms outside of mathematics is
something that's just been explored for the last few years, at least seriously.
So I believe Toby didn't have much to start with, given that the scarcity of material in the applied
category theory area.
But of course, it's a burgeoning field and it's gaining traction quite rapidly.
So I hope to see much interesting works in the future.
And I believe Toby's dissertation will help a lot in shaping the future trajectories.
Great comments about applied category theory.
On to the keywords.
So three big keywords are category theory, Bayesian brain and active inference.
And then category theory is really a language of its own.
For some of the relevant keywords that we pulled out in our shared epistemic niche, the CODA document
that we utilized to collaborate over the last six months as a team.
We, here's some of the terms that we had on the right side.
And we had a full table that people who go to the slides or the CODA document can explore more.
But there were so many creative words, just words that you're not gonna get outside of applied or basic category theory.
It was quite a learning journey just from a lexical perspective.
So a lot of keywords and a lot of domain specific words in category theory.
But we keep the bigger picture in mind about Bayesian brain and active inference.
And one last piece of information here before we head off into the dissertation itself.
JR, during their internship over the last several months at the Active Inference Institute,
among other works, completed an absolutely beautiful syllabus, adventure mode syllabus,
for introduction to category theory applied to active inference.
And it's hosted on our GitHub at the Institute.
So hopefully people can find it useful and continue to version and utilize it and make contributions to it.
I'll just read the summary.
It's for any curious, thrill-seeking Active Inference Institute participant who wishes to study and conduct further research on active inference-related papers that involve category theoretic tools.
And we have a fractal embedding of a quotation from Christopher White on model stream number 1.1.
We have a finite time on this earth, right?
And a finite time to dedicate to learning things.
The syllabus is centered around the joy and the dissertation.
So another category theoretic work for background and the dissertation itself.
The approach is based on experiences within the category theory learning group.
Insights from the Topos Institute category theory outreach panel.
And Chang and the Joy book club.
And this great line from Emily Reel in her book, Category Theory and Context in the notes of the reader section.
Inevitably, given the diversity of mathematical tastes and experiences, the examples presented here will seldom be optimized for any particular individual.
And indeed, each reader is encouraged to search for their own context in which to explore categorical ideas.
So this curriculum is something that will be living and versioning as we move forward in the active inference applied category space.
Super exciting.
So thanks again, JR, for the epic contribution.
And we all reviewed the syllabus and just found so many interesting aspects to it.
So there's a lot to learn.
No surprises there, but it's awesome when other adventurers help create spaces and ways for others to go on their own adventures.
And it really feels like in category theory that there is a culture of that.
So it's really encouraging.
Okay, to the overview of the dissertation itself.
As stated earlier, there are seven chapters.
Chapter one is an introduction.
Chapter two is a comprehensive review of the concepts and results needed to understand the mathematical contributions.
Chapter three begins to re-approach neural modeling and more generally the algebraic modeling of the structure of interacting systems.
Chapter four presents the first main result that Bayesian updating composes according to the categorical lens pattern.
Chapter five introduces the corresponding semantical categories with a new abstract formalization of the concept of open dynamical system.
Chapter six presents the functorial formalization of predictive coding using a new notion of approximate inference doctrine by which statistical models are translated into dynamical systems.
And chapter seven reviews the prospects for future work from the mathematics of the cognitive map, a program called compositional cognitive cartography, to the composition of multi-agent systems and ecosystems, and the connections with compositional game theory and other categorical approaches to cybernetics.
Number three is ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
there's stuff in chapter seven that literally points you in that direction so you might want
to give it a like a once over uh just to sort of orient yourself and then you should feel free to
be able to go bi-directional just a just a strategic prompt because if you get bogged down
and it's very easy to get sort of caught up in the in the minutia of this i would just say
zoom out step back and if you can't if you if it's if it's not registering on the first pass
it might register if you start going a little bit backwards and forwards instead of just one
direction great and just to summarize some of the primary contributions a few quotes the main
contribution of this thesis is the formalization of models of predictive coding circuits as functorial
semantics and the associated development and exemplification of categories of statistical
games as well as the introduction of bayesian lenses and the proof that bayesian updates compose
optically that is in some sense like optics we believe our presentation of general open dynamical
systems as certain polynomial co-algebras also to be novel along with the concept of cilia and their
associated monoidal bi-categories we hope that this dissertation contributes to a renaissance of
cognitive and computational neuroscience through the adoption of categorical methods we're going to be
returning more to all of these so it's going to be cool and i'll leave uh it's all good with the video
off for internet's sake but just raise your hand or bring your video on whenever you would like to speak
before we take the jump we just pulled out two small quotes that's going to help us leap off this cliff
to map the gap respect it and beyond so first from page 226 this is from chapter seven this resemblance
becomes even closer when one considers the recent diegetic open parenthesis diegetic
occurring within the context of the story and able to be heard by the characters within the story
the recent diegetic formulation of open games in which strategies themselves can be updated using a
backwards map from the arena of the game back into strategies or rather strategy updates and then
fundamentally from page 225 this is also the idea underlying the successor representation of the
cognitive map which says roughly that the brain's representation of where it is is equivalently a
representation of where it soon expects to be and so how as we bring that last foot of the six feet
off the other side of the cliff and jump through the unknown how do we take this immense work and
update our strategies backwards so that we can successfully represent and disseminate ourselves
any final words before we jump into chapter one on this topic
just think if you're part of the active infants community and you've been wondering if there's been
any sort of question in your mind as to the role of strategy in that relationship between inference and
action um this is going to be really really helpful in terms of maybe giving you a better sense of you
identifying and then you carrying out choices so i think it's um i think it's very important to now take the leap
and then you're going to be able to get the right to the right to the right to the right to the right
so for the coming slides um ali or dean please just if you'd like select one uh bullet point feel free to
read the bullet point or give any remark and on these coming slides we're just gonna move through but
either of you or both of you please take the first uh pass all right so chapter one introduction
um i'll let people read through the slide i think the one that we bolded here category theory is the
mathematics of pattern composition connection and interaction i think you can i think you can read that
um but i believe you also have to kind of sit back and ask yourself so what does that mean so right away
they're taking a superordinate and they're breaking it up into its parts and so it there again there's this
world within world within world thing that is reinforced just in the way that we have to
try to communicate the ideas to the readers
the readers awesome and ali i guess and i also think uh the two problems outlined uh in the first
page of chapter one namely that uh each research group has not only its own language but also its own
perspective and these languages and perspectives are not well connected uh these two issues i believe
uh are the uh organizing themes of the whole dissertation and uh we see uh these issues addressed time and time
again uh throughout uh the thesis uh so uh and particularly in chapter seven uh which these issues are addressed uh
quite explicitly uh both in terms of the work or the contribution done in this thesis and uh the suggestions for
uh future research uh the other point is uh that the language of category theory is homo iconic uh and can be used to translate constructions between contexts so again uh right at the beginning uh this dissertation tries to uh put a particular perspective uh in order to address the uh the t the two issues just mentioned so in this case uh toby
is um

interconnected as if by a categorical web with the connections and expressed categorically.
So in other words, category theory provides probably the ideal toolkit to address those
situations, those issues, which I believe is not restricted only to scientific endeavors.
So these two issues come up in many other areas and outside science as well.
So in that case, I believe category theory can provide a much more general framework to
address them even in non-scientific fields as well.
Can I just add on to what Ali just said there real quick?
I agree with you 100% Ali about the toolkit.
And I would add that I also believe it gives us an opening to develop a rule kit so that
we can actually figure out how to do that translation piece.
And it also gives us a pool.
I like to use things that rhyme because it's easy to remember.
But the way that we collect, how things congregate, what that attractor state becomes so that
we can then figure out how things are moving in that dynamic situation.
So I think it provides a toolkit, a rule kit and a pool kit.
Great.
All right.
Next slide on chapter one.
I'll just pick one and then either of you, please.
The one that's exciting to me is we showed that the theory of predictive coding has a clear
compositional structure that explains the bidirectional circuitry observed in the brain.
So even outside of the connection to the empirical, grounded, embodied biology, the idea that a lot
of the ways that in retrospect, informally, we've been talking over the last years as a field and
in the Institute about the compositionality of models and can we just plug in the sense states
here to the action states here?
Can we nest the models these ways?
And the ways that we've been thinking about the active inference cognitive kernel, like
a Lego kit, all of this is realizing a level of formality, which doesn't mean inaccessibility,
really quite the opposite.
That's just accelerating what's possible with predictive coding, Bayesian brain, active
inference, free energy principle.
So we're really seeing like a dawning of the formal compositionality and to be able to
compose and to be able to construct are going to have a relationship that we can continue
to weave in the coming sessions.
Either of you want to highlight some other piece here?
I think it's really interesting because I know that they are trying to build an infrastructure,
but there, a lot of this dissertation has to do with a process that's actually a deconstructor.
Deconstructure, meaning there's a lot of pruning and sculpting that they actually speak to.
If we were to talk about real things that form and shape and give us that sense of what's in
and what's out.
So yes, they are building an infrastructure, but then Toby goes along and speaks a whole bunch
about, so why does this stay?
And why does this not get included?
Ali, anything or we'll continue?
Just real quick.
It reminds me of Mario Bunga's work on causality and also Alan Garfinkel's theory of explanation.
Because, and particularly in Garfinkel's work in his book, Forms of Explanation,
he provides a theory of explanation based on rigorous modeling of problems in terms of state spaces
and how we can address the context-dependent explanations based on the contrast space on one hand
and the relevance space on the other.
So category theory, I believe, somehow unifies or, in other words, translates these kinds of theories
into a rigorous and coherent framework that can be used to formalize or rather to frame all of these theories
of explanations and causalities within a unified framework.
So that's, I believe, one of its greatest advantages.
Great.
Okay.
Anyone want to give a comment here?
I'll just give a quick comment, which is, and this is just a peek ahead to chapter two.
We're only going to have a few snippets from the medium, the meso chapters, the space between.
But don't we see diagrams like this all the time in active inference?
We see these diagrams all the time.
And section 2.1 is extremely provocative with the analysis of neural circuitry and two other types of systems
in really establishing that the drawing, if it's informal, is insufficient to completely convey the arguments
and to really represent the situation.
However, if we use the kind of string diagrams or just diagrams more generally
that category theory provides, we really get a graphical compositionality
that just drawing on a page, though obviously wonderful and fun, does not reach.
And so we're going to be able to talk about how these types of diagrams,
which again we see all over the literature,
can be enriched with this category theoretic perspective
so that we can assess, well, what if I draw a line from this one over to that one?
Is that valid?
How is that going to change the properties?
And so we're going to be able to know a lot more about that
when we understand the compositional structure
via the Bayesian lenses of these compositional Bayesian systems.
Anything else to add on this slide?
All right.
Dean or Ali, go ahead.
So chapter one begins with the claim that the brain's visual circuitry
seems to be roughly hierarchical.
And this hierarchical structure is a hint of compositionality
and thus a sign that a categorical approach may be helpful and enlightening.
On the other hand, the underlying equations of the free energy principle
exhibit a form of compositionality which is used to obtain the hierarchical models.
Despite the hint of compositionality,
the equations of motion for these hierarchical systems
are typically derived from scratch each time,
a redundant effort that would not be required at a compositional formalism such as category theory being used from the start.
So this thesis supplies such a categorical formalism and exemplifies it with hierarchical predictive coding under the free energy principle.
Category theory has a rich formal vocabulary for precisely describing universal constructions.
And so not only does a categorical formulation of the free energy framework promise to clarify the current confusions around FEP,
but it may be expected also to shed light on its potential universality.
Just so exciting and interesting.
And in terms of the current, the past, present and future status of the free energy principle and active inference,
it's an absolutely consequential direction of work.
Dean, anything here?
Dean Mitchell No, I know that in this in 741, which we'll talk about later,
the introduction of the term fuzzy and fuzzy distributions comes up.
So even though they are being precise, they are being precise in their fuzziness as well.
David, Great.
David, like a high resolution picture of a fuzzy jacket.
David, Onwards.
So, in this thesis, we do not get as far as a completely general formulation of active inference and it goes without saying
this expression could be added to every single thing that we read today,
But in the coming videos and beyond, we're going to discuss what this all means.
And just one more exciting piece from this page.
Because active inference models and the free energy framework more broadly are descriptions
of systems that are open to an environment, interacting with it, and therefore situated
in context, they are particularly suited to a category theoretic reformulation.
So that's very exciting because we've, from qualitative, philosophical, humanistic approaches,
and also from statistical, numerical, formal approaches, we've discussed a lot of this
openness.
And now we have another entree or another vector or another toolkit, rule kit, pool kit to work
with.
And that is just opening the space up a lot.
Ali or Dean, want to add anything here?
Just real quick, we've talked in other live streams, we've used images of ice cream cones
and ice cream trucks, and what's in the foreground and what's in the background, what's actually
the context and what is the content.
And this reinforces that idea of, as the observer, as the one using their optic nerves, what did
you choose to put in front and what is in behind?
And we have to keep that in mind because we shouldn't assume that everybody chooses the way that we do.
So, again, just making sure we understand what's being said here in this slide is really important.
Thank you.
Ali?
I guess.
I think it's really clever to title the dissertation as mathematical foundations for a compositional
account of the Bayesian brain as opposed to active inference.
Because, as we all know, one of the distinguishing features of active inference theory and what sets it apart from other related theories, such as Bayesian brain and predictive coding theories,
is the fundamental integration of action into perception.
So, as long as this dissertation doesn't provide a full-fledged account of this kind of action integration, I believe it would be more appropriate to term it as a compositional account of the Bayesian brain and not particularly active inference.
But, of course, in Chapter 7, Toby suggests some potential ways that this kind of integration can potentially be done in the future research.
Awesome.
All right.
Chapter 1 is already foreshadowing the idea of cognitive maps.
And Toby writes,
Current models of cognitive maps.
Some are expressed in the language of approximate variational inference.
We talk about that a lot.
Some are expressed in the language of reinforcement learning.
Some attempt to combine the two.
We expect that the foundations developed here will help us unify these accounts.
So, how can we be reimagining maps?
Cognitive maps.
Cognitive maps.
Aren't they all?
Ali or Dean, anything else to add here?
All right.
And, last few selections from Chapter 1.
Either of you, please, what's a first take here?
I'll go first.
Our primary motivation in writing this thesis is to lay the groundwork for well-typed cognitive science and computational neuroscience.
It's a very interesting topic about the implications of well-typing and what does it mean for something to be well-typed?
What is a programming language or a scientific culture or a framework that's well-typed?
The free energy framework, like the structurally adjacent framework of compositional game theory, has a strong flavor of teleology.
What is that taste like?
And systems act in order to make their predictions come true.
We come to this so many times and in so many ways.
In reinforcement or reward-oriented learning, you have a reward function and systems work to maximize reward.
Whereas, in free energy as a bounding variable or functional on surprise, the imperative is to bound and reduce surprise such that expectations or preferences are realized.
And so here it's expressed qualitatively.
And so here it's expressed qualitatively.
We've approached this in many different paper discussions from a statistical, numerical, formal, analytical angle.
And here we're approaching it from another formal avenue of category theory.
And either of you have any comments on this or want to talk about the last piece?
Yeah, I'll talk quickly about scientific faith.
In the programming that I did, we had a little axiom or expression that was, if it isn't history, then it's a mystery.
And I think that's part of what this scientific faith piece is all about.
I mean, if you have some data, if you have some way of recording or taking in or gaining some sense of, that's great.
That's the historical part.
But you still also need that curiosity and that sense that there is yet still to be witnessed and observed.
And you have to have some faith that sticking around is going to be able to provide that opportunity.
So, yeah, I think, I don't know if it will, I don't know if a well-typed science will buttress scientific faith.
I think sometimes the personality matters.
I think if you're the kind of person who believes in curiosity being resolved and wayfinding being a really good strategy to find out who you are and what the world is about, I think that's the faith piece that some of us just seem to carry around, whether we like it or not.
Awesome.
Ali, anything on this slide or enclosure of chapter one?
I just wanted to mention that by well-typed cognitive science or more generally well-typed science, I believe Toby somehow implying a kind of more or less a claim for disunity of sciences as opposed to a unified vision of science.
Because you see, in the unified vision for science, every explanatory models and every theory can theoretically be unified within an overarching principle or overarching theory, which has not been discovered yet.
But some philosophers advocate the position of disunity of sciences.
In other words, although there are some commonalities between every scientific areas, but there are some individual types or individual concepts, if you will, that cannot be taken.
I mean, this individuality cannot be taken for granted simply by just explaining it away by proposing some unifying principle.
So in this sense, well-typed science is a quite rigorous and individualized notion of scientific endeavor, at least in my opinion.
But I'm curious to know Toby's opinion.
I'll just add one more comment on the well-typed.
In programming languages, where type safety or type soundness is being described as a beneficial feature in certain contexts, obviously, people point to the way that a well-typed language can prevent illegal operations or use safer handling of short-term memory, working memory,
and avert logical errors.
So it's very interesting to think about what that means in science in terms of not just the reproducibility of experimentation, but in terms of what experiments and what research avenues are pursued overall, as well as even cognitive security.
So there's so many different angles where well-typing is going to matter for the way that we think about compositional cognitive cartography, which we're going to come to now.
Chapter 7.
We skipped over a few pieces, didn't we?
That's how the last six months felt.
99,100, yeah.
I'll hold on the jokes for now.
But yeah, we skipped about 200 pages right there.
That's the part that you want to take lightly.
That's the bottom of the bathtub.
You jump into chapter one, and it's exciting.
It's like skiing downhill.
And then this vast tundra opens of chapters two through six, which, again, was the last half year for us and several others.
So now let's get to chapter seven, and then the sandwich will be dissected with Toby.
Okay.
With absolute humility and accuracy, Toby points to three prominent shortcomings of the thesis.
Ali, do you want to summarize these three shortcomings?
Sure.
Sure.
So the first one is that the notion of approximate inference doctrine should be tested with further exemplification.
In other words, and specifically with the problem of double counting, which is addressed in chapter six.
So the other one is that the generative models that Toby has considered in this dissertation are somehow static, despite its application in modeling dynamical systems.
So, again, this problem is addressed.
I mean, some suggestions for overcoming this shortcoming is addressed in this chapter, specifically in relation to Meyer's categorical theory of dynamical systems.
And finally, although we consider lower level neural circuit models, we did not explicitly connect our approximate inference doctrines to these more biological models.
So, in other words, it's not a theory for modeling the whole iguana.
It's just a particular, it's just a modeling framework for modeling a very specific function of, or the cognitive function of the brain.
I don't know that knowing your limits should be considered a shortcoming.
That's just philosophical me going, knowing, well, okay, so of the three of us, I'm the one guy who's proud to say I get it wrong 20% of the time.
I don't give a rat's backside most often about precision and perfection.
I want to try.
And so if somebody says, well, the thing that I'm talking about here has its limits, and it's not going to solve all the problems of the world.
I just think that's being realistic and honest.
So, call it shortcomings.
I see it as a bit of a feature, being self-aware of not being able to do everything at once.
Yeah.
So often in papers, it's apologetic when it's actually the adjacent possible.
And there's always an adjacent possible, indeed an expanding one.
So to make an exponentially expansive apology, rather than pointing to the adjacent possible and seeing what can become, is just two sides of the same coin, with a third side being the rim on that coin.
So, 7.1.
7.1.
Structured worlds and 7.1.1.
Bayesian sensor fusion.
Ali, how do you see sensor fusion?
Just so sensor fusion is a situation where one has a number of sensors which report spatially situated data.
And also, I mean, it's kind of a problem of combining the local data with the global data.
So, in category theory, there is an obvious choice for addressing this particular problem, namely the notion of sheaves, which is a spatially coherent data type.
Something like a bundle for which local sections can always be uniquely glued together into a global section, as Toby described here.
And it reminds me of the theory of, I mean, the derivation of the duality between FEP and CME in Bayesian mechanics paper by deploying these notions of bundles.
So, in other sense, sheave theory and the related fields of applied topology and cohomology allow us to judge when it is possible to form a consensus and quantify the obstructions to the formation of consensus.
Hence, the consensus between FEP and CME as done in Bayesian mechanics paper, I believe, is done in the same sense of sheave theory as providing a possibility for emerging such a consensus.
And also, missing from the current sheave theory of sense of fusion is a thorough treatment of belief and uncertainty, especially from a Bayesian perspective.
The first possible extension of the work presented here is to extend statistical gains and approximate inference doctrines, and hence the classes of model that they encompass, to structured data types such as sheaves.
We expect that the first step will be to consider categories of channels between sheaves.
Awesome.
And just to give a more mundane or empirical example of sensor fusion, what if we have many EEG sensors on a head, and we need to synthesize into one joint representation?
Or what if we have temperature sensors across an agricultural field and humidity sensors?
How this happens is called sensor fusion, and category theory is helping us understand the compositionality of such issues.
Dean?
Yeah, I just want to focus in on bullet number two here, because Daniel, both you and Emily, I think you're absolutely correct.
I think, where they say something like a bundle for which local sections can always be uniquely glued together into a global section.
Well, of course they can.
But I don't know that that's necessarily the magic.
What if, what if, in a counterfactual sense, what if they are glued?
Does that something, is that something we must commit to?
And then if it is going to be glued together into some sort of global composition?
When?
That timing of when to do that, I also think is something that we judge.
So is that the data set, the what if and the when, is that the data set that we're going to eventually bump into?
I would argue, yes.
Does that mean we're going to have to pass through that moment and come out on the other side of it, hopefully still intact?
Yes.
To me, that is consensus building.
So I know that that's one little sentence in a 200 page paper.
But again, there are so many nuggets in this paper where if you just slow down and read it and think about what the implications of what they're saying are, you could literally go off right there on that one sentence and spend hours trying to figure out.
Okay, so, so really, what should we be doing with this?
Is this a priority?
Whatever.
Awesome.
Continuing on to address that first shortcoming.
We already mentioned sheaves.
And we hope that these tools will suggest new connections to work on quantum theoretic formulations of the free energy framework.
That's something we've discussed in several stream series.
Live stream 17 with Chris Fields on information flow in context dependent hierarchical Bayesian inference.
Live stream 40 with Friston, Levin, Glazebrook, and Fields on a free energy principle for generic quantum systems.
And the ongoing Chris Fields course physics as information processing 2023.
So category theory and adjacent tools are already widely utilized in quantum sciences, quantum information science more broadly, quantum computation.
And so on one hand, we see the quantum and free energy principle synthesis outlined in these stream series.
And here we have the category theory, active inference, Bayesian brain, free energy principle synthesis.
So all three category theory, quantum and FEP walk into a sheaf.
So I believe that is a great idea of what do they say?
All right.
Ali, what is a summary or overview on learning structure and structured learning?
Oh, yeah.
So an interesting distinction is provided right at the beginning between structured learning and learning structure.
So structured learning, at least Toby, means extending the process of learning to a structured setting.
But by learning structure, he means learning the underlying structures themselves.
So in the categorical semantics of dependent type theory, the context is witnessed by the object over which a slice category is defined.
And so in some sense, it defines the shape of the universe.
By the growth in the construction, there is correspondence between sheaves and certain bundles as objects of slice categories.
And so we can think of structured inference and learning as taking place in appropriate slice categories.
So both of those somehow address the binary concepts of structured learning and learning structure in a complementary way.
So we can think of bundle morphisms as generalized parameters maps.
And in that case, the problem of learning structure then becomes a problem of generalized parameter learning.
And this is the way that some reinforcement learning techniques have been deployed by using this kind of generalized parameter learning.
So we expect this line of inquiry to clarify the relationships between our formalism of approximate inference and other related work on the categorical foundations of cybernetics,
which have typically been studied in a differential rather than probabilistic setting.
We expect the connection to be made by information geometry where Bayesian inference can be understood both using gradient descent and as a kind of parallel transport.
In other words, it is a way to unify both the physical formulation of a system as done through the differential equations in cybernetics,
and also the probabilistic formulation of the systems as done in Bayesian mechanics.
Awesome.

Just two quick notes on this.
First, the growth and deke construction.
Shauna Dobson spoke about this in the math art guest stream in the context of the evolution of art and other areas in math and philosophy over the last hundred years
with this progressive swarmification of self.
So that's really cool to see.
And then we expect the connection to be made.
What we expect is what we prefer.
And then what we expect slash prefer is shaping our action selection to realize it.
So again, once we, as mentioned earlier, understand that systems act in order to make their expectations realized,
we see that these kinds of expressions are more than just the expression of a belief.
They're also in some ways an action imperative.
Dean, any thoughts?
Oh, I could go for days on this section, of course.
But I will say this.
Who knew there was so much to be loaded up between the difference of a verb tense, right?
Structure and structured, add a D, and all of a sudden we're discretized between process and product.
I'll just start there and wait for Toby to come on because I could literally have a field date.
I'm at the circus, the carnival, and every single theme park in the world when it comes to this stuff.
It's awesome.
All right.
Now we get to 713, Compositional Cognitive Cartography, Sailing the Three Seas.
Ali, what is this section about?
Okay.
So this is mainly addresses the success of representation and I mean doing a kind of a comparison between success of representation and other cognitive map theories.
In other words, the topos theoretic developments sketched so far may provide a suitable setting in which to understand the neural basis for navigation and help explain how ostensibly spatial navigation processes and circuits are invariably involved in more abstract problem solving.
A topos is not only a richly structured category of spaces or spatial types, but it can also be understood as a categorified space itself.
But an important notion here is that under the free energy principle, there's a close relationship between beliefs about the geometry of an environment and beliefs about expected future trajectories in that environment.
So this is basically the idea behind successor representation of the cognitive map, which says roughly that the brain's representation of where it is, is equivalently a representation of where it soon expects to be.
So under the free energy principle and similarly under the successor representation, the expected dynamics is a geodesic flow, which is determined by beliefs about the spatial geometry.
But crucially, these beliefs are not static.
They depend on what the agent believes will happen.
And this has been suggested as an explanation for the predictive nature of the cognitive map.
In other words, if we don't take into consideration the uncertainty behind the information available to the agent, then we wouldn't get to formalize the behavior in a truly predictive way, because obviously there isn't any uncertainty to predict about and then compare the prediction with the actual data.
The cognitive map has its central locus in the hippocampus, which we may therefore understand as representing the base space over which the big topos is sliced.
And since changes of plan seem therefore to induce changes of base, we might see the functional connectivity of the brain as witnessing this mathematical structure.
And this particular claim, I believe, maps perhaps perfectly onto Bujaki's theory of brain from inside out.
So Bujaki provides a kind of theory that sets the hippocampus as a kind of the agential center of all the cognitive tasks that needs to be reconstructed from inside out,
as opposed to just processing the coming data in a kind of purely computational, unidirectional way.
We talked a lot about, and certainly will in the coming weeks, about what is witnessing.
How is witness related to observation?
But we'll come back to that.
Okay, continuing on on the compositional cognitive cartography.
There's some discussion about the internal universe of the topos, not just the topos institute, but the concept.
And the way that the representations of the cognitive map are inherently context dependent.
Therefore, it fits naturally within the subjectivist metaphysics implied by the free energy framework,
a topic that I know Ali is extremely interested in.
And Dean or Ali, any other comments on this slice?
Maybe we can start calling them slice or a bundle instead of a slide.
Well, if we do go the slice route, one thing I would just pause for a second.
I think for most people in context, geometry or geometric stability is usually the association,
whereas geodesic flow, which was mentioned in the last slide, is a lot more dynamic.
And I think that if we're going to talk about a composition,
like the flow of the piece of music that's now playing out,
we have to think of this as both framed and filtered.
And so these sheaves allow for that sense of distribution, that movement part.
I think metaphorically of exploitation and exploration now being the two passengers in the HOV lane,
and HOV lanes in North America at least are designated by a diamond.
So you can see how the geometry and the geodesic, again, can all be put together,
and you're starting to build a picture in these different models and maps that you may be constructing.
Great.
7.2.
Societies of systems.
I'll just say that a collection of purely passive agents is no society at all.
What would it even be?
Ali, you want to add anything more on the forwards and backwards, perhaps,
and the compositional structure?
Well, first of all, I wanted to just point that the very first sentencing or a collection of purely passive agents is no society.
Also applies to one of my favorite metaphysical theories out there, namely the assemblage theory.
So we can say that a collection of purely passive agents is no assemblage as well.
But in any case, the doctrines of approximate inference introduced in this thesis are inherently perceptual.
But the forwards channel of a statistical gain points towards the environment, predicting the expected incoming sense data,
whereas the backwards channel points from the environment into the agent,
terminating in the agent's most causally abstract beliefs.
one way in which we can incorporate action and thereby shape the framework of this thesis into a framework for active inference.
The forwards channel should predict not only sense data incoming from the environment,
but also the actions to be taken by the agent.
So, up until now in the dissertation, he has provided in quite, I mean, with elaborate detail,
how this kind of formulation of the bidirectional channels can be used to reframe the perceptual side of active inference.
But as I mentioned earlier, he doesn't go so far as to integrate the action into this framework as well.
But of course, here is a potential way forward,
which we can deploy the same forwards channel as being the actions to be taken by the environment
because of the same directionality it possesses.
We therefore expect the compositional theory of active inference to have forwards channel,
rather so that an agent's sensorium depends on the configuration or quote-unquote action that it has chosen.
And another very, in my opinion, significant point here is the substitution of the notion of markup blanket
throughout the whole dissertation with the notion of polynomial functors,
because as have been discussed in the previous chapters as well,
markup blankets doesn't provide a rigorous enough concept to be applied quite,
at least directly in category theory.
So polynomial functors substitute the well-known notion of markup blanket
as used in active inference literature to characterize basically the same thing
or the interaction boundaries of adaptive agents.
Yes, so many great pieces here.
Markup blanket used in the informal active inference literature,
like everything we've been studying for the last few years, all of that.
So casual, light, airy, breezy, we had fun.
Now it's time to formalize that.
And there's so much more we can say about backwards and forwards,
but we'll just carry on.
7.21, active inference.
There are some mentions about the resemblance between active inference and economic games
in terms of they're both having lenses into the area or the arena of interaction.
And this line of inquiry naturally leads onto the consideration of multi-agent systems.
Perhaps this can be investigated with poly-algebras.
7.2.2, what is the type of a plan?
Perception and action are thus in general the two dual ways in which a system can minimize
its free energy.
Change your mind, change the world.
Akin to the two degrees of freedom available in an auto-encoder game discussed in the thesis.
A system that acts must necessarily be motivated towards some goal.
And in order to realize its goal, the system must enact a plan.
Dean, pick it up from here.
Well, I will just say this.
I'm not going to speak to this stuff on the slide necessarily.
At the very end of this section, he probably writes,
this prompts us to ask what is the form of this data
and how can we incorporate it into the compositional framework?
In other words, what is the type of a plan?
Then, these seem to us to be key questions for future work.
This prompted me to go, and then we wonder why teachers struggle sometimes
to necessarily remember what it was like to be the learner.
Because we can come up with a plan because we've done the learning.
We're now the learn-ed, right?
The learner now changes because of one, sorry, tense present to past.
Tense change.
Tense change.
Tense change.
And or why the plan that we put before learners removes all the critical work
for self-organizing.
This is the cost of being a teacher.
Because if we do the planning for somebody, and I understand why we have to do it.
Because if they're walking into a space, we don't want them falling off,
jumping off cliffs necessarily and not having, you know, a soft landing.
However, we do need to talk a little bit about what is the type of a plan and what are the benefits
and the costs of choosing to use that strategy going forward, especially if we're in the role
of somebody who's supposed to be guiding, opening up worlds and horizons and all that other stuff.
Thank you.
Oli, any other comments on this section?
Not at the moment.
One piece to me is it seems unnecessarily crude to hide all of this data,
which is described as a lot of data,
inside of a single undifferentiated choice of prior distributions.
So that's very interesting in light of, again, the statistical, numerical, quantitative way
that we've approached policy selection as inference, planning as inference, action and inference.
What does it mean to differentiate this choice?
Okay.
Reinforcement learning, open games and ecosystems.
Oli, any summary here?
Okay.
Okay.
So as also indicated in the first sentence,
there was a close relationship between active inference,
markup decision problems and reinforcement learning as explored numerous times before
in many papers.
But the standard algorithm for gaining an optimality for policy selection
is usually called backward induction in reinforcement learning or AKA as dynamic programming.
So namely backward induction is structured according to a similar bidirectional pattern
or the optic pattern to that both Bayesian inference and reverse differentiation
that MDPs themselves fit into the associated general framework of open games.
So in the informal active inference approach to MDPs,
the system in question counterfactually evaluates policies using a backward induction-like process,
accumulating free energies in order to score them.
Now in this process,
it is this process that results in the prior
that we're all familiar with,
an active inference context,
which is then updated by the agent's inference process.
But future work will need to untangle this matter of interrelated bidirectional process.
In other words,
how we can explicitly determine in what way those kinds of processes,
although being quite in a quite different,
having with quite,
I mean,
opposite directionality can be unified into a unified framework.
So we hope that having done so,
we will show how the whole picture emerges
and how it relates to the developing geometric or diegetic framework
in categorical cybernetics,
possibly involving the further development of our notion of cilia.
Great.
Continuing on with reinforcement learning,
open games,
and ecosystems,
since the free energy principle underlying active inference
asserts a certain informal universality,
we might also hope that the satisfactory development of compositional active inference
might exhibit a universal property,
that any other doctrine of cybernetic systems
factors uniquely through it.
There's some discussion of multi-agent systems
and their implied global search.
Casting this account into the emerging framework of compositional active inference
will point towards a bridge
to multi-agent reinforcement learning.
The resulting general account of multi-agent intelligence
will encompass both reinforcement learning and active inference,
allowing us to understand their relative strengths and difference.
We hope that one distal outcome of the work
will be a new and beneficial understanding of corporate activity,
sometimes called organizational cybernetics,
or meta-governance.
We should expect any framework resulting from this work
to capture existing models of collective active inference,
such as recent work on spin glasses or ant colonies.
Any other thoughts on this?
Yes, Dean.
I know that this is my biases, literally on the surface,
but I believe that the idea of open games
and opend, O-P-E-N-E-D, ecosystems,
is a future path that a lot of formalized and structured learning
is going to take.
It's the work that I did essentially for 10 years.
And so I think that everything that you're seeing here
may become a new model that can be optioned into
in terms of how you would want to structure your learning.
So I think this is really important stuff.
How you'd like to structure your learning and how you'd like to learn structure.
Exactly.
7.3. The mathematics of life.
We move on to consider the relationships between compositional active inference
and the contemporary mathematics of life.
We hope that compositional active inference may supply part of the story of a modern theory
of autopoiesis, the ability for life to recreate itself.
So just some brief notes on topics that are near and dear to us
as we get close to the end.
7.3.1, Bayesian mechanics and the free energy principle.
Recently, it has been suggested in various venues,
Citation 53 and 54,
Carl Fristen, 2019, a free energy principle for a particular physics,
and 54,
Parr, DaCosta, and Fristen,
Markov blankets information geometry and stochastic thermodynamics.
That the free energy framework provides a universal way to understand the behavior of adaptive systems.
Bayesian mechanics promises to build upon the nascent understanding
of random dynamics via inference,
245,
245,
Dalton's activity,
towards the geometry and analysis for Bayesian mechanics,
and Ramsted et al.
on Bayesian mechanics, a physics of and by beliefs.
Also check out livestream number 49.
To supply a new theory of mechanics for statistical systems,
the present formulation of Bayesian mechanics is constructed using mathematical tools from physics,
but not yet
the kinds of compositional tools promoted in this thesis.
We expect that developments along the lines sketched here will unify the ongoing developments of Bayesian mechanics,
with the new synthetic understanding of mathematical physics,
by casting all dynamics as abstract inference.
We should also expect this line of inquiry to begin to quantify the persistence of things
and imbue much of physics with an elan vital,
with a vital energy.
any thoughts on this?

Well, I was just gonna say, I think that section, there's a, you've already talked about the importance of ad, adjunction,
and I, this section literally makes that very, very clear.
I think that the relation and the translation are kind of the on and through of this,
this part of where the Bayesian mechanics and the free energy principle help us understand that there's a statistical game that's also strategic.
So, and again, I'll be interested to talk to Toby about that.
Great.
Carrying on with mathematics life 732, bio, bio semiotics.
Ali, want to give any summary or thoughts on bio semiotics?
Sure.
So, um, the emerging bio semiotic
reconceptualization of life explicitly acknowledges the importance and universality of, uh,
uh, communication and context proposing that in, uh,
uh, in any, uh, such situation, the interpreting system, uh, necessarily has an internal representation, uh, of the external world, uh, uh, so to speak, its own belt, uh, which is updated by interpreting incoming signals.
Uh, we can, in principle reconstruct the external world by understanding it as that which a collection of systems agrees about.
Perhaps then the shared universe, as determined Topos theoretically, of a fusion of active inference agents is a good model of this semi-sphere.
It seems, therefore, that mathematics resulting from our work on internal universes and their interactions, and more broadly, many of the formal ingredients of compositional active inference is well aligned with the informal structures of bio semiotics.
And so, uh, and so it may be desirable to re-express a bio semiotics accordingly.
In doing so, perhaps the mathematics of a modern Bayesian subjectivist metaphysics will be found.
For instance, by expressing communication and its phenomenology as a geometric morphism, a generalized base change between agents, internal universes.
Uh, and, uh, and, uh, it might, uh, be worth mentioning here, uh, the work of people like, uh, Terence Deacon, and, uh, also,
Karen Broad's agential realism because I mean in Terence Deacon's work and particularly in his book
called Incomplete Nature he provides a kind of nested hierarchy of how various kinds of
information as provided to biological organisms are structured in a nested hierarchical way
that would allow the agent to distinguish the purely informational data as opposed to the semantic
data that is in the innermost level of the nested hierarchy and also Karen Broad's agential realism
provides this notion of intra-action which allow the agent or the system of interest to co-constitute
itself via the very interaction with the environment so it's not just pure interaction between the
system and its environment but rather both the agent and the environment co-constitute
themselves through the intra-action so it might be worth exploring some of these ideas with Toby as well.
Dean, anything to add on this one?
No, I think Ali summed it up perfectly.
All right, and the final section, fundamental theory. Future work connected to this thesis
need not only be an application. A number of purely theoretical questions raise themselves too.
So for people who we could already hear in the live chat, in the YouTube comments, complaining that
this was too practical, too application-oriented, don't worry. There's also some theoretical questions
that raise themselves. So first, geometric methods for structured belief updating.
The mathematics of belief is in large part about replacing definite points with fuzzier distributions
over them. In fact, this PDF copy error with a fuzzy interpretive system allows the word to be read
by a human. In dependent type theory, we replace points with terms. Non-dependent terms are exactly points.
So a type theory with belief should somehow encompass fuzzy terms. We might well want to express beliefs
about things whose identity we are not quite sure. 742 Dynamics. Chapter 5 supplies the beginnings of a
compositional co-algebraic theory for open stochastic and random dynamical systems in general time.
And we hope that this theory could provide a home for a modern account of non-equilibrium systems.
Home, home on the state space.
And 743 Computation. A new understanding of computation may follow the semiotic understanding
of information processing that we propose above. Perhaps we could say more precisely that computation
is the dynamics of semiosis? The time is right for such a reconceptualization.
As human-made systems increasingly move away from von Neumann architectures towards more
biosimilar ones, such as memristors, optical processors, neuromorphic technology, graph processors,
or even many core and mesh-based evolutions of classical processors.
So some absolutely fantastic theoretical avenues to pursue. Any of you want to comment on some of
these avenues? Dean, please.
In the Dynamics section, there's a really, really interesting, again, more confirmation bias
in my world. He says here, Chapter 5 supplies the beginnings of a compositional co-algebraic
theory for open stochastic and random dynamical systems in general time.
Me being a time guy, that's cool. And we hope that this theory could provide a home for a modern
account of non-equilibrium systems with the category polynomial functors supplying a satisfactory
account of these systems and then I'm going to slow down because this is the part that I really
like interfaces in brackets i.e the boundaries across which information flows along and in the
word along there's the word on in the middle which they compose and through which they interact and
me being an on and through it being the same thing this was fantastic confirmation of that
in a dynamic sense and Ali
yes and also again I think some of the work done by Bob Koch and his colleagues regarding the
Bayesian quantum inference and especially I mean proposing a kind of string diagrams in the sense of
I mean using category theory to explore the whole theory of the quantum Bayesian inference
I believe it maps onto this sense of dynamics as provided by Toby in the final pages of his
dissertation in the case that in the Bayesian quantum inference it is also a question of how to provide
the exact time evolution of each state or each agent not strictly in a linear sense but both in linear and
in sorry in the predictive and also the retroactive sense in other words by taking into account the whole
arrow of time not just a particular instant or particular moment of it so in this in the sense I think the discussion of non-equilibrium systems which is still an under explored area of physics can by using category theory can help to unify or at least make connections between these kinds of predictive models and the
models as used in classical models as used in classical physics and also some of the retroactive models as recently proposed in quantum Bayesian theory
great and so we couldn't escape without showing at least a little bit of a hint of what realistically much of the dissertation looks like
so next time we're going to jump into the thick of it these kinds of equations and diagrams are what you're going to find when you unpack the dissertation and of course there's so much to add and we did so much work on just scratching the surface of what these diagrams are and how they actually convey formality in category theory and it's going to be great to work and talk about
and talk together on them and talk together on them and with Toby
where does that leave us fellows Dean with the pre-penultimate thought and then Ali
well I think that there's going to be a big shift from the this this today's live stream which
um
um
tries to be gentle on on us but also anybody who's really curious as to where this goes next I think it's going to get a it's going to get a lot more um
it's going to be a lot more sophisticated and there's going to be a little bit more um work to do but I think I think at least we've we've started down a path that it hopefully we've peaked your curiosity
we've peaked your curiosity as the last question says what are you still curious about I think there's I think there's a lot coming up that um should be pretty good for those that want to really get dig dig now into the real formalisms and the real structure of this
um

uh
well again at the end of our six month uh joyful right through this dissertation uh I believe uh at least uh from from a personal point of view uh I truly learned a lot and uh it piqued my interest in lots of domains and areas of the
which I didn't know I had interest in them before so I I think it's a really um good mark of an influential work be it a dissertation or a book or paper or research to make this
a good mark of an influential work, be it a dissertation or a book or paper, any other kinds of academic publication, to pique people's mind to explore in even unexplored, somewhat unexplored areas and try to connect the dots in a very,
I mean, in particular in the category theory sense, in a very rigorous, well-typed and
even insightful ways and maybe some exciting developments and results can emerge from these kinds of dot connections.
Thank you both for this excellent stream. I have so much gratitude for the whole category theory team, not just the sheaves around Toby that enable and scaffold this work, but also the way that we were able to collaborate over the last months.
And in the bigger picture, maybe the end of a chapter. We just finished chapter one, or chapter zero. And that's really what the dot zero is. So we were in the dot double O.
Now we are bringing the dot zero to a closure soon. We're going to jump into the dot one and the dot two with Toby. And even that in some other nested scale is a double O or a dot zero. So thank you again, Ali and Dean et al. Till next time.
Thank you.
Thank you.

## fzFDvJhrn0U

Hello and welcome. It's June 7th, 2023. We're in ACTIMF livestream 54.1 discussing
mathematical foundations for a compositional account of the Bayesian brain. So, welcome to
the ACTIMF Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning,
and practicing applied active inference. This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please
provide feedback so we can improve our work. All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome,
and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams. To learn more about livestreams
and other projects, head over to activeinference.org. And we're here today in ACTIMF stream 54.1.
We are in our first discussion with the author of the work Mathematical Foundations for a
Compositional Account of the Bayesian Brain. Today in 54.1, we're going to say hello, then be on with it
and see where it all goes together. So, we'll begin with introductions. I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in
California. Six months ago, I was quite unfamiliar with category theory and have had quite a fun
journey with Ali and Dean and I guess Toby via Stigmurgic Proxy. So, really looking forward to
this discussion and I'll pass to Dean and then Ali. Thanks, Daniel. I'm Dean. I'm here in Calgary.
My goal in joining this group was to take the idea, as we got in the one of the previous slides,
the idea of practicing applied active inference. I see the potential through category theory of making
that even more accessible, more possible. And so, I'm really excited to have the author with us today and
maybe have a look at what that means. I'll pass it over to Ali.
Hello, I'm Ali. I'm an independent researcher from your run.
I'm a professor from your run. And as I said in Datz Zero, I'm quite excited to be here to discuss
this magnificent dissertation with its author. And well, I mean, in the past several months, we did our
best to understand and dissect it as best as we could. But obviously, we have many, many questions
that I'm looking forward to discuss them with.
So, Toby, thanks again for joining. Please lead us off with just any introduction and background
that's going to set the stage, maybe how the work came to be. And that would be great. So, thanks again.
For sure. Yes. Great. No, well, thanks, Dan, and all of you guys for hosting me and for having the
courage to read my thesis, which, as you noticed, it's a kind of strange mix of things. It's kind of
both the research work. And as I noticed, what are you saying in the previous stream,
it's at this kind of frontier of knowledge? And of course, it needs to be. But I also, because this
language is so unfamiliar to people, and because I think it will prove to be very useful across the
sciences, I really wanted to make it kind of legible to people. So, you know, for people to read the
thesis, but also like my research, and kind of understand what I was saying, effectively,
how it came about was, yeah, I was supposed to be studying interactions between frontal cortex and
hippocampal circuits in the brain. And at the sort of time of trying to get started with that,
obviously, I was kind of interested in the free energy principle and active inference and all of that.
But I found that there was a lot of kind of, you know, as I said in the thesis, and as you talked
about in the previous stream, and probably in discussions before that as well, there's a lot of
kind of, you know, each research group has its own language. And these different groups, you know, they
don't necessarily talk to each other in a way that is kind of an efficient kind of communication. Each
group of people is interested in their own thing. And one of the things I like about
the free energy principle and about active inference is that it's this nice sort of general framework for
adaptive systems. And so it is in itself a good place to kind of situate an understanding of systems
like the brain and other adaptive systems. But of course, it doesn't, you know, immediately resolve this
problem of, well, the problem that was for me a kind of confusion about like, what's going on in
these circuits? And how should I understand what one person says in relationship to what another person
says about, you know, this bit of the brain or this interaction. And so, in the process of kind of trying
to understand what was going on there, and to resolve in part, the confusion I had about predictive
coding itself, and the complexities of all these models I was encountering, I kind of resolved to
replace that confusion with another kind of confusion, which is, you know, what is all this crazy category
theory stuff? And, you know, so you might think, okay, well, that's mad, what's the point of that,
you've just made everybody's life a lot harder. It's kind of like that XKCD comic, where you've got all
of these different standards, and, you know, we decide to like, come together and, and make a new
standard. And in fact, this is happening, I think, and like, I don't know what it was in,
in cellular biology, maybe I had John Byers talking about this yesterday, but, you know, they have lots
of different standards for writing down diagrams, but describing like interacting, like biological
processes, and the kind of scientific community in that area has set up a kind of mediating body to
kind of try to, you know, form, like bring together all of these diagram languages. But they weren't
really able to do so. So they still, they instead of just coming up with one new standard, they came
up with three new standards to try to unify these things. And the trouble, you know, I had or have with
these different languages, or different sort of syntaxes for talking about scientific things is that
not only are they all different, but they're kind of all ad hoc. And so the reason why I feel that there's
promise in replacing this confusion of this, of so many different ideas, I mean, of girls, it's great
to have this kind of ecosystem of ideas about how these complicated systems work. But it's still very
ad hoc and confusing. And so instead of just coming up with a new ad hoc and confusing way of understanding
these things, I was kind of hoping to use a language which is maybe kind of universal in some
sense, like it's really about, or it's really capturing like how we think, and maybe also like
how the world is actually, you know, built up. But in particular, it seems to capture something of how
we think. And so, you know, the fundamental theorem of category theory says that you shall know a concept
by the company it keeps to adapt the kind of that that sort of motto of, I think, birth from
linguistics, that you should know a word by the company it keeps. That's really like at the heart
of how we come to understand things in the world. And I think the maths that is category theory captures
that very nicely and very precisely, and at the same time enforces a kind of discipline. And so I know it
is quite like hard going reading this kind of research work, this kind of introduction to all this new
stuff. But, you know, in part that's because, you know, when you're being disciplined is hard and
doing things very formally precisely does require a bit of, well, you know, a lot of dedication.
But that isn't to say that it's not worth it, or that these ideas even used a bit informally
somewhere down the line might not be useful, at least to sort of frame the way we think about things.
So I hope to be, you know, some use in helping not only sort of change the confusions that we have,
but also like modulate them in a kind of way that will be sort of useful for people.
Awesome. Great starting place. Ali or Dean, where can we begin? How can we replace some of our
prior confusions with a new and different confusion?
Ali, want to go first?
Ali, can I ask a quick question to Toby? Toby, when you were talking about when you actually saw
all of these standards, so you know, you were the sort of what you were the, you were the hub of all
of these standards you saw sort of all around you. Can you maybe speak to the idea of what you perceived,
or what you sensed was the stabilizing function of those standards, but also the searching function?
Because of course, you had gone out and realized there were all of these different standards at play.
I remember it in a previous professional life of mine, having to have chief financial officers and their
math, sit at the table with engineers and their math, and them talking right past one another,
and making no sense to each other. And I had to be kind of the medium between them, so that their math
would actually get a little bit sticky. And they'd be actually able to understand and interpret one
another. In your experience with this, how did that play out the both the stabilization through the
standards and the search? Well, I guess I should begin by saying that I'm, this is still, this is
still like ongoing, and nor am I an expert in all of these different standards. But the thing that I
kind of at least noticed, right, that was that people use languages like Bayesian inference or
reinforcement learning, or dynamical systems to talk about certain bits of the brain that I was interested
in. And they kind of just plug all these ideas together. And it's sometimes, and it's fine. So
you want to write a paper, and it's about a particular phenomenon. And it's great, you maybe come up with
some nice model, and you, you know, you put people in MRI scanners, and that the quantities in the, you
know, in the sort of bold signal correspond to quantities in your model. And that's, that's great,
it says that maybe this bit of the brain is doing that. I mean, we can argue about MRI at some other
time, but it doesn't really tell you about how that little model you've got interacts with the rest of
the brain or the rest of the world. And so if you care about like this whole complicated thing, you want
to know how do these parts actually talk to each other. And so I was just fortunate at this kind of
beginning of this, in some sense, to be in the right place, the right time. So I kind of knew there
were these different, you know, ingredients all being put into these different models. And, you know,
only, you know, I'm only sort of familiar with some of them, but I could still see that they had sort of
similar structure. And that was in part because I've been going to, you know, some applied category
theory meetings or talks and seen that say economic games, which are very closely related to
reinforcement learning, have this kind of bi-directional structure where an agent tries to
sort of effectively, in some sense, choose, they make an observation and they sort of do this kind of
forward projecting kind of thing of choosing an action at the same time as saying, okay, well,
if supposing I take this action, like what would the payoff be? And that's this kind of backwards
facing thing. And then you can sort of chain that process and think, well, if I do this in multiple
stages, like how does the utility I get at the end of this, you know, multi-stage process, like feed
back to the utility I'm going to get having taken just one step right now. And that's kind of,
that's a similar sort of bi-directional thing to what happens in active, or like in, well,
in predictive coding specifically, where like a little circuit is saying, okay, well, I need,
given the, my like high level beliefs about what's causing this like sensory data, I need to sort of
retrofit the actual sensory data to kind of come up with a new belief about what those causes are.
And so that seemed to me to have the same kind of structure. A similar thing also happens in
backprop in machine learning where you have, say, some neural network and it kind of, you know,
you feed forward some information through the network and it say does a classification.
And then you have some, some training system which says, okay, well, actually you have this error and
then you need to sort of back propagate that to update, you know, say some part of the model on the
basis of that. And so that also has this kind of bi-directional structure. And it just was fortunate
that at this time people were talking, talking a lot about these kind of bi-directional processes.
And, you know, so I was thinking about these things at the same time I was kind of thinking about,
you know, the application of Bayesian inference. And I kind of noticed that, you know, they had the
same structure and I kind of wanted to figure out what was going on there. Like really sort of pin down
what, what it was that made like this kind of predictive coding circuit have this kind of
shape in some sense, because as I think you've also talked about, and I kind of mentioned a few
minutes ago that, you know, individual predictive coding circuit isn't an isolated system, right? It's
part of like this hierarchical thing. And so you have one little circuit connected to another circuit.
And that whole conglomeration of circuitry is supposed to do something quite grand, but at the
same time, it's made of smaller parts. And I think that the main, one of the major confusions I had at
the beginning was, okay, so you have this like big generative model with lots and lots of factors,
and you go through it and you try to derive like the differential equations that give you the sort
of predictive coding dynamics by saying, okay, well, you know, we're going to minimize the free energy.
And you have this complicated thing with lots of sums in it. And it seems like very intimidating to try
to like come up with that differential equation, even though actually, when you sort of look at this,
the kind of the look at the process that you're doing is quite kind of mechanical because effectively
you're doing the same transformation to each factor of this model. And so that also hinted that there
was this kind of compositionality thing going on in these systems. Okay, you not only do you see that
these kind of this bit of the brain is has this kind of modularity, but you also get a sense of that
modularity in that derivation you're doing. And so what I wanted to do was to capture both of these
things. One is the kind of shape of the circuitry and the other is like how to somehow save the effort
of having to kind of re-derive everything for each different case. And that kind of formalization of
this process corresponds to a kind of functoriality you get when effectively the functoriality means you
preserve compositional structure. And so what you want to do is you want to say, okay, well, what's the
compositional structure of the thing that the functor starts with, like the process starts with, and
that's the compositional structure of Bayesian inference itself. And then you want to say, okay,
well, what's the compositional structure of the kind of dynamical systems, which is the thing you're trying
to get to, and how do you map from one to the other in a way that preserves that structure. And so that's
kind of what I was doing in this thesis is just saying, okay, well, what are the structures I need and how do I
relate to them? And, you know, it turned out that there were a lot of details that I had to write
them all down. But the kind of basic idea, I hope, is quite simple. It's just trying to say, what are
those kind of simple, like the kind of individual components, like the kind of Lego blocks, and how do
they like connect together? And how can I sort of, you know, relate this, the kind of Lego blocks of one
thing with the Lego blocks of another in a way that's kind of preserves the shapes. And so, yeah,
it's kind of this kind of mammoth thing. But the kind of fundamental idea is quite simple. And I think
it's kind of like how when, if you're like programming a computer, you can write in a high-level language,
or you can write in like low-level language. And if you wanted to, you could write in assembly language.
And category theory is like a language where you start with the kind of assembly language,
and you build up a high-level language within the language itself, in some sense. And so,
if you really want to start with, at the very beginning, like I did, with the definition of
category, and then build up to this big thing, you have to make a lot of steps. Because like, assembly
language is really simple. And it's, you know, it's just like single instructions that your
processor does. And so getting all the way to something like Zoom that can do a video call is
quite complicated. And so people don't, they start with the high-level language. But the thing that
people strive for in designing high-level languages is to set them up in such a way that they're sort of,
that the abstractions are quite nice or sort of modular. And so that's what I'm trying to do with using
category theory is to kind of find abstractions that are modular in a similar kind of way. And I know
on the previous call, Dan, you mentioned the kind of analogy between like, typing in this category
theoretic sense, and in the programming sense, and they're quite similar. The category theory sense is
kind of a much sort of more general, bigger idea, it has a lot, it sort of encompasses all kinds of
things. But you could imagine somewhere down the line, having a programming language, and that, you
know, people are trying to build these things, but having a programming language where you could express
anything you could in, you know, category theory, and, you know, I, to be honest, find it quite intense,
and quite sometimes mechanical and tedious, I had to prove that certain categorical structure
satisfies the coherence conditions that it has to satisfy, like, you know, lacks associativity or
monoidality or something like this. There are a lot of like, diagrams, you have to check commute or
something, and much of the time, that checking is quite tedious. And someday, I hope that we'll have
tools that we can say, okay, well, I'm going to spell out what my structure is. And the tool will just
check that it satisfies all the axioms. And so, you know, I know you guys have to wade through a lot of
that stuff in the thesis, but it's kind of manually necessary right now, but in the future, it might not
be. And then we can use this high level language in a much more kind of liberal way. I hope that'd be
great. Sorry, I've been watching all for ages. So I'll stop there.
Awesome. Great. I'll go to a question in the chat. Mark wrote, applied category theory and active
inference have tremendous promise. I confess I have not yet read this dissertation. It would be helpful
to describe a specific engineering application for the work. So what do you see as proximate and
and or distal engineering applications here?
So one of the things that I hope could be produced soon as an engineering application is a sort of
general modeling framework for building kind of complicated active inference systems that might
include lots of parts, lots of agents, kind of like
something that my colleague Jules Hedges wants in cybernetics more generally, something like
a kind of programming language maybe that incorporates
all of these kind of strange cybernetic structures I mentioned earlier, like reinforcement learning and
like back propping machine learning and Bayesian inference, they all have this kind of
bi-directionality. And so you should be able to have this kind of modeling environment which allows you
to incorporate all of these things in a kind of nice way. But I think before we get something quite as
grand as a whole new sort of modeling environment, I think just having tools to help us build
you know, approximate and active inference systems that are really nicely compositional is one thing that I
you know, hope to come out of this. To be honest, I don't know very well what the general tooling is like
for this kind of thing right now. I know that there's SBM, I know that there's like
PyMDP for certain kinds of problems, but I don't know how sort of general they are.
Another thing that you would get if you have this kind of toolkit, because of the kind of modularity of
category theory is you should be able to plug it into other things that exist already. So one of the
things that's particularly of interest to me at the moment is kind of multi-agent systems
and sort of building, trying to understand how we could build something like or simulate things like
you know, something like a corporation or some kind of, you know, some kind of society structure where
you've got lots of active inference agents coming together to pursue a sort of common shared goal.
How can you kind of effectively distribute that goal sharing across systems? They could be like little
robotic systems say or something like that or agent or like, I don't know if it's precisely, I'm kind of
like an abstract thinker. But yeah, I think like being able to kind of control or like modulate the performance of these kind of
distributed multi-agent like active imprint systems might be quite a cool thing to be able to build.
So that's kind of like, I can maybe
flavor of the kind of thing that this tooling gives you.
I suppose for me, this particular work was really about
trying to encourage people to use this language to understand things more clearly.
So yeah, there's a lot of stuff that I hope we can understand. Well, at least I can understand more clearly.
Awesome. Thank you. Ali?
Thank you. Yes. So in this paper by Krzysztof Wojtovich,
are there category theoretical explanations of physical phenomena?
He argues that category theory by itself does not and cannot provide any mathematical explanations for
physical phenomena. So the idea here is that category theory is merely a meta theory to kind of
do a kind of bookkeeping or householding of the physical theories and it's not a tool to construct
the mathematical theory of physical phenomena itself.
I'm not sure I agree with this argument entirely because
in one sense, some of the most profound
aha moments in the history of science obviously results from looking at
pre-existing theory or a model from a novel angle. And I believe category theory can provide such
such novel perspectives even when looking at some established and pre-existing models of theories.
So what do you... I'm curious to know your opinion about this. So do you think category theory
can actually provide mathematical explanations for... I mean either in cognitive science, neuroscience or
or even other areas, other scientific disciplines as well?
I think it's a it's a subtle question. Right now it's probably largely the case that the role of category
theory is kind of this... I'm not... I think it's like like bookkeeping but like clarification too.
Bookkeeping if you think of it in a very general way of like trying to account for the things you're thinking about very precisely
and not sort of miss details like if you your books don't balance you kind of miss some payment or some debt.
I think that's quite a nice analogy. But I think one of the goals of
quite a lot of people or not maybe I mean a fair chunk of the community, particularly that which comes
from a sort of more abstract mathematical side of category theory, one of their goals is to try to recast
a lot of how we think in kind of purely categorical language. So one of the things that category theory
allows us to do is to kind of formalize in some sense patterns that crop up all over the place
using the notion of universal construction. And the thing about universal constructions is that
you have like some little pattern and if you know that you can instantiate that pattern in your category
that you have like some object which kind of captures the essence of that pattern. And you don't need to say
be able to kind of write down all of the specifics of that object sort of a priori because the kind of
universality gives you a recipe for constructing it. It gives you it in some sort of unique way. And so
you know that if you have this universality you can always you can always like access this object. And
yeah so I'm talking very generally but because of that one thing that people try to do is to try to say
okay well what it you know we've got these things that we're interested in in say physics like you know
the principle of least action or like the nature of space time or something like that.
Can we express those things as kind of universal constructions? Or for instance in a completely
different realm like we may have some process which is something we're interested in on the computer
like the migration of data in databases. Can we write that down in a way that doesn't have any kind
of ad hoc ingredients? It only is built from universal constructions. These are things that we can just
write down kind of abstract sort of axioms in the language of category theory and that kind of gives us
the process or the structure that we want. This kind of line of work is often called like synthetic
something like synthetic you know probability theory or synthetic physics or synthetic topology or
something like that. And it means you sort of start from these kinds of very high level categorical ideas
and then you sort of end up with a characterization of the essence of the thing you're interested in.
In physics a kind of a simple example of this which I supply in a kind of relatively feeble effort
to say that it's not true that category theory doesn't give you a characterization of things in
physics. So there is a category of say topological spaces and the morphisms between them are continuous functions.
And there's a morphism a category rather of sets and the morphism between the sets are functions.
And of course underlying every continuous function is a plane function. And so there is a functor from
the category of topological spaces to the category of sets which just forgets
the topological structure of the spaces because every topological space has an underlying set of points.
So you have this forgetful functor. And this forgetful functor has two adjoints. And one of the things
the category theory teaches you is that adjunctions give you this universality. So adjoint functors are characterized
uniquely by their kind of satisfaction of this adjunction property.
So these two adjoints to this forgetful functor, one gives you what are called discrete spaces.
So if you take a set you can turn it into a topological space by thinking of all the points
as little islands in this space. So there's no like connectivity between them.
And that's called a kind of discrete space on that set. And the other adjoint functor
gives you what's called the indiscreet or sometimes co-discreet space where all of the points are sort
of collected into one big like island. So they're also connected together. So it's like a sort of fully
connected graph.
And of course, that's very different from the discrete space. And it's different from like the
space time or the space that you live in, which has a particular kind of connectivity, like you can't
walk through walls. And so, you know, people try to use these things, particularly use adjunctions to
characterize things like properties of spaces. Another thing that comes out of a jointness,
is something that I can let you read about later, because it'll take me the rest of the talk to try to
explain. But you might be familiar from logic that you have these quantifiers, you have existential and
universal quantifiers. And you can do things with these quantifiers, like you can say, you can sort of
compose them together. So you get things like for all x there exists, for y is such that this.
And you can think sometimes of these composites, or these compositions of quantifiers,
as like maybe like modal operators, like you can sort of decompose necessity and possibility in terms of
the compositions of logical quantifiers. But the kind of weird thing about quantifiers is that they
too arise out of an adjunction. It's kind of like they are left and right adjoints to substitution. So
if you have a proposition, you can like substitute a term into it. And the adjunction, the adjoint
punctures to substitution give you the quantifiers. And you can sort of take this another step. And then you
can think about like composing these adjoint punctures, and those give you the modal operators.
And so that's something that comes just out of category theory, but is really sort of fundamental
in sort of logic. And you know, we might think there's a kind of close relationship between physics
and computation or physics and logic. Or, you know, physics and information and information and
computation and logic. So I think it's not quite true that there's nothing to be gained from
thinking about kind of traditional mathematical things, or traditional physical things using category
theory. In some sense, they, you know, doing that really clarifies the essence of them.
Because it tells you what their kind of universal properties are, and you can then like instantiate
those things in different contexts. So one of the things that you could do is start to think about
these kind of logical structures in different contexts. And that's kind of like what type theory
is all about. And you could use it to think about the logic of like dynamical systems. Or you could use
it to try to characterize, say, like the universal property even of the free energy principle. And that's
something I like to think about sometimes. Like, how can we think about active inference systems as like
trying to achieve their goals? Is that is that related to these adjunctions that, you know, come up in sort
of foundations of logic when you look at them categorically? And if it is, then that's quite
profound, because it tells you that, you know, maybe the FEP does have this kind of universality that
people want to claim it does. So I think, you know, it is true that right now, because it's quite early days,
category theory is kind of mostly used for bookkeeping. But I guess that might be because
there's quite a lot of bookkeeping to do before we can make the most of this kind of move,
make the most of using these kind of universal structures. And maybe one day further in the future,
where people are more familiar with this kind of language, and we have this big library of categorical
tools. And yeah, our computer program, a computer sort of modeling environments and programming
languages, know how to like import stuff from this category just really easily. And so you don't have
to do all this kind of tedious manual stuff, maybe like in the future, in that future, it'll be much more
common just to say, Okay, well, we're going to start to model things using these universal properties,
you know, off the bat, rather than trying to sort of retrofit them.
Okay, awesome. Thank you, Toby. Ali?
Ah, yes, thank you so much for your detailed answer. And again, I have a follow up question to that. So
there's this view in philosophy of science that views scientific theories as not as a kind of monolithic,
I mean, phenomena or model, but rather, any given scientific theory can be viewed as a population of
models. So some of those models are more fundamental than the others. And, or in terms of Manuel de Landa,
there are virtual and actual parts of each of any given scientific model. So the idea here is that
the actual parts of scientific models try to capture the context dependent behavior of phenomena or any
physical system. But on the other hand, the virtual or more fundamental part of scientific models or
theories try to somehow capture its more abstract and abstract model of the phenomena in terms of its
topological invariance. So do you think category theory can provide a rigorous language to somehow unify
this view of science? I mean, and to see how exactly those context dependent part of scientific theories fit,
or at least can be compatible with the context independent part of scientific theories or the virtual part?
Because, you see, in the context dependent or actual models, scientists usually try to refine their models to fit the data
as close as possible, or at least approximately close enough to be useful. But for the more fundamental parts, comprising
principles, axioms and so on, they only try to capture the topological terrain or the, I mean, the topological
invariance of the models and how models can be compared in terms of their singularities and topological shapes.
Yeah, that does sound very familiar. I don't know this kind of work or idea in any, you know, I haven't come across this before, but it does sound something that be quite amenable. And in fact, you know, there seems to be, at least in my mind, some alignment between this kind of sense of virtual that you're talking about, and this kind of universality that I was talking about.
So you could think of, you know, a category of models of particular kinds as being like inhabited by all of those things which satisfy these invariants, and then you have different, you know, individual instances of these things, which would be like the objects of the category, and then the differences between them are the, you know, the morphisms.
The thing about morphisms in the category is that often they are the things which preserve the structure. In other bits of mathematics, they're called homomorphisms, and that's where the word morphism comes from.
And so you could think of those as, you know, ways of comparing the models or translating the models from one to the other, but preserving those invariants, you know, and so that seems to me to capture some of the idea that you were sketching.
I guess one thing which may or may not be useful, depending on how you look at it, the category theory gives you is it's obviously kind of a lot more general.
And so it allows you to talk about invariants of kinds that, you know, more than just, excuse me, more than just topological.
In some sense, like functoriality is a kind of, in like, it kind of captures the kind of invariance as well as saying, okay, well, we preserve this structure.
Each, I mean, just one way of like looking at a topological space is to take its, it's what's called its nerve.
And so that, like, that takes a topological space and turns it into a category.
And you could sort of think of the morphisms in that category as like the sort of like the paths in that space or ways to sort of get from one sort of part of the space to another.
And then, you know, morphisms, functus between topological spaces considered in categories like that.
They really are just things that preserve those topological structures.
And so, so you like this, this language kind of seems to encompass the kinds of things you're saying.
Yeah, yeah, it would be nice.
Yeah, I would love somebody to make that connection.
Oh, I'll just follow up on this.
And then Dean, it's a, it's a related comment from Roman in the chat.
Roman wrote, quoted you in this fractal quote streaming,
thinking about the FEP through category theory and relation to goals maybe allows to prove that FEP has the universality that people claim it has.
And Roman asks, didn't Maxwell Ramsted and Dalton Soctiva Devel already kind of prove this in the Bayesian mechanics, physics of and by belief work?
So you're talking about the role of generalization.
What do we gain with the category theorification of FEP beyond, for example, the generalizations that we've seen in Bayesian mechanics and G theory over the last year?
Yeah, that's a great question.
I think Maxwell and Dalton are doing a great job formalizing the ideas of Bayesian mechanics.
But as far as I'm aware, the job isn't done yet.
And so I haven't yet seen, you know, I mean, I have a particular aesthetic, right?
And I would like, I would like to see a really clear recipe of a way to take, of like, on the one hand, some like, or like some machine that takes in, that has like a particular shape, that is like input shape.
And it takes in, like, a dynamical system of a particular kind.
And it gives me back, like, the specification of an inference problem for that dynamical system is solving.
I think that's what Bayesian mechanics is saying.
It's saying, okay, well, if we have a dynamical system that is somehow kind of, that you could sort of look at it and say it has a boundary, it's a Markov blanket, that you can write down its dynamics as if it were doing free energy minimization, that is solving some inference problem.
But there's a lot of, and I, so I think that statement is true for certain classes of dynamical systems, but it's not, I don't think the story has been made, like, like, the questions for me are like, what are the classes?
And what are their, what's the essence of those dynamical systems?
So if the result might depend on, like, specific technical criteria, which maybe you think, okay, well, like, that, that's kind of like a distraction from this kind of abstract principle, which we're trying to get at.
And so it would be nice to sort of know what the actual, like, essence is of the problem that allows us to do this translation.
And then, you know, there seems to me to be, like, questions of, I mean, other fairly technical questions, but questions about things like, well, what is this boundary thing?
Like, how long does it persist?
And what does it mean to separate a thing off and consider it as having a boundary?
Most of the treatments I've seen of this idea have not been done, have not been explained or expressed in a, in this compositional way.
And so they just assume you're given a system and a boundary, and then that's kind of it.
But, you know, boundaries come in all kinds of shapes.
Like, the boundaries of the cells in my body are kind of all, like, glued together in a particular way, and they form me, and I also have a boundary.
And so how do the kind of local inference problems that are being solved by those individual cells, given their gluing, amount to the kind of inference problem that my whole body is solving?
And I don't think an answer to that is, you know, is anywhere near given right now.
And yet, obviously, we're, you know, we look at systems out in the world, and they all seem to display this property of free energy minimization, or at least something that looks a lot like it.
And so it would be nice to be able to relate those, those kind of inference problems to one another.
So I think there's still a lot to be done.
Just because we've kind of made some first steps doesn't mean that we're all the way there.
Obviously, given my aesthetics, what I would love to see is this kind of abstract characterization of this universality.
And I think I, you know, I think there's a way of stating, or at least the structure of that universal property,
using this compositional active inference language, of which the thesis is a part.
But effectively, it seems to be something like this adjoint thing that I was talking about earlier.
So you, on the one hand, you have like a, something like a functor that takes statistical problems,
and gives you dynamical systems that kind of solve those inference problems.
And so that's a function from like, you know, statistical, you know, what I call statistical gains into dynamical systems of some kind.
But of course, you have lots of dynamical systems.
And so, you know, what this Bayesian mechanics idea seems to be saying is that you can go the other way as well.
And maybe this mapping in the other direction is also functorial.
And that would be a way of characterizing this kind of gluing together of dynamical systems, like I was talking about cells.
And ending up with maybe dynamical statistical games that also have this kind of gluing property.
But there's still a fair amount of work to be done, even to get like the basic framework to spell out that story precisely.
It's work that I'm trying to slowly get on with at the moment.
But I think, you know, the ingredients to doing this in the kind of generality that I would like this starting to become clear.
And so hopefully we get there.
But I don't think it's, I don't think it's sold yet.
Awesome.
Yes.
Just so cool to see all these paths weaving together.
Dean?
I think it's awesome, Toby, that you in this conversation have kind of anti-captured a jointness and common jointness.
Because I think that's a huge part of your work here and reading it.
So here's my question.
I think, and I would like you to maybe comment on this as though you were explaining it to a very curious 15-year-old.
So on the sort of most basic level, when I hear under sort of a common jointness principle, the word bookkeeping, I immediately wonder, okay, so what is the partner?
What's the thing that's being glued to?
And to use your metaphor.
And so I would glue it to taking receipts, essentially where you have a stabilization of a record under bookkeeping.
So I get that part.
And then the taking receipts is the stabilization of the change function, right?
So we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this kind of competition, we see this
of being a tool or does it get under this column directly adjacent as a as a rule like that's the
part where i think the adjointness could be really really helpful in terms of maybe helping people
see the applicability and not just the abstraction what's what's your thoughts on that so i mean i i
i yeah so i think um david spivak talks about category theory as being like a kind of accounting
system um or accounting systems plural for um mathematics and i i think he's kind of quite
right then so the the way i the way i see it is like um when you you know when you're keeping books
um particularly if you're sort of using like this double entry system you're trying to keep track of
the stuff that kind of flows into and out of your account uh your company or whatever it is
um without sort of missing some bits you see where everything goes and so that's how i think of this
kind of mathematical language you have this stuff um and it's kind of like some like abstract collection
of things some like maybe mathematical ideas and well a functor takes that stuff and does something
with it and turns it into some stuff of another kind um but it's like this kind of double entry idea
that you know when you take something out of here you have to put it in here and so you have to sort of
keep track of all the details at least all of the details that are relevant to those two to that float i
suppose and so when you have an injunction you have a way of going from one place to another and back again
without losing track of some stuff um it's like a little bit kind of like you're allowed to lose track
of some stuff but you you know the stuff you've lost track of because you don't care about it like
you know it like you know you might you might allow for some you know have some like buffer there but you
know how big your buffer is something like that so like a little bit like more precisely like in a
junction it's a way to map from one category to another and and back again in such a way that like
the the two mappings are kind of like like ideal approximations of the inverse of some of each other
and that you can sort of measure the difference between between them um they sort of like give you
it gives you like an isomorphism of between the two sets of morphisms of some kind and that that kind
of gives you this nice kind of structure preservation property this kind of bookkeeping property um
i don't i mean so i know that there there are people out there um who have used
um category theory to um model stock flow diagrams and so these are used in economics to measure you know
stock flows of stocks and things like that but they also use an epidemiology to model
you know the transmission of disease because that's also like um a flow of some stock you have people
moving around um and so i you know it would be nice to sort of bring this idea full circle and have
this mathematical language of bookkeeping actually applied to bookkeeping um but i don't i i haven't
i don't know how that would go just yet but but like you know if we think of if we think of economies and
corporations as as adaptive systems or if we somehow kind of translate from flows of money to like flows of information
that there does seem to be like an analogy between that kind of flow and the kind of flows that we think of
in active inference explicitly um and you know another thing yeah one of the things i like about category theory is it allows us to make these analogies in a precise way
and so maybe we can you know relate these two things quite clearly i mean i you know it's yet to be done but i would love to see it
awesome
dean smiles when his keywords are buzzed during a response
okay
we'll go to another great question in the chat from matt n
matt wrote can you provide some ideas about the next necessary steps or milestones for categorical theory
to be effectively utilized across research and in subsequent engineering applications
and i'll just kind of append to that what do you think at the individual team and organizational scale
what can we do what milestones exist to realize some of these engineering applications and implications that you brought up
right so i think the main thing
possibly unfortunately for you guys who spent a lot of time reading the details i wrote is to kind of have this community
developed to develop to a stage where the tools that i mentioned that allow us to kind of use
these category theoretic concepts fluently without having to know all of those like boring and complicated details
um to develop those to a stage where people are actually you know able to use them without being kind of like mathematicians or category theory domain experts
um so this is i think starting to happen i guess you know as a result of the kind of needs of the pandemic
people have developed these tools for epidemiology i mentioned this stock flows stuff
and i think you know you can probably there's like some i can't remember what it's called unfortunately now
um so in the julia programming language there's this great framework for use for kind of building
systems using category theory concepts um but of course this doesn't satisfy the property of not having to
be a category theory domain expert yet on top of that people have built using compositional ideas about dynamics
frameworks for you know building compositional dynamical systems and like compositional models for things like
epidemiology and and stuff like that and you know hopefully you will get there also with um you know
statistical modeling and active inference and all that stuff but what you know once once you've got that
kind of lower level library people can start to build like user interfaces on top of it and and that's
the thing that's starting to happen now with the stock flow stuff um and i think that people involved in that project
uh i mean they know that there's like one kind of like major like proprietary tool for doing this kind
of modeling which is used for you know it's used by lots of different organizations for instance it was
used by governments for modeling during the pandemic but it's not like it's not very collaborative it's it's not
compositional so if you like have this huge model it's very hard to like deal with like to modulate just some
small part of it um and so these people are like i say it's very impossible i can't remember all their
names um or the name of the software but they're building this tool which um allows you to build up
these models just using this interface but it's built out of this compositional stuff um and so it has a lot
of the nice properties that come out of it and of course you if you if you want you can sort of delve
under the hood and understand like actually how it works and connect it to all this other you know stuff
and maybe down the line when we've got really advanced tools that that will kind of be able to
be done for free and some nice user interface but i think you know so if if people want to make the most
of this you know they can sort of get involved with that kind of effort or at least they could sort of
get familiar with the kind of basic ideas of you know categorical modeling or compositional thinking as
i like to say these days um but i don't i also don't want to like prescribe to people and they
have to know what like a monad is and all that stuff because you know there are it is technical it has to
be technical because it's about technical stuff but i mean it's also trying to be ergonomic and
yeah if if that's your thing you can try to help make it more so
awesome dean
no i i i i i i'm waiting because there's a there's a part of the paper that the belief updating and the
fuzzy of distributions and stuff i'm gonna want to talk about that later but i'm i'm done for now
all right i'll go to a question submitted by jr also who created the syllabus so thanks again jr for
that amazing work so jr wrote um in compositional active inference from may 17 2021 toby said i'm with
valeria on this i think we need to seek ai alignment for the artificial intelligences that we already have
things like corporations and social systems and we should be concentrating on those right now could you
speak more about how you envision this kind of application this is especially interesting in
light of what we spoke about in the 54.0 regarding sensor fusion and consensus what might this mean for
corporations and social systems toby do you mean that uh this between humans and things kind of like
artificial intelligences or machines and artificial intelligences in the context of companies and
societies yeah that's a great question and i think you know jr's done a great job with the syllabus which
i also had a look at um yeah yeah i think uh it's a good it's a good it's a good like list of um material and
concepts to sort of get get to grips with um but as the yeah ai alignment it's a very vexed issue of course
um i know i mean i put this to people who are involved in the um ai safety community and some of them
say oh well we concentrate on machine intelligence rather than corporations because there's like no hope
for making corporations safe like it's too late they're already out there so we can't fix that which
is obviously a very sort of defeatist attitude but maybe it's right um to concentrate on a matter where
they think they can actually have an influence um but i do nonetheless still think that corporations
are like super intelligences we they've been made out of code but the code isn't a traditional computer
programming language it's the legal programming language that makes up their contracts but those
contracts sort of determine how they operate and are executed on a thing which is a bit like a
computer like the legal system um you know you go in a court it processes the contract and it
explains what the outcome is going to be it's a it's like a computer but it's it's like made up of people
um and you know they have you know goals and desires and they take actions and they receive
information from the world and so yeah they're they're a lot like um well yeah ai systems but it's
nice because we can pun on ai and have it mean both artificial intelligence and active inference um
so yeah so that's like a long preamble um one of the things that at least as far as i know
right now the active inference literature doesn't talk an awful lot about at least not very precisely
is this notion of sense of fusion so you can have like two so you have like two yeah so if you think
about the brain again you've got like two like neural little neural circuits next to each other and
they're making predictions about two visual receptive fields um but those visual receptive fields they kind of
often overlap and so what we might want a system like the brain to do is to be able to kind of glue the two
inferences that those circuits make together over this overlap so that you get like this you know unitary
perception like we don't just see a bunch of independent patches of the world we see like
this kind of glued together thing even though you know it's the way it's been inferred is through lots
of like individual systems next to one another and so it's it's quite you know and you know it's quite
clear how to put two things next to each other mathematically you just take their sort of product
um that you just then you just do them side by side but when you need to when you want them to sort of
glue together in this way um you might encounter some problems like you might have one make one
inference and one make another inference and so you get like a disagreement and then you need to start
to say okay well what's what's going on there like what is the nature of this disagreement is it something
that can be resolved by like say you know passing some messages between the two systems or do we need to
just like ignore some of the data or is there fundamentally some like paradox which means that
we can't resolve this disagreement excuse me um and so in mathematics there's a lot of theory that's been
done about precisely this question in topology in an abstract way um related to the field of what's
called co-homology which is all about like measuring like obstructions to doing this kind of gluing
thing and sort of in this world of like applied topology people talk about um algorithms for resolving
disagreements and and things like that and they often have the flavor of like diffusion you can sort of
think of diffusion as like smoothing out disagreements like because you're just sort of like letting stuff
propagate um something there maybe could be said about like how these diffusion models work in
generative ai but i haven't really thought about that um and so you know maybe maybe there's something
to be done for you know political systems or corporations like maybe we can look at how
you know the mathematics says we can resolve these disagreements and implement better processes in our
organizations that are inspired by those algorithms or the kind of universal properties
and you know maybe that'll make the world a kind of more harmonious place or maybe it will just help us
build um you know systems in the future which resolve disagreements better and this is one of the reasons
why i was um talking about you know multi-agent systems before um i know this is a thing that sometimes
people think about in the context of you know blockchain systems and things like that which are actually
actively composed of lots of different participants um but i don't know yet how it you know might
all pan out i mean ultimately the question of alignment is really about do the goals of this other system
disagree with my goals and you know if the other system has more power than you then ultimately
there's probably not much you can do about it regardless of whether there's
whether there exists some algorithm that might help you smooth it out um so i i think
i i hope at least that by looking at how like the mathematics says we can optimally resolve disagreements
or smooth them out or patch things together or build kind of multi-agent systems that will help us
build things in the future in such a way that we don't get to a situation where the systems we're
working with are actually aligned against us say um but obviously we can't really guarantee it we
actually have to sort of do some work but it's nice that at least um the framework of active inference
allows us to talk about that at least right so you know we can say like oh i have these beliefs about the
world and this other agent has these beliefs about the world and then you know we can express these
beliefs in a mathematical framework which is amenable to using these tools from cohomology
and applied topology to be able to start to make use of that work that's already been done
um it's to me not so clear how you would do that if you're not working in this active inference world
and you're working say with just reinforcement learning um i i know there are similar questions
about how to kind of glue together preference functions in economics um and i think
for me the simplest way to kind of understand those questions is to kind of turn those preference
functions into distributions over states and then use this kind of um sort of more active inferency
language to think about it um so yeah again we don't you know we're just at the start of this process
but like it sounds like we should be able to you know make use of this wealth of tooling which has been
developed in other fields um because we're putting this into this kind of modular categorical language
we should be able to kind of you know put put these two modules together and make make the most of them
thanks i'm going to go to a different sort of question here i'm going to uh play dissertation roulette
but i kind of know where i'm going to go and uh i'm going to skip to a diagram it's a diagram at the
end of chapter six and it looks like this so what do we see here what happens in this graphical arrangement
it doesn't have to be ultra specific about defining every variable but does right what is what matters
here that's apology or the geometry is it an arbitrary visual layout but you're conveying something about
the connectivity or is it read from left to right or is there a certain way to understand or just
approach these diagrams which in slightly smaller forms or larger forms we see peppered throughout
category theory and your dissertation so okay yeah so here what i'm trying to do is say that
if you have a like hierarchical predictive coding system if you if you take like the formative two
parts that are sort of plugged into one another and this is the the g and the h
you like do predictive coding on g and you sort of plug that into h
and then you do predictive coding on h with that input it's the same thing as doing predictive coding
directly on the two parts as if they were one thing at the start so what i mean is
if you have so like here we've got like a hierarchical system again the the parts of the hierarchy of g and h
and we could do two things we could either apply predictive coding to the two parts and then glue those predictive
coding systems together or we could glue like the g and h together and then apply predictive coding
to gh the glued system and what this bit of this result is saying is if you do those two processes you get the same
dynamical system and that's that's saying that this predictive coding thing um at least with this sort of laplacian
scheme is functorial so in this diagram um it is read from left to right i mean in some sense you know you can
orient these diagrams however you want so you're clear about how you how the information flows um and if i
remember rightly what we're what we've got is we've got some like um um a yes we've got x and y so i think um
so we've got one system which is predicting x and one system which is predicting y and i'm
i'm not totally sure what p and q are but i guess they relate to x and y um and you've got some stuff
that's coming into the predictive coding system h of g and some other stuff which is coming in and going to
h of h and these give you like updated states so in predictive coding with this laplace algorithm what
happens is that you you know you get this new observation that comes in and you look at the error
on you know your you know between that observation and your prediction and you update your prediction
according to the sort of direction that error points you in and so that's what these hg and hh systems
are doing but because it's a hierarchical system this like second layer
which yeah yeah the second layer requires you to take in the prediction of the first layer
so if you sort of follow in the flow of information
h h takes in inputs from gamma gamma is the kind of um the predictive channel the predictive part
of g and so that feeds into h
and the update of g which is a sort of layer above h requires the the new this newly updated belief
from h right so that's going sort of up in the causal hierarchy
h of g
and so if you sort of follow the flow in as well into this g update function at the top h of g
you see that it gets an input from this sigma function
and that's the that's the new belief emitted by the h system in in this part of the proof at least that
was the notation i used and so this is a saying if you do predictive coding on these two bits it
it has this structure which is you know you do the forwards pass down through the system g and then h
and that gives you a prediction at the kind of lowest level and then you you know take your observation
which is i think the thing you get in here in z yeah that's what z is it goes into h you get an updated belief
that comes out in the form of the sigma
and then gets passed to the first level of the hierarchy
which is used to give you the highest level of belief
great well it's awesome because in so many papers we see what i guess people expect and prefer which
is you should be able to make a nested model here and have communicating agents here and do sophisticated
affective inference in this way and it's like we're already playing with the legos in a sense and
talking about it like it's a total play shop so to understand in a way that is worthy of dissertation
research some of that substrate it's basic lego research and how do you know when you're working you
describe this as a result how do we know i mean can i just draw a line from here to here or can i just
uh make a d and just have d you know connect to gamma what rules do you keep a guidebook or recipe on the
table what rules help us know what edges and shapes you can even draw and when you describe the manual
checking yeah are you looking for what right so yeah this is this is a good question um so yeah this
is like it is like a language so it has a syntax um and that syntax is like i mean it's like the
grammar right and it tells you what things make sense to say um
and so you only say those things don't we all don't we all no but that but it's it's it's that's
what i am laughing because often you want to like play with the grammar right and so sometimes you're
like oh well you know i'm it feels like i'm not allowed to like draw this thing like i'm not allowed
to connect this box to this other box in this way but like i really want to do that and it's actually
that's not a bad thing you shouldn't do it in that diagram where it doesn't make sense but you should
take that feeling and reflect on it and say oh but that's saying that maybe this language this diagram
syntax is missing something important and then you should like trust your intuitions there and say okay
well like actually what do i need to do to this diagram language to make it like allow me to do that
move that move that i wanted to to do to draw that thing i wanted to draw and so that that you know
suggests that there's like you know you're you're walking down you're walking through like a valley
and you can see there's a hill over here and there's something peeking out over it and you're like actually
there's something over there i need to be able to see and so you have to like move over towards a
different place to be able to get to that to that place um and so you should do that right then that's
fine but the reason why i said at the beginning don't just draw it in your diagram is because then
that means your diagram doesn't mean anything and that's that's worse so this is part of the reason
that it's actually requires using this kind of mathematical formalism really using mathematics
generally requires this discipline um because you don't you don't want to say things that don't make
sense it's kind of a if you have a intuition you should do it justice and and and like treat it
seriously and you know you probably get more out of it by figuring out what's missing so like you know
with this particular kind of string diagram language you can't just get used to reading them right so i
you know that these little black dots mean copy some information so you if you see the first one
or like all like the second one on why you know you go from why you go into this copier and you just
send the information to both of those outputs if you read like um bob cooker's work or say his book on um
um his book picturing quantum processes which is all about uh quantum theory using this string diagram
language um there's a lot of like there are lots of lots of different rules for like stuff you can do
with these languages languages like you have colored like spiders he calls them which are like colored versions
of these black dots and you know you there are things you're allowed to do like if you have two
spiders next to each other that are the same color you can sort of merge them to be a spider with like
as many legs as the two of them and if they don't have the same color then you can sort of split them apart
and like that's that those kinds of those kinds of moves are like you know part of the syntax
of this language but it's a it's a human language and so people developed it and they realized that
they could do some things and they realized that they couldn't do others and they tried to make the
rules of the game you know match the things they wanted to do and you know they ended up with this
language which is now used a lot in um quantum computing because it's a very sort of like natural
language for that problem um so as to like how do you know what kinds of things to draw well here like
i was trying to prove functoriality which is the sort of general property and it says the thing you know
it says in an abstract way the thing that i started by saying which is like there i was i wanted like h
of gh to be the same as h yeah see here if you see this line the update map of the composite system
you see i've got um h after hg well i want that to be the same as h just applied to h after g and so
that says okay well i want these two things to be equal and so what i do is i like draw the two diagrams
for the two parts and they okay you draw them out and they first of all they don't look equally
like oh that's annoying but then you stare at it for a bit and you reflect on the kind of moves that
you're allowed to make you think well okay maybe i can um maybe i can apply this move and it makes the
diagrams look a bit more similar and eventually you make the diagrams look the same you've only used rules
that you're allowed to use um okay i can see sort of skimming through to see if it looks like that
uh directly in the thesis but like effectively that's what's going on um it's just the rules are a little
bit abstract though that being said i know that um pavel soboczynski who's a researcher in category theory
at talon he's got a project um with a colleague of his to build a a mobile game which is all about
making string diagrams equal in this way um and so the idea is that in this game you have like
pictures like this and you've got certain moves you can do to manipulate the pictures
and that you know and the sort of aim of the game is to like transform one the sort of starting picture
into like the sort of goal picture just by applying these moves and as you go through the game the kind
of moves you can do become more complicated um but it's i mean it's the same kind of process i'm not sure
the game is at the stage now where you're allowed to like do this like human creative thing and say
actually i want to like make that be a new kind of move or change the diagrams or like add in a color
here or something like that's a really human thing and you know there's nothing to say you shouldn't do
that but i'm just trying to advocate for do that in a way which is also rigorous
that's awesome awesome awesome yes to speak fluently the syntax and the grammar whether
we're talking about natural human language or we're talking about the active inference ontology
we want the syntax to be unobtrusive if not compressent so that we can actually convey the
semantics because that's the real information flow the syntax is within the shannon signal entropy space
and then in live stream 17 and 4d and the physics as information processing with chris fields where
we've been exploring these semantic bayesian information flows that must out of necessity to
be enriched beyond the syntax have to include an individual or or shared context that flow necessitates
the proper syntax and so it's just um part of the learning and so it's exciting to see that there's
games and work like yours and others to help because um if we could play with those legos
and get the instantaneous feedback just like learning with a language tutor of like no these two pieces
they don't fit together and then it just it we kind of um would actively infer
patterns make our own rules and understandings but there would be certain compositionality of the
system itself and so it's interesting to think of like you described it as a natural language it is
technical and naturally arising and our natural language without going too much into the superior wharf
and everything like that it reflects the kind of subject object verb structure that we often want to convey
this is a natural language for science it conveys what we want to convey and so being able to do that
in a way that is both disciplined and rigorous also enabling low cognitive overhead fluency for some
individuals today but for more tomorrow that's just extremely powerful and the fact that it has
like such a beautiful and intuitive way to graphically represent it is um very promising because that may
tap us into a more holistic understanding and a visual field uh or a felt sense understanding that just
looking at this and someone says wait this is what we learn in active inference it's like well no that's not
not even the tip of the iceberg there's so much more to it and it's not only this and all of that but it's
one of the pieces that at this moment in time in our sort of early calculator phase or abacus phase almost
it's one of those things that that we're tackling but it's the wave that we're riding and i just can't wait
until there's more accessibility and the learning pathways to to end up the playgrounds to use all this
yeah i mean i i totally agree with with all of that and i i think um it was it was nice to see the jr in
this syllabus that included um references to eugenia cheng's work because she's done a lot of great work to
kind of make mathematics more accessible in this way um she had an article in the guardian like in the
last week or so even talking about mathematics education and how um it's often it often like
scares people because they're taught to like you just apply algorithms in this kind of blind way to do
like multiplication or calculus or whatever and and not really like play with the concepts in the way
that i was trying to say okay well you know you're drawing these diagrams and you know you want to like
play with them and it's it would be nice to see mathematics education take this kind of more playful
route to start with one of the things that um eugenia says in this article is that unfortunately that
would make things kind of slower because like you just want people to muck around you don't want
people just to you know be able to churn out this kind of computation but you know in this future where
our computational tools are so powerful maybe we don't all need to be perfect integrators or like you
know derivators and be able to like multiply numbers quickly and you know some people like doing long
division but i i don't even remember how to do long division why would i it's it's it's silly to kind
of drill that into children so there have been projects um to teach like kindergarten children um like
like a couple of projects not many some of the kind of rules of this string diagrammatic stuff
um in in this quantum um information processing world this um of book bob cocker and his colleagues
i think there was one um project by dan geeker in birmingham and maybe one by bob himself or at least
he was trying to get it off the ground i don't remember um but at least where it has been tried i think
they found that children very easily learn to use these these these kinds of languages um because
it's just playing with pictures they're kind of much more approachable than this kind of scary symbolic
language which is you know i don't i mean it it's a kind of fine language if you're used to like
typing on a typewriter or like writing by hand where you write in this linear way but you know if you go
to like a mathematics department and look at the you know the whiteboards or the chalkboards there
you know most of the time you see lots of pictures diagrams and things and that's how people reason
typically um and so a lot of what's been happening with applied category theory is trying to like
take using diagrams seriously as mathematics um and trying to like say okay well here's what we can do if
we do if we do take it seriously we can sort of recap sort of recapitulate some of these things which
people have found like abstract or abstruse or difficult in mathematics before and like make
them seem a bit more easy to reason with now and so i mean that applies to like abstract things like
stuff i've mentioned already like adjunctions like the laws of adjunctions you can draw them with
string diagrams i mean you know i haven't shown it in my thesis but like you can
if you sort of google around you can see you know adjunctions in a two category and they end up being
some kind of snaky picture and sort of you get a sense of like what's going on there from these pictures
like the flow of information in some sense um and there's a similar thing with like with like monads
the the joke for like functional programmers about monads is like oh like you don't know what a monad is
well it's just a monoid in the category of endofunctors and i i mean that's true it's not just a joke it's
true but the thing is if you draw what a monoid is it's like a thing which like like one of these like
you see on that picture you've got this gauss thing and then it's got a black dot and you've got
you got one wire and then it has a black dot and then two wires come out of it and i said this is like
copying well like a monoid is like that in the other direction like you've got two things that
go into a dot and that come out with one thing so like when people say monoid they mean something like
they often mean something like addition you've got two numbers that come together and they produce one
number we've got like multiplication you've got two numbers again they come together and produce one
number so like it's like the opposite of copying in some abstract sense which takes one thing and gives you
two things this is something that takes two things and gives you one thing and so you can just like
draw the the diagrams that define a monoid and say okay well what does this mean for like endofunctors
and you can sort of start to reason about it a bit more approachably i mean it's still quite abstract
because it is quite abstract but it makes it kind of less scary to use this kind of language i think
awesome yeah there's so much psychology and sociology and mathematics and just hearing about yeah on real
chalkboards people branch and they flow and they circle things and they put an x through something it's
like there's all these operations that can't be copied with a typewriter and as our uh cyber physical
and social niches develop and we have different affordances different metaphors different quantum
reference frames for working and being it starts to make more sense for uh having a natural language that
can express that um even if in some yeah no no go on i've said loads of stuff
it just makes me think of a turing tape where even if there is a linear representation
it can still in some other way characterize like a lisp program with nesting or hierarchical model even
though yes there's like a linearity but also there's a model so it's not that we can't represent
certain things with the bit streams or anything like that it's just that that may be more like the
assembly language and that when we actually want to do certain kinds of work we may want to just move
lightly and semantically with a high level way to think about math
yeah totally it's kind of it's notable to me that um like recently i mean i i've been giving you know
talks for a while you know using a computer whether or not like over zoom but like it could be in person
like you know have my like powerpoint slides or whatever but these days if i give a talk i just use my
like tap like digital tablet and i do everything like all the slides by hand i draw pictures and
it's nice now that we've got like technology that is starting to you know be a bit more human in that
sense and i think this is like a kind of mathematical technology which is like that although i think it's
also notable that um it's still in substance quite niche and i think i mean i don't i don't know but the
impression i've got from talking to people is that it's still the case that some mathematicians sort
of think of this kind of like mathematics of diagrams are somehow like not quite like real
mathematics because it's like it's too much like play in some sense um but i think that i think that
perspective is changing and people are taking it seriously i mean it is real work and there's a lot
of hard problems um and you know stuff actually gets done but i think it's it doesn't to me it doesn't
really matter what like a handful of mathematicians think it's just what's useful to people that
matters um and so i mean i i hope that you know these tools continue to develop and like you know we
can use them in all sorts of different domains um i don't know you know i've never really
it's it's no it's like notable to me as well that like human vision is kind of like two and a bit
dimensional really it's not really like three-dimensional but you've got a bit of three
dimensionality and i've never really played much with like three-dimensional diagrams but maybe i
will one day have some tools with my like you know vision pro or less not pro thing or whatever it'll
allow me to to do things even more like naturally like actually like plug together some stuff in some
abstract space um who knows who knows yeah the diagram being two-dimensional or or planar gives
us this kind of classical screen holographic screen that information can be written on that then quantum
cognitive agents can unfold into the imaginary plane with the wick rotation but also the boundary just like
you said earlier can come in many shapes many dimensionality so we could have a four-dimensional
boundary artifact that still becomes rotated into a higher dimension and uh that's not the framing or the
mathematics that most of us have learned up to this point there's a really crystallized would be a
complementary way to say it but um codified or fossilized sedimentary understanding of math education
its role in broader thinking and what we learn along the way and the progressions get reified with who
makes it through the pipeline so i think that's like that's like the the unknown unknowns here the known
unknowns like we all know that we struggle to understand this but then what but but then that's the real
jumping off when it when it's not just us adapting into a new regime um of learning and doing but when
the new regime is the new regime and the new regime is the new regime that we're trying to do this
in our last um sections here um dean or ali another question or um what what are you looking to
bridge or gap into the dot to
uh dean okay okay uh well yeah i actually um i've written down a number of questions but uh they may be
quite specific and i think uh uh they're perhaps uh best um suited for the dot two discussion uh but i
wanted to thank uh toby for uh i mean i literally had goosebumps the entire time so uh it was really
fascinating and um quite enjoyable and i uh learned a lot and i hope to uh i i also have some additional
questions in my mind i hope to uh get to get to some of them uh in the second discussion uh so uh yes
thank you again it was really really great thanks dean with the penultimate thoughts what are you um
what do you see us heading into yeah well what if it's if it's okay i'd like just to read a really brief
piece of the paper because i don't want to launch this on toby in the dot two without giving him a
chance to think about this a bit under seven four you've got fundamental theory and you say future
work connected to this thesis need not only be in applications a number of purely theoretical questions
raise themselves too and i love seven four one this this one paragraph it's not it's it's for me i call
it a really have to slow down and enjoy the moment you're today toby i don't know if you're a
distance runner an endurance athlete of some kind but your stamina has been phenomenal but this one
paragraph to me would be like a refreshment station where they offer you a milkshake and a piece of
battered fish like it's yummy but you but you yeah you need to wait you have to pause and kind of go i
don't know if i want to do that but it really ties in nicely with the syntax stuff that danny was talking
about and i have a question at the end of it so i just want to read it though the mathematics of belief
belief so you basically said belief is theoretical that's fantastic is a large part about replacing
definite points with fuzzier distributions over them independent type theory we've replaced points
with terms non-dependent terms are exactly points so a type of theory with belief should somehow
encompass fuzzy terms just as we can replace points with distributions we can replace dependent points with
the dependent distributions however the standard replacement moving from a category of functions
to a category of stochastic channels obscures some of the universal categorical structure and underpins the
rules of type theory this standard replacement also misses something else while it does allow for
fuzzy terms it omits a model of fuzzy types we might well want to express beliefs about things whose identity we
are not quite sure and then you say in the next sentence there seems to be a couple of related
resolutions to this puzzle my question for you is this and it's not for today it's maybe for next time um
it seems to me we have to grapple with this idea of making fuzzy clear and making fuzzy precise and you
started speaking to that and my my wonder coming now with a strong a much stronger active inference set of
priors is there has to be something more to this than just a gradient descent and i think you started to
speak to that in this section and so um i'm kind of curious do you think that this is a feature
the fact that we can do this we can do fuzzy clear and fuzzy precise and not necessarily see that as a contradiction
but actually the way category theory kind of gives us permission to examine that so again it doesn't have to be
answered today and maybe i'm maybe i'm misinterpreting what you were trying to say there so i'm i'm open to being
redirected but i just think that this opens up a world of possibilities and when i first read it um
i i i don't know what ali's goosebumps looked like but i was just i was just like oh man i really want
to ask you about this so yeah i mean yeah i yeah so the thing about fuzzy type yeah so i do i gotta start
by saying i agree that the kind of that what some of this is seeking is something like thinking clearly
about thinking fuzzily in some way it's kind of weird right um it's like having some certainty about
uncertainty um but it's definitely the case that still now like i think a notion of like fuzzy type theory
is not well developed though i am aware of people various people having thoughts about this and
people thinking about it at the moment um and of course i've got my own ideas about it um but it
seems natural right like we often you know think we know what to think like we can recognize a thing
but like um maybe you're not quite sure and so like you know you're not sure if it's this or that or
you see somebody coming down the street towards you and you kind of recognize them as somebody you
know or you used to know and then like as they approach that their identity becomes a bit clearer
but you're not you know you weren't sure for a while um and i think you know there's nothing to say that
you know we shouldn't be able to you know in some sense like types are a kind of element of some
bigger space and so we should be able to apply all this maths to it and it's kind of really about
figuring out what the rules are that makes the kind of language of type theory kind of align nicely with
the language of probability um and it's a research effort but i'm happy to talk about it like more
next time i'm also like happy to talk in any detail about any of the actual like specifics
of the stuff in the material in the thesis or whatever else in category theory you might be
interested in like i'll promise to be expert and everything of course but i mean i'm happy to try my
best particularly if ali it sounded like your questions were maybe over like a more technical
nature maybe not if i i don't know if i got the right sense of what you're saying but if they are i'm
happy to like talk about the details of that thank you and also like to to like review any of the stuff
like to to try to like say because you're right that there's a lot of like detail in the thesis
um because you know you make a flame and you're supposed to substantiate it and that means you have
to give a proof and sometimes the proof is quite like complicated um but like structurally i'm i'm i want
this to be simple or at least to have like a simple like framework and so i would like to be able to
like clarify some of that if that's um if that's you know if there's time for that or if it comes to it
yeah that sounds amazing in dot two we will uh return perhaps any questions that people submit as a
comment on the video or as a message in the category theory channel on our discord we'll curate those
questions we'll re-watch and digest and then we can begin with ali asking some um taking us on a little
bit of a technical journey and toby thanks again for the incredible work it's uh defined our 2023
in many ways so it's been a joy and we look forward to next yeah thanks for plowing through um i think
yeah there's also the stuff i i think we talked about before that that we haven't really touched on
this time and obviously i didn't really touch on much in the pieces about like how do you actually
fit in like action into this framework and like how do you like start to talk about this like multi-agent
stuff we can you know if there's time we can talk about all of that two of the pieces just to share
that that gave us some of the most laughs were um first we didn't get action and and we're like
it's i mean just the the the it wasn't an anti-climax it was a climax of its own and uh and then also we
had had so many discussions over the months of time and the treatment of time backwards and forwards
ringing the bell unringing the bell um all of these different concepts and then in your limitations
you said we we really have to work on getting a dynamical treatment oh yeah but i actually think
that depending on like what you care about it may not be too hard so that's fine but even that you
would say it that way just having dealt with time oh yeah yeah and then to be like well i mean it's like
i thought that's what dynamical modeling was involving time no no no so that that you're right
you're totally right that so all i meant at that point was so the the the kind of like statistical
framework that i've been working with until then it just seems you have like a prior and like a way of
make generating predictions but like the predict there's no like nothing to say that the prior
data has any like data about how stuff actually evolves in time or the predictions have any data
about how like the sense data evolves in time it's just like i believe that there's this on the screen
and that makes there be this like stuff coming to my eye and that's it this is like a snapshot
and so like when you want to include time evolution in those beliefs it things become a bit more complicated
awesome well thank you again toby we'll see you um in a week and a day
it's been a pleasure thank you for having me bye thank you so much bye
thank you
















Thank you.

## GfImcptiLsY

Hello and welcome. It's June 15th, 2023. We're in ACTIMF livestream 54.2. So welcome to the
ACTIMF Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning,
and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at the links here. This is a recorded and
archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work. All backgrounds and
perspectives are welcome, and we'll follow video etiquette for livestreams. Head over to
activeinference.org to learn more about participating in livestreams and other projects.
All right, we're in livestream 54.2, continuing with our third discussion on the work Mathematical
Foundations for a Compositional Account of the Bayesian Brain. We're back with Dean, Ali,
and Toby. So if each want to say hello and anything to begin with, otherwise Ali has some questions
ready and we have some questions that people have submitted in the meantime as well. So,
shall we just proceed to the questions as we have the same people as .1? Great. Okay, I'm going to jump
into some of the pre-submitted questions. So, would it be correct to call equation 4.2,
Compositional Bayes' Theorem, which is or are Bayes' Theorem categorically? And we have the
document ready or anything that you want to share. But what does it mean for Bayes' Theorem to be
categorified? And where is that in the dissertation? Yeah, okay. So that's a nice question. I would say
that equation 4.2 is like a sort of basic representation of the product law of probability
probability theory. And so I wouldn't say it's particularly like inherently compositional. It's
just something that is just like an axiom that is just like a consequence of the sort of standard
axioms of probability theory. The thing that makes it a little bit different from the way that it's
normally written in probability theory is that I've kind of annotated those P symbols which represent
like the probability of a certain event. I've annotated them each with like a subscript and that
subscript represents like where the probability is coming from or like the probability according to
whom. Well, that's kind of how you can think of it. And so normally I find like this kind of like
P notation to be a little bit confusing because people often write, you know, P of B given A
and they also write like P of like X given Y or like P of W comma A comma Z. And so like in each of those
cases like the sort of content of the P is kind of different. Like the A and the B might be like
events of a different kind to X and Y and yet they're all like put into this P symbol. Whereas in this case,
like with the annotations it says like, as I say, it says according to what? And so here like the
little subscript C represents what's typically called in like compositional probability theory like
a channel or like a kernel. But that is like a kind of abstract way of just saying conditional
probability distribution. And so the little c means it's a conditional probability distribution
from like X, a space X to Y, a space Y. And here I'm thinking of like the B as being an event of type Y
and A as being an event of type A, sorry, of type X. And so the PC says it's the probability of the event
B of type Y given the event A of type X. And so that means that when you like plug these like these kind
of flows of information together, you make sure like the types match. It's kind of like working with
a strongly typed programming language. So like that type information is like the main thing that's
different between this and the standard like product rule of probability. And it's from that product rule
of probability theory that you can just write down Bayes' theorem, which is the equation 4.3.
I would say that the reason why I slightly hesitate to call equation 4.3 like a sort of abstract or
categorical version of Bayes' theorem, even though it's annotated by these channels,
it's because you have this like division. And like that division isn't something that's
like well defined in all categories, in all situations that you might want to consider
like probability theory. For instance, like you might have this E of C dot pi thing, and that means
the kind of like Y marginal of the joint distribution, or it's otherwise known as the push forward
of the distribution pi through the channel C, like that thing might have what's known as measure zero,
which means the probability might be zero. And so the division isn't very well defined. And so like
that expression doesn't always make sense. Now, the thing that does always make sense, on the other hand,
is that just product law equation, which tells you how the two ways you can write down this joint
distribution. So if you have a joint distribution, like on the space X times Y, I've written it there,
then you can decompose it into like a prior on X, and a channel from X to Y. So then if you like, put,
you know, the information from the prior through the channel, you get the marginal on Y, and that's that
push forward thing. Or you could write the joint distribution as a prior on Y, and a conditional
distribution from Y to X. And the thing is, obviously, we're talking about the same joint
distribution in both cases. So those two decompositions, they're sometimes called
disintegrations, those two disintegrations need to be equal. And that's what that equation is saying.
So that's kind of because it doesn't have this division in it. And because Bayes law follows from
it, and because it's something you can write down in all settings, it's kind of more fundamental.
But I quite like the kind of string diagrammatic form of it, which is something that is drawn,
it's not it's not my invention, it's I think I originally saw it in a paper by Bart Jacobs,
and I think his student at the time, Kenta Cho. So in, let's see,
let's see, equation 4.5. So that's section 4.1.2 on abstract Bayesian inversion.
So yeah, if you scroll down a little, it's on like page 130.
Or 130 in my version, which might be hopefully around the same place in your version.
Yeah, a little further.
Oh, man, no, maybe not. Let me let me let me get up the version on,
because I've realized I've opened the wrong version.
Meanwhile, see if
So the thing I'm going for here is the sort of, as I say, the string diagrammatic depiction.
Oh, yeah, 4.1.2. It's page 120. Sorry about that.
Oh, good.
Yeah, so it kind of shows you like how the information flows.
And so this like makes the two, the two like processes, like quite explicit, like so here on
the left, the prior of the joint distribution is pi. And then you take the sort of probability,
the information from pi, and you copy it, and you keep one of the copies, and that gives you your
x marginal, and then you feed the other one through the likelihood or the conditional channel,
c, and that gives you the other marginal. And so like, if you if you throw away this
x information, you get the y marginal, and that's what marginalization is. And that's why the y marginal,
if you look on the right hand side, the prior is c after pi, you know, that's, that's the y marginal.
So like, that's, that's, this is, this is like depicting that product law. And then you say, you know,
you can call something a Bayesian inversion of c with respect to the prior pi, if it is something that
can go in the box on the right hand side where I've written c dagger pi. And the reason I use this dagger
symbol is because under, you know, certain, you know, technical conditions, this, this Bayesian
inversion thing gives you what's known in category theory as a dagger functor. And like, that's
something that like swaps the direction of a morphism. And so here, you've taken the thing that goes from
x to y, and you swapped it, and it goes from y to x. But it depends on the prior. And so I pretend
that's all subscript. And so for me, this picture is a kind of, I mean, it's kind of equivalent to that
product law equation 4.2. But I think it's, it's kind of, although it's a kind of new kind of language,
I think it's a kind of more intuitive one, because you can sort of see how the information flows through
the system. So that was a bit of a long answer. But I think that's like, I think that's how I think of it.
Great. Okay. Next question could be a short one. I'm mostly wondering about how chapter six will be
rewritten. Yeah, yeah. Will it be major? And when we promise we didn't write this question, primarily to
select the best policy as to where to direct my regime of attention. Like, should I wait to dig
deeper into chapter six until the updated observations arrive? Is reflecting deeply up until chapter five,
where I should focus for now? Or is chapter six something that won't change too much? And I can still
explore that next week. So this is a great question. And I would, and I'm sorry that it isn't like the
new, the rewritten version isn't online yet. But it is really close, I promise. I am kind of aiming for
it to be done, like next week, or maybe let's, let's not hold myself hostage to fortune. So let's call it the
next couple of weeks. But it is a quite a, it's quite a change in the sense that I've kind of both,
it's kind of annoying, because it's simpler, but also kind of more structured. And so that means that
there's kind of, there were a lot of like finicky details that I didn't anticipate needing to deal
with, that I had to deal with, even though fundamentally, the basic idea is kind of the same,
but also neater and simpler at the same time. And if you, I mean, I can go into some details about
the differences, if you'd like, or I can just leave it at that. Like, what would you rather?
Let's return to this in the dot three.
Okay, yeah, let's do that. That's, that's a nice idea. So yeah, I would say don't, you know,
dig too deeply into it. Because basically, the thing that I've managed to do away with,
and sorry for all the people who tried to bang their heads on it already, is the kind of pro
functor, like optics, kind of like the sort of pro functor stuff with those weird, like co end
things. The kind of like integral symbols that I was using to define contexts for statistical games.
That whole thing, you it turns out you don't actually need the complexity of that structure.
And the notion of context is really given just by two things. It's really just the prior,
which we've already talked about. And also like the observation you take from the environment.
And so before I thought you needed to consider like not just the observation, but also like the stuff
that might go on in the environment around the observation that like, gives you correlations. But it
turns out actually, you don't need that, at least not for the free energy principle.
And so that makes things a bit simpler, because you don't need that kind of weird structure.
But there's like, as I say, like some technical stuff, which is very annoying, which made it also
a little bit like slightly annoying to write down. And involve five categories, and like, sorry about that.
But it's actually the fundamental idea of a statistical game being like a Bayesian lens, which describes
like the the inference process, maybe like a parameterized Bayesian lens that allows you to learn.
But a Bayesian lens that like comes with a loss function. That's still the same idea.
And it turns out that loss functions like the relative entropy and the free energy, they actually have a really neat
categorical structure. So the things I was calling like free energy games before, or like
relative like Bayesian inference games, those are actually now a lot even neater still. So that's really nice.
And the way you get predictive coding is still as like a functor from some from these like statistical games,
to dynamical systems. So like that idea is still the same. It's just actually it turned out that the statistical games
themselves, there was actually a lot more nice stuff going on there than I had realized before.
Awesome. All right.
You cite Erisman and Van Bermisch work on memory evolutive systems. To what extent have you used
their work in the thesis? Would it be correct to say that there might exist a functor from that book
to your dissertation? Or indeed, to any of your citations? Is there work someone could do to explore
the connection between the two? To me, this is a question of one instance, if a learner or researcher
performs active inference on the interface between a work and a citation more generally? Great question.
Yeah, I think it's a really nice question. And actually, I, so I read the this work on by Erisman and
Rambamish on memory evolutive systems, like a few years ago, and I found it very like abstract and
confusing. And I was like, yeah, this is this is all really nice. But like, how does it actually connect
to the brain and how things like brains work? But I've, I've kind of softened my stance on it recently.
And I think actually, there's some really cool stuff in that work. Some really great ideas about like
hierarchical complex systems and emergence, and like, even things like neural coding.
And it's kind of, I think, like, slightly in danger, I think, of being forgotten, because people
are perceived and think, okay, well, like, how does it actually make contact with things I know about now?
Things that like actually scientists use. And so I think it would be great to explore the connections, like,
in a kind of more detailed way. I don't know precisely what that would look like. I heard a talk, actually, by Andre
Erisman. I think it, I don't know, I don't, there may be some on YouTube, I don't, I don't know. This was in
consciousness, mass of consciousness, like workshop at the end of April.
And she explained some of the more recent stuff they've been doing. And it sounded like actually
they, there is a proof, I think, that heavy and learning does actually give you
sort of what she calls cat neurons. And so before I've been like, okay, well, it's a nice story. But is
it does it does it actually, it doesn't actually relate to things like heavy and learning? Or is
it just like an analogy? But it sounds like it's actually a bit more precise than I had thought.
And obviously, because of the connection between things like heavy and learning and predictive coding,
it sounds like, you know, there, there should be a way to relate something like predictive coding to
memory evolutive systems. And that would be really nice. Because I, you know, sometimes think about
this kind of direction that I'm trying to go in. So, but try to think about, like nested active
inference systems, like, you know, you might have a little region of the brain, and all the cells are
doing, like, active inference, and the circuits do predictive coding, and they make up a brain, and the
brains make up a, you know, society and or an organization. And that story of like hierarchical
complex systems is really the story that this work is trying to tell as well, just in a different kind
of way. And so I think there's some really, it's a really fruitful area. And I really hope, you know,
somebody does dig into it. Because it will be because I think it's, I think it's great work. And I think
it's just work that was kind of maybe ahead of its time. So it kind of got left, you know, in by the
wayside, maybe a little bit. But I'm really glad to see somebody asked about it now.
Cool. Just one short remark on this. And then I'll hear Dean, please. It's almost like,
when people draw associations, like a line of sight, Oh, well, emergence is like this, it's like,
they're surveying, and can have quite far vision. But category theory is like building the high speed
rail, where it's like locked in. And then we can say, there really is a relationship of this exact
formal type between heavy and learning and predictive coding, let's just say some type.
Mm-hmm . So then that can be really relied on as a foundational building block. And it kind of
brings those literatures and merges those streams, or at least adjoins the streams or naturally transforms
the streams or whatever the appropriate terminology would be. But in a really solid way, that's not just
like, well, one person on a mountaintop saw that these two things could be connected. It's more like
an engineering project that really locks it in for everybody. Yeah, I think so. And I hope, you know,
some people are incentivized to do that engineering. I think that'd be great.
All right. Last of the pre-submitted questions.
So in the Par Pizzullo and Friston 2022 Active Inference Textbook,
the first question in the recipe for designing an active inference model, this is chapter six,
is which system? This entails three pieces of data. One, the agent, generative model. Two,
the interface, sensory data and actions. And three, the external environment, the generative process.
So how do these relevant big chunks of notions from the recipe for making an active inference model in the
part-of-the-part-all textbook map to the sections of what you've done in your dissertation?
That's a nice question. And it like takes me on to like a question of like action and active
inference beyond the sort of approximate inference that I was talking about in my thesis predominantly.
Maybe here I could like draw some stuff. And so I don't know how easy that is for you,
but I can share my screen. Yep. Let's see how this will work.
Yeah. Okay. Share.
All right. Can you see my like cursor thingy? Yeah. Okay, cool. So, um,
so I like to draw this picture and this is like the little channel C, which does prediction.
And then, and it goes like from here and it goes like outwards. And this is the inversion,
the like approximate inversion. And it takes in like a prior, which is comes from like here.
And it takes in like an observation. So we could think of this as like,
um, this is like high level
belief.
And like lower level.
And this is like,
somehow you get something which gives you an observation.
And then this gives you like,
new belief, high level.
And this thing is a Bayesian lens. So that's like what the Bayesian lenses are all about.
Um, and like the thing that I was talking about in my thesis is, um, doing,
you know, turning this into like a predictive coding dynamical system.
Um, because you've got like neurons, which do this sort of prediction part and then neurons,
let's do this like, like, um, passing back of error signals to do this updating part. And they have
this kind of like bidirectional form. And that's, that's really neat. And so like, you can like put in
another one here, another one here, or you can just start with your prior, which is like something
that I often write as pi up here. And then this gives you like a new pi at this point.
And so, you know, this is going always from like high level beliefs to lower level beliefs. And down here,
you might eventually get to like the lowest level, which is like, you know, if you're thinking about
visual systems, then this to be like, you know, the V1 visual cortex stuff, or like the stuff you get
in like the retina and you get like prediction about, let's say visual signals, but then the world,
you know, so you get this predicted, but then the world comes back and it actually gives you like actual,
this is predicted,
gives you actual signals, and then the brain uses that update its beliefs up here. And so really,
like the interface is somehow like this. Okay. And so this is, this is like lens, lens world.
And this is like external world.
So that's where the like external environment comes into the picture. And you could think of everything
in here as like agent. But this doesn't really tell us much about action. And it doesn't tell us much
about like interaction. And so there's another kind of story for that, which is kind of similar in many
respects, which is the story that is told, at least in category theory, by what's known as
categorical systems theory. And there you get pictures like this. So this is like your like world. And
there you've got like a sound like system inside the world. And here you've got another system inside the
world. And so people then draw like things that are called wiring diagrams to kind of represent how these
things interact. So for, let's call this A, for A, maybe there's another system over here.
And this is B, and maybe that's C. For A, its environment is like everything that isn't A, it's, you know, B and C.
And so maybe like it's connected like this, I don't know, some like weird like wiring thing.
Actually, maybe that maybe that should go like around to here. And then this goes like to that.
I don't know, something like this. So this is this is just what's known as a wiring diagram. It just
tells you how the systems are like coupled together. And that would be like specifying like how the
information flows across the Markov blankets of your systems. And so like, this would be like the, this
box is like the Markov blanket of A, and then this like wiring is like the data of the coupling of the
blankets. And so there's a whole theory, a whole story in category theory about how to sort of compose,
if you've got like, you know, if you, you know, it has a composed dynamical systems of this kind.
And so, you know, what we do is we like say, okay, well, we write down like the type of, if we say,
if we call, if we write I A to represent like the interface, like the data of like, this is like X,
and this is like Y or something like that, the types on the, the kind of shape of the Markov blanket.
But then what systems theory tells us is that for each like interface, we get a whole category
of systems that you could put in that box to like animate it to make it like a living system.
And then, you know, this is like a closed box at the moment. And so maybe it just represents like
the whole universe, which doesn't have any like external environment. But you might also have
like, you know, something like a company. So you call it like company X. And that has like, you know,
some agent which decides what the company does, or some agent here, which like get takes in information
from the environment. And so this, this, this wiring is then something that gives you
a morphism from like A and B and C to X. And what this like, dynamical, like systems theory tells
you is that there's a, let's call that W for wiring, is that there's then you get this functor
from DIN A and DIN B and DIN C to DIN X, which tells you then how to wire all these
dynamical systems together to give you one that fits into this outer box.
And so this is like tells you how to do all this for just dynamical systems. But of course,
we're kind of interested in like active inference systems. And so here you don't just have
like some like, you know, DX by DT thing to go in here. You've got, you know, the data of prediction
and, you know, plans and goals, and maybe the maybe then something about how to like, you know, actually
do the inference like the statistical game stuff. But really, the story is the same. And so if you have,
you know, this, these boxes again, what we can do is if we have a box like this, X to Y,
is we can think of the, like the, an agent as having as a part of it, a way of predicting,
say X, we think of, let's, let's call this something else. I'm sorry, let's call the, let's call these
S. So this is like the fence data that goes into the system. And then there's call this A. And then
this is maybe like the actions that it takes. Let's, let's now call this box. I don't know, B.
Um, oh, no, I don't like B. Let's call it Y.
So now let's think, okay, well, part of what an active inference agent is doing is that they,
you know, they're predicting, they've got some, some like high level beliefs of type Y. And then
they make a prediction about not just the sort of sense data, but also about their actions. And then,
you know, their body like samples from this belief about how they should act, or you've got these
little cells, these little like mechanisms, which try to correct the prediction errors to like make
that those actions into reality. And then maybe that gets like coupled to some other system,
which receives those actions as inputs. And, you know, you might have another part here, which,
you know, goes in the other direction, which says, okay, given my actual sense data,
and, you know, my actual actions, maybe my body is still learning how to like play tennis or something,
like what, what, what are my new high level beliefs? And so you can do this whole like story again of
Bayesian lenses. Um, and this goes like that, and that's, you know, and this is now just why
Y, and then this is like S times A, and this is S times A. So you can tell this story, and you can
build like hierarchical systems. But now you have like a way of filling in each box.
And in principle, a way of coupling them together to give like, you know, composite active inference
systems like companies or like, you know, colonies of cells or things like that. This isn't a story yet
that I've written down. But I know it works. I'm in the process of slowly writing it down.
So the kind of fundamental structures that are in the thesis are like part of the story.
The thing that's the main thing that's missing is kind of like reorienting. It's just like reorienting
this picture so that it's not like going from, you know, here from left to right. It's like sort of poking
down into like the box. If you see what I mean. And this is like, this is like the stuff you put in.
So this is like your lens thing here, and you sort of fill in the box with your lens.
So I think that tells, I mean, that tells you how like the chunks of the thesis kind of fit into the
standard active inference story. The main job, at least as far as I'm concerned now, is to like,
spell out the details and then start to talk about things like what happens if like, you know,
we've got Y and you've got Z here. Like what if, you know, they're trying to form part of an
organization, but like they disagree about what to do. Like how, how does an organization resolve
disagreements? Like what if you've got like two signals from your brain to your muscles that tell
you to do different things? Like how do you resolve that kind of, that kind of like, you know, how do
you get like harmonious active inference systems in some sense? So I will, I'll stop sharing my screen
now and then we can sort of return to the discussion. But that's like, again, my kind of long-winded answer.
Awesome.
I can share the pictures. I see, Dean, you said you'd shared something,
something, but I can share some more things.
Dean unmute and then go for it. And then Ali.
No, I just shared something from about nine years ago that I was doing in my programming that
everything you just wrote out was, I just wanted to share one part of it that confirms that
you could, you could come from completely different places and arrive at the same destination. The whole
bi-directionality, the whole paradigm, predictive parabolic. Yeah, this, you can bring this into
classrooms and have it make sense. It doesn't, doesn't have to be esoteric or too, too remote, I guess.
Yeah.
What I mean, that's great to hear. I'm really glad to hear that.
Yeah. It's really awesome.
Thanks. I mean, yeah, as I say, there's lots, lots left to do. But I think an important part of that is
spreading the word. It's really great. But yeah, that process is beginning, thanks to you guys.
So yeah, that's good.
The rehearse, play, reflect cycle actually begins when you reverse the direction of thought.
Reading from Dean's email. Interesting.
Self-organize. Yeah. It's all part of this whole cat, but this is the thing.
Sometimes the, like, I love the questions that we've had so far, and I want to hear Ali's questions.
And then I want to be able to take it and have people not be intimidated by it, because you can
really find yourself doing these things on a daily basis. You just don't necessarily identify them
the way that we are. But that doesn't mean that we have somehow lost access to the things that we're
discussing today. So that's, I'll just leave it at that for now. Yeah. Cool. All right. In the rest of the time
that we have with you for the .2, Toby, Ali?
Okay. Thank you.
Your video's frozen. Your video's frozen. Maybe you can just turn it off.
Yeah, go for it. Thank you. All right.
Sorry.
Sorry.
I noticed in your thesis.
Sorry, Ali. There's just a lot of, a lot of, like, yeah.
Yeah.
What would you say is the chapter six equivalent? Is there yet a recipe for designing the kind of
categorical, kind of compositional organization that you alluded to?
I can answer that quickly.
Yeah. Go for a quick answer. And then I think now it's better, Ali.
Yeah. So, okay.
The quick answer, well, it's a quick answer, but it's not a quick thing to do.
But there's a great book on categorical systems theory in its kind of great generality, which doesn't
explicitly talk about active inference like I've been, but it does talk about this kind of composing
dynamical systems in this hierarchical way idea. And that's the book that's currently being drafted
by David Jazz Myers. I can circulate a link to it.
M-Y-E-R-S.
And yeah, so that sort of spells out the kind of general structure.
M-Y-E-R-S.
And I believe he and Matteo Capucci have got a paper upcoming at the upcoming ACT conference on applied
category theory this year, talking about using that framework to do kind of cybernetic like things.
M-Y-E-R-S.
And so what I've been thinking about lately is trying to fit active inference and the stuff I've been doing
into that framework, which has been sort of developing in parallel.
M-Y-E-R-S.
And kind of fortunately and maybe slightly unsurprisingly, they fit very nicely together.
M-Y-E-R-S.
M-Y-E-R-S.
M-Y-E-R-S.
And so the pictures I was sketching are kind of a fragment of that other framework.
And as I say, I think they go quite well together.
M-Y-E-R-S.
Awesome.
Okay, I'll go for it.
M-Y-E-R-S.
Okay, sorry about that.
All right, so I noticed in your thesis that you don't rely too much on the notion of Markov blankets,
but instead you use this notion of polynomial functors as its more formal or perhaps more rigorous replacement.
With regard to that, in your paper,
polynomial life, you say in the literature on active inference, sorry,
and the free energy principle, there's much debate about the concept and role of Markov blankets,
which are sometimes conceived to represent the boundary of an adaptive system.
We believe that the algebra of polynomials will help to make such thinking precise,
where it departs from the established usage of Markov blankets and Bayesian networks.
So would you care to elaborate a bit on that?
And how do you see polynomial functors as overcoming some of the limitations of the notion of Markov blanket?
Yeah, okay.
Okay, so I'll preface this by saying I think some people might disagree with me, but as far like I...
There is a notion of Markov blankets that for me is nicely defined, that exists in the sort of Bayesian statistics literature.
And it says if you've got a Bayesian network, you can consider the nodes in that network, and you can ask what are their Markov blankets.
And in particular, you can define the Markov blankets of a particular node to be its parents.
So those nodes that it's conditionally sort of dependent on.
Its children, sort of those nodes which are conditionally dependent on it.
And what are known as its co-parents, so the other parents of its children.
And that's a very nicely well-defined notion.
But it's only nicely and well-defined in this context of Bayesian networks.
And so it's like...
Generalizing that to kind of situations where you've got interacting dynamical systems
is something that like informally makes total sense.
You want to say, okay, well, I have this thing in the world and it behaves so it changes in time.
And it's sort of a coherent unity in some sense.
And so it has a kind of boundary.
And because it has a boundary, like information and energy,
or it, you know, from the environment always have to flow through this boundary in order to interact with it.
And that sort of boundary notion, it seems, is like what is in other contexts also called a Markov blanket.
And I think if you set up your dynamics in a particular way,
you could, or your definition of Bayesian network in a particular way,
the two ideas that, you know, might coincide.
But I don't think that's true in general.
And I think what people mean in the literature when they're talking about Markov blankets,
but in this dynamical context, I think all they really mean is like boundary or interface.
So the data of the system's like capacity for interaction or something like that,
the stuff that is on the edge of the system through which interactions with its environment are mediated.
And so that's a general idea is something again that appears nicely in categorical systems theory,
but in a very general way.
And it doesn't require any of the notions of Bayesian statistics,
and it doesn't require, you know, conditional dependence or
like parents or children of a graph, because, you know, you might have something more complicated than a graph.
Like you might have like edges which are allowed to connect more than one node,
and that gives you a hypergraph. And there, of course, the notion of Bayesian, of Markov blanket in the standard sense,
just doesn't make sense at all.
But of course, the notion of interface does. And there's a certain like there are certain categories of interfaces.
And those wiring diagrams I was drawing before are an example of a category of interfaces.
Like they don't have any data of the systems themselves. The category just tells you how to sort of plug interfaces together.
And so I think it's kind of neater to think about this connectivity and the interfaces sort of separately from the stuff that fills the interfaces,
like the data of the dynamical systems or of the active inference like games that I've been talking about.
And so a really nice kind of category that you can use to talk about interfaces and indeed to talk about lots of other things,
but in particular to talk about interfaces is this category of polynomial functions.
And it kind of generalizes these wiring diagrams that I was drawing earlier.
And it does so in a particularly useful way, I think, which is that if you think of if you sort of formalize the interface of a system using this polynomial language,
you can start to talk about interfaces that themselves might change depending on the context.
So like when you get into the car to drive somewhere, effectively, you've sort of changed your interface because now you've got this like power around you and like you use and it behaves in a different way than if you're just on your own.
Or if you're like just, you know, a normal, you know, normally going about your life, you might, you know, blink, right?
Or you might close your eyes. And that means that you're no longer receiving visual signals from the world.
And so like if you just say, you know, you're writing down your like active inference model and part of the model is that it receives visual signals.
Then, you know, talking about situations where those visual signals go away.
It kind of you can do it, right? But it's not very neat.
And so to sort of account for interfaces that might change like this, it's nicer to be able to say, OK, well, my interface actually is allowed to depend on what I'm doing right now.
So like, you know, I'm currently on a video call and it means I can do certain things, but like I'm currently wired into the computer, so I can't so easily go and walk around like the set of like signals I receive or actions I might take might change.
And so I think it's easy to start by saying, OK, when we're talking about Markov blankets in dynamical systems, we just mean like there is some set that is like the action set and some set which is the sort of sensory set.
And that's just for me, it's just not enough because of the fact that the world is dynamical, you know, context change, you know, coupling might be dependent on like you might be in an organization and there's some executive who.
Who's in charge of defining the team structure and that mean the team structure is like the wiring of the agents in that organization.
But it depends like that how they behave depends on the decisions that that executive makes.
And so like their Markov blankets are like conditional on those decisions.
And that's something you can talk about nicely in this polynomial language, because you're allowed to have systems which like affect the wiring of other systems.
But it's really not something that's easy to talk about in this like standard framework of of of like interfaces and boundaries that is dominant in the active inference literature.
And I think that's because really in the active inference literature, there isn't a framework for interfaces and wiring.
And that framework is supplied by these categories of interfaces.
And so you can just choose one and you can, you know, hope it does, you know, choose one that's appropriate for your situation that you're trying to model.
But it helps to actually have one that allows you to do this wiring.
And that's something that using category theory allows you to do because it's all about composition.
Awesome.
The textbooks will be rewritten.
One quick thing, Toby.
One quick thing, Toby.
Does the timing of the choice in your experience really matter?
The timing in what respect?
Whenever you do decide to make a choice, doesn't the effect of the timing, the whenness of activating that choice play a huge part in what follows?
In terms of the category?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So do you mean like if you're choosing to use a particular kind of interface language, say, or describe a thing using a particular with a particular interface or like particular kind of boundary?
Yeah.



































so i i agree and that's why i kind of tend to work quite abstractly so rather than saying i'm
working with a particular kind of interface language i'm just saying i will assume my
interface language allows me to do these certain things and so that's not so useful for like
actually implementing a particular model but if you're trying to think about like systems in
general it's helpful to work like agnostically in that way and so the reason i sort of advocate
like this for polynomial functors is i think that they are they sort of sit at a nice sort of
intermediate level of abstraction it's not it's not to say okay well there is a collection of
interfaces and some collection of wiring them together because that doesn't tell you like
actually how that works um so it does it is slightly opinionated it's different from certain
choices that people and other bits of applied category theory make um but it does generalize
this simple case where you have just a single set of outputs and a single set of inputs or single set
of actions and a single set of um like observations and so i think because of that it's it's a kind of
nice it's a nice sort of intermediate level i think it's it's one i've like tried to work with because
i think it's quite you know natural um but yeah you can sort of totally work at a very abstract level
and that's what um david jazz does with his systems theory he just he's just like talks about interfaces
in general like they don't have they might not have you might not have like actions at all um
you know it's completely agnostic
uh okay thank you so much so uh my second question uh is about the relation between uh your compositional
account of active inference and uh the recent line of research uh done in bayesian mechanics namely uh the
discovery of the duality between fep and uh constraint maximum entropy principle so
uh as discovered uh primarily uh through the work of uh dalton saktivadevel uh in the last couple of
years uh there's this uh nice duality between uh the observer dependent uh the uh i mean uh the
viewpoint from the inside observer of the agent and the outside observer so based uh respectively uh the
perspective of fep as opposed to a constrained maximum entropy uh principle but uh dalton uh has
demonstrated that actually those two perspectives uh can be unified uh through showing the equivalency
between the bayesian optimality and james optimality so uh bayesian optimality from bayesian optimality we
can obtain fvp and from james optimality we can um uh we can acquire um a cmap uh so given that uh the
notion of bayesian lens also uh comprise both uh bayesian bayesian inference and uh its inverse process
uh uh do you think uh uh the bayesian lens as providing uh a kind of uh i don't know a tool to
account for showing this uh kind of duality between uh fp and uh constrained maximum entropy principle
i think the answer is probably yes but i think this is a really great question because i genuinely i
don't know the story here like i mean i i know um a bit about dalton's work and i think it's wonderful
um but i really don't know yet how it connects to the stuff i've been doing and it's it's really like
an open question for me um but there are some like tantalizing signs that as i say i think the answer
to your question is yes there is that kind of unification of the two kinds of story um and
some of the ingredients of that story are kind of floating around out there so i know that there
seems to be a connection or like i know there is a connection between quantities like um the relative
entropy and like uh sort of infinite like energetic concepts you get in physics and through that you can
make a link to the kinds of things that dalton has been doing with gauge theory
and i i i feel like there there is a kind of geometrical structure that you can put on top
of these statistical games that i've been working with because remember they are these lenses with these
loss functions and these loss functions seem to have this kind of um as i say this kind of geometric
thing going on with them but really like re like explaining or like putting matt's
constrained maximum entropy into statistical games language um is not something that i've done and
it's something that you know you know um i've been thinking about doing and you know i'd be delighted to
talk to people about more um and so i don't know precisely the details um there is a kind of other
duality which i think is quite nice which is related to this um and i think
and i think again at the nexus of these is this like systems theoretic idea um
because of course all of this work of dalton's lives in this kind of like dynamical systems world
where you have like dynamical systems like that are interacting and information flowing between them
um and there are some really tantalizing um connections again of course between
physics and information processing and i i learned the other day for instance that there are
certain classes of um generative adversarial networks
um the sorry this is just a slight tangent but i think you might be interested to know
certain classes of generative adversarial networks that you can you can set them up
and the two like um the two like parts of the network
tend to like instead of settling into like an equilibrium they seem to like exhibit some like
orbits around each other so they don't like achieve some like equilibrium state in the game they're
playing they kind of just like trot around um but somebody was telling me about um like if you have
an orbit you could sort of in your efficiency you think okay well like what what is that orbit like
like conserving is there like a quantity that it's conserving and in this case and i don't know the
details but in this case um this person found that the quantity that was conserved in this orbit was the
relative entropy and so like there's this weird thing going on these things are playing a game but
they're still like at this kind of like somehow like steady state of relative entropy um and so
there's this seems to be this deep connection between these kinds of like game-like systems
and like sort of information physics in some sense um and i'm aware i need to head off at a moment but i
just want to draw one more picture and i'm sorry you probably had loads of questions but we kind of ran out
i haven't really managed to answer many of them but hopefully we'll get to the rest of them soon
um but if i just draw as i say one more um picture
which is a kind of slightly uh different kind of duality but a similar kind of similar kind of flavor
so what we have in systems theory is this category you have this category of interfaces and
that of systems and the morphisms tell you how to like wire these systems together to give like
hierarchical or like composite systems and you can if you have if you have something like this thing
which i wrote before din which i said you know for each interface i was like a category then you can
sort of think of this as a functor from int to like cat the category of categories and one thing you can
do with index categories of this kind is you can sort of turn them into what are called like
vibrations using what's known as the growth and deconstruction if you know about physics you've
probably heard of a concept called a fiber bundle which is just like a collection of spaces indexed by
points of another space and so what you can do is you can write this vibration which says okay well
for each interface i've got a category of inter of systems on that interface and they're all like glued
together correspondingly with the the wirings of your interface category and so you write this as like
another functor which kind of forgets about the dynamical systems and just returns the interface again
and so you have this vibration thing here and this is like where kind of like physics lives
um and so what i've been trying to tell this story about you know in this story about active
inference is that you have a similar one where you have um for each type of interface the category of
agents that might be that might have that interface like you know we're all humans and so we're all like
the type that might fit in like a human shaped box um and so we're all in that like particular category
and you know we come together to form organizations and that's another object of this category of
interfaces and another kind of agent category on those interfaces and so that gives you another one of these
vibrations and the thing that something like predictive coding tells you is it says okay well given a
certain story about a type of agent can i turn that into a dynamical system which like actually animates
it and so that's like a functor like okay so like this so maybe maybe what we could do is we could think
of this as like maybe like some version of biology or we could think of this as like you know we could think of
this as like body and we could sort of think of this as like mind and so like this is telling us how to
go from like a description of like a mental system to like a sort of embodied system and i think some
of what the free energy principle is trying to say is that you know for certain kinds of system there's a
way to turn your description of a dynamical system into something that looks like an agent and so the thing
i'm wondering is that whether there's like some like adjunction or maybe maybe this is like i don't
know i don't know which where we might write labels on these but maybe there's like some adjunction here
um that allows us to like compare these two processes of like you know turning a sort of mental system into
a physical one and then going in the other direction from a physical system into a mental one
um and so maybe this is also like where like you know information comes in
um and it's a kind of similar story in in category theory um where there's a sort of duality between
geometry and logic um that you that's sort of sometimes written like this you have like truth values
down here and you have like logic over here and you have like space over here and like there's a way
to sort of like draw a picture like this that says okay well logic is somehow like dual to space in some
like sort of mumbo-jumbo way i mean again i've run out of time but i think there's a story that people
try to tell about like science in this kind of abstract world and i think it's a similar story to
the name of something that's being told over here um again lots of details and i don't know precisely
the connection with dawson's work but i think it's kind of pointing in this kind of direction
thank you toby after you have revised and proceeded um let's have 54.3 and talk more about action active
inference so thank you yeah great thank you so much for having me and i look forward to speaking again
and answering your questions ali thank you so much that was great okay great bye guys bye bye
well
wow i'd like to ask dean a question oh ali please make a remark and then i have a question
sorry yeah uh you know uh i really think of toby's work as uh really provocative as it uh as it really
opens up pandora's box with many many uh different fertile questions so uh i'm i'm a firm believer uh
this old saying that uh a sign of a great book is not how many answers it provides but uh actually how
many uh questions it gives rise to so uh i really wanted to congratulate toby and said and writing such a
uh uh i mean uh it it looks as if uh he he he began uh from the perspective of trying to address uh some of
the uh i don't know some long-held questions but uh then it turned out to be uh much more deeper than
that in terms of uh actually giving rise to many uh fertile questions so uh yeah that's really great
uh
dean i i'd like to ask what is the difference or how can we think about being on time in time and out of time
because toby said he was out of time with the answer and i i know that we've spoken about this when
we consider some of the time consciousness and category theory work previously
so what is it to be out of time yeah that's a that's a great question all i can say at this point is
that it's easier to discretize when you're in time and out of time as a as a comparator
than it is to say when you're on time versus those first two positions
that's all i can say about that for now because i'm sure toby from a from a diagrammatic perspective
could probably tell us what is happening when he's actually using his stylus
versus not
right like the result of that leaves something in and out but while he's actually on on point
he he he's literally in a different place so here's a here's a here's an interesting thing back to the
provocative ali in the dot one was talking about virtual and actual models and was probably saying
it in a in a way that's completely different than how i use those those same i believe those same two
models are in effect and so um
um if you if you for example um draw up a play say in sports because we're we're talking a lot of
strategy while toby was on today and a lot of gaming gaming theory and stuff you draw up a play
and then you confirm that you have all the elements or resources that you need in order to be able to
carry that out and then you're you're as a group communicating with one another like we are doing
on this on this live stream right like you're literally calling out to play in in north american
football you'd huddle up and literally call out a sequence of code and then you'd have to literally
reverse that and turn the inference as as a the shortest time window into a prediction like you would
literally line up and then you would carry out this the simulation in actual terms this
is all of that together means that i believe that the virtual version of the model is as toby was
saying in the bi-directional sense going in one direction and that actual model is going in 180 degrees
the opposite direction and then when he mentioned the dagger symbol today i was just like okay where does
that fit in to this bi-directionality and the difference between the the sim the digital the virtual
and the actual so these are the things that literally pop up at any at any given moment aren't necessarily
part of what you consider to be the space that is inhabited by virtuality and actuality and yet
there it is it just appears and then you have to sit down and figure out well where does that
categorically fit so again don't want to go off on a on a deep rabbit hole philosophical take on this but
i just find that at any given moment there is again so much math in this philosophy that it's
it's kind of staggering and just to be able to have somebody who can explain that and draw it out
is pretty impressive so i don't know if it's provocative what i just said i hope it isn't because
man i did this work for almost a decade and
man i think it's a very important thing to do is to be able to do this work for almost a decade
and it seems like young people weren't scared by it maybe older folks are but i don't know
uh so if i may add a brief uh comment on just what you said uh i was recently watching this uh talk
by uh john bayes about the history of applied category theory uh so uh he had this nice tag diagram
showing uh the uh the relationship between the different areas of knowledge uh i mean going from
business to pure mathematics and uh he he claimed that most people in category theory or in most other
areas uh consider category theory as being on uh the top of uh top of the pyramid as being the purest of
the purest so uh as being even a kind of uh being on a meta level than uh even the pure mathematics but
then uh he said that i believe category theory can actually be seen as kind of permeating all of these
levels so it's not something that sits on top of uh the uh the hierarchy it's something that actually
can be seen as influencing and permeating all the levels so that at least uh from the from the
perspective of applied category theory uh it seems to be uh if not self-evident but something that uh
gathers much i mean uh more evidence as the research goes by so i'm really optimistic in the in the
research direction that applied category theory is going and hopefully in near future we can see it
uh applied to many many different areas many many different unforeseen areas so yeah i think i'll just
tag on to that ali if you if you use an abductive logic lens then it's simply a question of when did you
enter on what point did you enter the abstracted timeline because if you see it that way it's not
just top down and it's not just bottom up it's back to my question well to toby was does does the whenness
of this really really matter if you want to be able to take it off the shelf and use it and that of course
his answer was yeah if you if you want to deal with idiosyncrasies you're left with no choice but actually
to acknowledge that the the the point in the continuum where you take this up but i think that actually makes
it quite easy to see it permeating every level but again it's the it's the abduction the abductive
piece of this back to last year in in august right we're coming up on one year since we talked about
how important that is and yet here we are um what ten ten and a half months later and it and it we're
circling back we have another predictive parabolic on our heads you few comments on that it's reminding me
of professor mike levin's work on basal cognition and the idea that intelligence isn't on the top of the
pyramid either rather it's something that's distributed compositionally across levels and
something that exists at all levels and so we can then still talk about higher order properties of
systems or or properties of composites or aggregate systems while also grounding in the in the
foundations um so yeah and that grounding and anchoring and stabilizing that's by itself is not a
is nothing but a feature i think you also want to be able to though because there's a lot of talk today
about being able to see this in in the dynamic in the way that things dynamically play out so again we're
back to the what's the minimum two ways that we want to incorporate this observation both the stabilized
and as searching right if we can if we can have one eye on each at all times it does
take a bit of rethinking um there is a there is a there is an interoceptive piece to this
what we feel from that is different
so that brings us to the sensor fusion aspects of the uh dissertation
yeah
7.1.1 bayesian sensor fusion yeah
a situation that is common natural embodied systems but which is not yet well treated by
current statistical machine learning methods also i'll lead thanks so much for asking the markov blanket
question i think his response is worthy honestly to review and unpack in in the um time we have we can
just sort of review a little bit and think about what other questions we want to prepare for for dot two
how would you ali restate the um limitations of the markov blanket concept for all the positive things
that we've said in the previous 300 live streams and and where category theory can help address and and
and move past some of that uh yeah you see uh so this notion obviously is one of the most um uh or
i don't know probably one of the most controversial uh concepts in whole uh fp literature because uh it has
received a fair amount of criticism from uh many various perspectives uh but some criticisms uh
uh uh at least as far as i know uh is uh they're they're basically directed toward uh the universality of
markov blanket how universal uh is this notion as uh as it's claimed to be ranging from i don't know
inert rocks to the brains right uh so uh does it apply equally for modeling uh inert rocks as well as uh
uh come the most complex system we know of in the in the whole universe namely the brain uh so the
response uh this line of criticism uh got from uh the researchers in the active inference area uh again to
the best of my understanding uh is to the uh to the effect that uh although theoretically it can be applied
to many uh i mean different systems uh with many different levels of complexity but then again uh for
simple linear systems such as i don't know many uh non non-complex uh systems uh it it doesn't have
anything interesting to say so uh rather than being applicable to all of these systems the relevant
question should be uh it it i mean there are enough insights we can gain from uh applying this notion to
uh many different um situations and um systems so i believe uh toby's um alternative for this problem
by uh proposing uh the polynomial functor uh as a replacement for markup blanket uh can cover this
line of criticism pretty nicely it can address this criticism pretty nicely uh due to its
uh abstractness and uh a kind of more rigorous way of talking about both uh the universality and
the individuality of each system so uh i think that's a a nice way to uh at least uh a viable uh i mean
answer to this uh question that needs a lot more consideration so that's my take on it
that's part of it okay and i'll i'll i'll give my um take two which is
the markov blanket concept since the work of pearl in the 1990s is actually not doing that much
philosophical work in and of itself it just describes the parents the children and the co-parents of any
given node within a graph so first we're talking about maps not territories we're not talking about
features of the world carving nature of the joints necessarily hashtag malandrews we're talking about
the bayesian graph and secondly even on the graph it's not that a node is like by its essence an
internal state or a blanket state or an action state if you use the first and blanket rather it's always in
relationship to others so the concept by itself does very little work however people have deployed the
concept implicitly and explicitly to describe interfaces of cybernetic entities the kinds of
entities that it makes sense to describe as an active inference agent so we know from the uh particular
physics and the strange kinds work the path integrals paper that we can describe using the formalism
the rocks the simple active systems and the sophisticated active systems
in order to have an interface concept that does justice to on one hand the relatively inert interfaces
on the other hand potentially extremely conditional or contextual interfaces
just having some uh tagging system of nodes on a base graph is going to get extremely messy
it's not that it couldn't be done but just in terms of actually doing the programming
it's going to be extremely messy you're going to need to have a lot of accessory or auxiliary variables
that indicate what the current interface is at this time or what it would be if this happened
and all these kinds of conditionalities would be like a less elegant way of describing what our category
theory colleagues have been developing explicitly with the wiring diagrams and interfaces so just to kind of
conclude there people draw the bayesian graphs and the particular physics is using a bayesian graph
however bayesian graphs don't naturally have a lot of these properties that were really um being
conflated with interfaces more generally and by using an interface concept as toby said at an intermediate level
of abstraction that's slightly opinionated but also really flexible that is kind of the right coarse graining
the right optimal grasp on the interfaces that we actually want to talk about for active inference agents
and again just trying to get down to the firmware with the bayesian graph we're going to get lost in the details
and any accounting system that we develop is going to be ad hoc and certainly less principled or powerful
than what the category theorists start developing
yes to ask you a question and i'm really curious what you what you think of this
if if we're talking about the relationship in in with the interface could we could we see and i'm really
asking this question i don't know i'm spitballing could we see the markov blanket as the more stabilized
version or form of the relationship and see the poly
nomial version of the of that is the search version of that relationship what do you guys think of that
i'm really and i'm really asking guess the first just listening to both of you talk here i'm just
wondering if i'm having one of those unitary moments myself or if i'm way out to out to
i'll give a first first thought then i'll also give a speculative answer
uh yes so uh one thing that comes to mind is you see sometimes uh people consider markup blanket as
being a kind of uh static boundary or interface uh that just separates uh the agent from its environment
but uh actually what it really is is a kind of uh providing a really dynamic
interface between uh those two internal and external states so uh it's not a static or stabilized in any way
but of course uh in some situations we treat it uh as if it's a stable or i don't know static uh so
i mean coding maxwell ramsted uh every theory of markup blanket is inherently processual so there isn't any
i mean static uh uh i mean static uh conception of markup blanket uh at all uh but on the other hand
well obviously for the polynomial functor i mean not even not just polynomial functor but the whole
uh area category theory deals with objects not in their static sense but rather in their um in the
meaning they acquire through their relations through their morphisms and it's not about uh so one of the
main differences between category theory and the set theory is exactly uh i mean uh hinges on uh that
distinction between the static viewpoint of mathematical or i don't know even non-mathematical
objects and uh the the inherently uh dynamical or relational identity of the objects as defined in categories
uh so i believe polynomial functor functors uh again uh by themselves are um not are i mean inherently and
intrinsically dynamical processual and uh in in the terms of some continental philosophers such as alan badu
uh there they acquire existence through their imminent relations they don't uh they they don't need any uh
i mean notion of pre-existence as uh some of the platonic notions of mathematical objects and ideas
uh so yes in this sense i think uh polynomial uh functors uh i'm not sure which one can be seen as i don't
know more dynamic or processual than the other but uh at least to a degree both of those concepts can be seen
as uh sufficiently uh processual in my view awesome okay i'll just add with a few other um associative
comments one is to blanket something is to dampen and stabilize it whereas polynomial seems to invoke
like many names polynomos polytopos so potentially there's a multiplicity in the polynomial
that is not acknowledged uh so lexically in the markov blanket and then a more formal way to say that
would be a markov blanket might be like a specific realization of some little neighborhood within the
polynomial functor so polynomial functor is a generalization of the markov blanket and so in that
sense it requires more searching and it is more abstract and it is more general but when you do
stabilize it down then the markov blanket formalism may absolutely apply but it will but wherever the
markov blanket formalism does apply like let's just say that we stabilize down to a computer system
and we have an api and we consider that that's one of our blanket states that would also be seen as an
interface of course which is how people would talk about it and so it would be a polynomial functor
and so this helps us look back at the literature and see as has been done many many times in fep and other
literatures recent developments enable previous developments not to be invalidated but understood
as special cases or or constrained or stabilized cases and it only makes sense that we would start um
well putting aside what makes sense in active inference it seems that we are taking both paths
in some cases leading with the stabilized and generalizing but in other situations making unstable generalizations
that then um precipitate stability inside of them
so more bi-directionality
great well we will have a 54.3 with the focus more on action are there any other topics that you
fellows would like to raise or if anyone in the chat wants to ask a question please go for it
uh no just i wanted to ask toby about uh the relation um the relationship between uh his uh theory or
compositional account of uh statistical uh inference uh as opposed to uh the uh the category theoretical
states um um states um states um states um states um states um states um states um states um states um

in one of the papers from 2011, I guess.
So, yeah, that's one question I wanted to ask Toby.
And, of course, a subsequent question about the relation of this distinction slash non-distinction to the accounts of quantum FEP.
Because in quantum FEP, Markov blanket is kind of replaced or rather blended with the notion of, I mean, holographic inner screen.
So how can we see quantum FEP as arising from quantum Bayesianism rather than from, I don't know, predictive quantum theory and the relation between those two frameworks of Bayesian inference to that topic?
Awesome. Yes. The quantum category theory, active FEP triangle.
And also, I think it's the question about reading the literature in terms of the interfaces between a work and the citations, I think, is extremely rich.
It's a really novel way to perform bibliographic meta-analysis, but also just in our own learning journeys.
Following this category theory, victim of knowing a thing by its relations, understanding the paper within the web of the past papers, which it cites, all of which are past and actual.
And then it's future time cone of possible relationships to things that haven't happened yet.
The co-parents haven't even happened yet necessarily, but that becomes part of the evaluation of the significance in the moment.
And if we could have the right generative model and understand how much attention to weight onto different things in the moment, that would be like being able to see the whole time cone at the right core screening.
But of course, as limited nest mates, we can't do that.
But we have our rules, our heuristics, and our approaches that address that nonetheless.
Anyone in the chat or Dean, what would you like to explore in 54.3?
I am just going to follow the two of you.
I got two big workhorses here.
I just got to get out of the way so I don't get trampled.
Let's look at the table of contents.
Here we're just shifting to the code of document, the back end that we use to coordinate a lot of our work.
Just so that it can all be seen in the video.
Chapter one is short.
Chapter two, if someone is looking for another account of like, why does category theory matter?
Toby begins chapter two with three examples of situations, neural circuits, Bayesian networks, and computations, where people often just use a kind of schematic diagram.
But it's not necessary or sufficient to really convey all of the richness that we can add on with category theory.
Chapter three starts getting into more detail with string diagrams and developing towards circuit diagrams in this rate coding neural setting.
A lot more new vocabulary arising along the way.
Chapter four, which the question, the beginning of this live stream brought a focus to, is on the compositional aspects of probability.
Number three, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy, the copy
bringing back strong recall of Shana Dobson, Chris Field's math art and the complexity of the self.
Chapter 5 went into dynamical systems, Markov chains,
open and closed dynamical systems with this polynomial interface concept.
It's really built up in an extremely methodical way.
First, the dynamical system is kept within a nutshell, extremely bounded,
but then it's progressively opened up and so even though it's going to be a lot of new information reading the dissertation,
it's done in a way that does also clearly build upon itself.
Chapter 6 goes into the Bayesian lenses, connects to several more prevalent concepts in statistics,
maximum likelihood estimation, approximate Bayesian inference, autoencoders,
and connects this to the emerging concepts of Bayesian lenses and statistical games
in terms of the approximate inference doctrines.
In Chapter 7, yeah, Ali, please.
No, I just wanted to mention this particular chapter is being rewritten at the moment, so yeah, that's...
Thank you. Absolutely, yes.
As we discussed a little earlier, Chapter 6 is going to get simpler.
But better.
But it was tricky.
But it's simpler.
But it's better.
But it was tricky.
And then Chapter 7 closes it out, but really opens it up with the compositional cognitive cartography,
sailing the three seas, society of systems, more alliteration,
and many, many, many connections to areas of interest for all system scientists and complexity enthusiasts.
So, what a tour de force and a journey.
And it's going to be awesome that we'll get to see some of the next increments in the work.
Talk more with Toby.
Yes, Dean.
Can I just throw this in?
And it's going to indicate how old I am, but a long time ago, the first time a needle dropped on the first Van Halen album,
something changed about everything that we thought about guitar playing.
And if you weren't there in that moment, you wouldn't know how everything changed.
I'm not sure what category theory taken up on a mass scale will do,
if it will be the equivalent moment for all people who use math in all the different ways that they use it.
But I think that we are at the beginning of something.
That is, it is going to change things.
And I don't know exactly how it's going to change things,
but there will always, I think this will always now be included as how we try to both figure things out
and out the figures in that three-dimensional space.
And one of the things that I thought was interesting in the dot one was when Toby said,
well, I work in 2D space.
And now I'm curious about, I wonder what that would look like in a 3D space.
Well, we exist in a 3D space.
And so I think the applicability of it is going off at any given moment.
So, but I do really think this is the start of something.
I'm not sure exactly what, but I don't think it's, I don't think we'll be able to unlearn this.
I think it's going to remain influential for a long time.
So.
For those about to categorify, we salute you.
Yeah, right.
There we go.
Thank you.
You can always make it better.
Any other thoughts on this?
Otherwise.
Great.
Yeah.
Ali, please.
With any last thoughts.
No, I just wanted to say I'm really looking forward for the next installment.
I hope it happens soon because, again, I have so many burning questions.
I try to, I mean, whittle it down to some, I don't know, not too much time consuming questions.
But, yeah, I'm really interested in, I'm curious to know Toby's answers to them.
So, thank you so much for everything, for organizing this and inviting Toby.
Oh, absolutely.
All right.
Thank you, everybody.
See you in 54.3.
Bye.




























































Thank you.