SPEAKER_00:
Hello, it is October 14th, 2022, at least where I slash we are, and it's ActInf guest stream number 29.1.

We are revisited by Shana Dobson, and today we'll be discussing the paper...

with Dobson and Fields, Making Up Our Minds, Imaginative Deconstruction in Math Art, 1920 to the Present.

We'll have a presentation with some interspersed discussion followed by more discussion.

So thank you again for joining and please take it away.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, Daniel.

Thank you again for the invite.

Thank you for noticing our paper and for welcoming us here.

So we will be discussing and deconstructing the idea of personality and mind and self.

through a very beautiful interlay of math art, as we call it.

So we're going to lay down this sort of heavy argument about what we're actually lacing together.

And then we're going to end with juxtaposing two mathematical giants, Groth and Deacon Erdos, and using them as a case point to evaluate this investigation of ours into why we're saying the mind is made up and what the self is.

So it's a little text heavy, but we're going to pause every once in a while so that we can get, you know, understand what's actually happening here.

I think no figure would do justice to what we're saying, possibly the perfectoid shape I have on the front, which I've talked about before, but I'll save the mathy part for the ending part.

So the main idea, what we say, oh, and I want to say we also gave a snippet of this talk at the recent Models of Consciousness conference in Stanford, so people want to look at it there.

But you can find the paper on the Phil Archive right now.

So the main idea is that the cognitive sciences actually tell us that the self is a construct.

So we're actually going to use mathematics to give it full expression and actually abstract the self to what we're calling a Grothendieck site.

So the self is...

is going to be what Deleuze and Guattari have called a hesaity.

So it's an actual ephemeral this-ness and now-ness.

And so we actually claim that we actually make up our minds.

So when we're saying making up our minds, we actually were playing there.

So that our acts are public and that they communicate effectively becomes what we're going to call a dialetheistic paradox.

So it's a limit paradox.

that happens when thought runs up against its own limits.

And as you all know, like Chris and I are not afraid to sort of like, let's take this concept and push it, push it till it breaks, or in the words of like Bards, push it past the antiphrastical recrimination.

So we love playing around in this heavy, heavy intersection of math philosophy, philosophy of mind, to figure out like

What is this self?

So we invoke a new mathematical formalism by Peter Schulze and Dustin Claussen called a condensed set to formalize the notion of a self as a site.

So we're going to mathematize what the self is.

And then we're going to create an event-dependent constructed time of retrospective and perspective memories.

Event-dependent, not that it's independent.

And so this is an alternative to the objective time of temporal logic and its descendants.

So we discussed this in the paper, and I'm trying to give a snippet.

So in essence, this new condensed formalism that's going to invoke some sheaves gives a representation to how a self

as a site experiences memory.

So if you remember, Chris and I are very puzzled by why do you experience memories?

Not why do you have them?

You can have some kind of like, you know, acceptation argument about why you actually have a memory, right?

And going down the DNA line and stuff like that.

But why do you experience memory?

And can you imagine the first creature that actually did?

So if we actually authenticate an object by observing it again, and that requires a lot of memory through the RAM, and we conclude that an inferential action or a creation has returned.

So we play around with this notion of return in the sense of eternal return and sense of Nietzsche.

Deleuze does a very brilliant discussion of what eternal return actually means, that nothing is actually returning.

The only thing that returns is pure multiplicity.

So it is a world without being, without unity.

And so we love that world.

So if authentication claims that something returns, what does return?

Because quantum mechanics is not going to say that.

So in the pink, I've highlighted that can this notion of sites or this condensed frame, this condensed structure, can that actually reframe authentication dialetheistically?

This is what I'm very, very, very perplexed in.

So if you have a notion of dialetheism, which we do, anytime you have a self-reference, a system referencing itself is going to create these paradoxes.

What does that mean for us in terms of authentication?

So we're going to conclude that the greatest imaginary construct is really our own mind.

But to call these constructs ours is to abuse notation.

So we call the I reified.

We say that I is an experience that we actually reify.

So it's something that you've actually made up.

Chris said this brilliantly, and I put it together.

An identity is a short-term weak approximation, something you quote,

get away with, but not for very long.

So again, Chris and I are saying that time is not this continuous, like beautiful thing that it's actually pieced, pieced, pieced.

And above every point in time lies a sheaf.

And I know I've discussed sheafs before.

So above every point in time,

Yeah, it's tricky.

So if every point is modeled as something singular and you authenticate at every point, then what you're actually doing is like a grand interpolation.

So to say that you have an identity is actually tricky.

So quantum mechanics is actually going to justify this proof.

It's going to say, well, isolated systems undergo unitary evolution, which produces non-separable states.

So this is irrefutable.

So we say me plus everything but me.

It is an isolated system.

And we take everything seriously.

So asymptotically, I am actually entangled with everything else.

So neither of us has a separate identity.

So we're opening our arms and saying, you know, someone help.

So maybe we only get away with what this is.

In each instantaneous experience, this is what we're saying.

It includes experiences of memories, but it's completely meaningless other than for instantaneous things.

So that meaning is something that we actually have to continually assign to this notion of instantaneousness.

So in this paper, we focus on a few questions that we say, what are we actually doing when we do mathematics or art or science or philosophy that explains the actual correlation, what we've called math art?

So what are we actually doing when we do anything, a creative act in general?

So how do we account for that trajectory through the 20th century?

It's very, very heavy that you move from a sense of solidity into extreme abstraction, fragmentation, depersonalization.

Why have all the creative disciplines followed this trajectory?

They seem to abstract, subtract.

What are we left with?

So, you know, we claim that, well, what has been deconstructed across all the creative disciplines is actually the self.

The self.

In particular, the confident Cartesian self as an independent, objective observer and a directed voluntary actor.

This is done.

So while we were working, I asked Chris all the time, why can we never actually access what causes a thought?

And so he would say, well, no finite system can contain a complete representation of its own dynamics.

You run into a problem of self-reference.

Why are there no things in themselves?

Well, because quantum theory is going to strike us as self-evidently true, at least as a description of the interaction between any finite system and its world.

I still to this day ask, what is a thought?

What is a thought and why is it that maybe my thought is somebody else's memory?

What is that?

Is somebody's memory my thought?

You know, Deleuze talks about this body without organs, which I'm going to get to, and he opens the paragraph with, at any rate, you have one.

So thoughts, what are these?

At any rate, you have them.

So we're just, we're grasping here.

A thought is a modal, as in like a sensory mode.

It's an immodal experience that's generated by imagination and not perception.

But what does imagination mean from an actual like quantum theory perspective?

So it must be a source of classical information.

So hence it must be written on a boundary, but it differs in a significant way from an action on quote, the world, because it's my imaginary world.

So we really dive into this paper as like,

How do imagination and sensation compete?

So there's a central contradiction, which I'm going to just kind of go quickly through.

Experiencers really want to understand the source of their experience, but it's actually impossible in principle.

All you really do is just overlay the experience with a theory, but what produced them is still inaccessible in principle.

So category theory can help mitigate this a little bit.

So there's always going to be morphisms acting on whatever structure we call it immanent.

So morphisms, you deem something as imminent.

You have morphisms acting on the structure.

Otherwise, you would have zero change.

Otherwise, you would have fixed agents.

We call it a temporal with zero that would experience becoming, but they never become.

So there would be no change.

Yeah, so the fundamental contradiction any philosophy of becoming is that it requires an assumption of processes outside of any possible experience.

So we're going to use sheaves and category theory to kind of get through this.

So one of our main ideas is linking imagination and the free energy principles.

So we're actually going to say that all imaginative activity is both constructive and active.

We actually have an agent, a literal sense of action by the agent on the agents actually on their world.

So using the variational free energy principle, we're going to say we consider all creative activity, including all imaginative activity, as actually problem solving.

We're creating novelty and uncertainty in the service of testing and improving a model of the experienced world, 100%.

So acting creative is that you're actually going to act on the world with the intention of provoking an informative response from the world.

So we say to make art is to perform an experiment.

An immediate consequence of this is that all art is provocative, experimental.

All art is informative.

Just as science is informative to the extent and in proportion that it's provocative and experimental.

So we really hit this hard.

We go right into it.

And we say, you know, mathematics is actually going to exemplify and express the very particular dissolution of the self with the greatest clarity and poetry.

For some reason, mathematics can get a horrible reputation that it's like,

like devoid of creativity, and we're saying it's not.

So Glavindig's notion of a site, it actually really encapsulates this whole notion.

It removes the solidity and locatedness of the traditional idea of a point.

Right?

Classical physics is based on the idea of modeling particles as points.

Math is that the Grothendieck side is actually going to kind of destroy that.

It replaces the notion of a point with something that is structureless and ephemeral.

And moreover, the notion of a condensed set is going to be like a notion of sheaves on a point.

So it's no longer about the point.

So we've kind of thrown out ontology with that.

So category theory is going to allow these structures to be transferred.

And then so we're going to introduce the society line.

And we're going to look at Francis Bacon's work as an artistic provocateur of this stuff.

So when we say our greatest construct is our mind, we're left with the question of how we as artists or scientists or as Bayesian uncertainty minimizers

How can we actually see each other as fellow agents communicate and share ideas?

This is actually really beautiful.

It makes you ask, what is language?

And what does it actually mean to say that art and math are actually languages?

What does it mean to be a speaker or a writer when the deconstructionist challenges, you know, challenges the very notion of objectivity and say from bars that a text unity lies not in its origin, but in its destination.

That's powerful.

Not in its origin, but it's dependent on the person reading it.

So quoting bars again, we will no longer be fooled by the arrogant antiparastical recriminations of good society in favor of the very thing it sets aside.

ignores, smothers, or destroys.

So we're going apart and through the actual notion of what is mind, what is self.

So does a shared semantics, can it even be assumed?

So when we say that all action is creative, we're going to get a little neurological here.

Creativity, it actually poses a complete paradox to the very antiseptic Western philosophical tradition, which is saying that it values reflective, deliberate, rules-based thinking, type two cognition,

Over what's a little more wild, which is the immediate, intuitive, unreflective type one or process one judgment.

So Chris is heavily trained in this section.

Thank you.

Read of Insight, it actually has the phenomenology of type one cognition, but a greater value than most type two cognition.

It's called the outlier, right?

So we're actually putting together a phenomenology of the outlier.

So, you know, and again, the Western discomfort is understandable.

One of the key attributes of an outlier is its unpredictability.

So the academy from like Plato onward, you know, is designed to render the insights of others formulaic and reproducible.

But then you've got what's beautiful are these flow states of cognition.

Super athletes go into this state, right?

In which activities are performed with the automaticity that comes with deep experience and expertise.

So you have something automatic that's actually coming from excellent trained, but you always talk about anyone in flow state, they say, I'm getting out of my way.

There is no I anymore.

So you combine the phenomenology of type one cognition with a feeling of ease or bliss or ecstasy or automatic pilot, whatever they call it, and you get a best performance out of it.

So I'll talk a few more slides and then we'll pause for any putting together right before we get to Francis Bacon.

So we say imagination and sensation compete.

This is actually really beautiful to me.

Chris and I find ourselves on opposite sides of the aphantasia spectrum, which is like the aphantasia spectrum

um, is, uh, classified as, uh, someone that does not have a, or it is a deficit in a very rich, um, visualization, um, versus the hyperphantasia, which is someone who has so much rich visualization and memory that the reality seems, um,

dull compared to the actual imaginative experience, right?

That the imagination is so overwhelming.

So it's beautiful that we write on opposite sides of this spectrum, and we can, and I think that's what makes this work so powerful.

So if imagination and sensation compete, how?

Well, deliberate thought.

What is deliberate thought?

So it's a sequence of ideas that's presented to consciousness, but by unconscious processes.

So I found this curious.

So the real work is happening below the threshold of awareness.

We've always asked, what are these fundamental units of life?

If anyone knows anyone who's really sick, the personality is definitely the last thing that sort of comes online.

It is, are the organs functioning?

Is the heart functioning?

And then comes little personality and appetite in these things.

So what is this threshold of awareness?

What are these fundamental units of life?

Why should so much be going on below it?

Why?

So then we have this hint, imagination.

Maybe we can gleam a little bit of what's going on neurologically by what's happening in the imaginative realm.

So we say the ability to have sensory and emotional experiences without engaging sensory input.

So this is Chris and Prasalan and Andrew and Hannah have tried to identify what imagination is.

It's sensory though.

It is sensory because it does engage the same large-scale functional neural networks that process sensory inputs.

I myself did not know this.

I myself, and I told Chris, I said, you know, when I'm doing a lot of math or something, I try not to leave.

I find myself not able to operate like heavy machinery.

And I've spoken out about this, like very, very honestly.

And he was like, Shanna, that's because those machines,

they actually compete for the same hardware.

And I said, you've got to be kidding me.

So in the paper, he gives an example of one of his professors that would speak but was holding the wall at the same time to remember that the wall is there.

But the imaginary field is so full.

So we talk about resource sharing.

So sensation and imagination compete.

They render inner speech difficult in noisy environments.

And visualization difficult during visually demanding tasks like driving.

You don't want to be like thinking of thinking of something like a perfecto in your driving like that is a red light, you know, stop.

So sensory deprivation actually enhances imagination.

Why?

So I'll just go quickly through reality monitoring.

There's, you know, the unintentional blindness of abstract thinkers, somebody like me, you cannot physically see the outside because your mind is thinking of everything else.

This can be chalked up to competition from imagination.

So again, sensory networks can be taken over by imagination and then imaginative experiences, episodic memories and thinking.

These are very present to awareness because being both sensory and emotional, they're treated by the brain as both important.

So this gets really interesting.

So this reality monitoring network involving the most phylogenetically recent areas of the prefrontal cortex really has the task of distinguishing sensory inputs from imagination.

Do we have a distinction?

Can I tell what's real versus what the matter is?

And we wanna label them as such an awareness.

So in neuroscience, we experience these imaginings as memories and pictures, and we're gonna use them to understand the world.

So the picture of the brain is employing all of its available resources to model the world,

And to act appropriately within it has been given a beautiful, elegant mathematical formulation for extended fields.

I've both done this.

The free energy principle, we have worked on this, that any system will behave so as to minimize, to the extent possible, its uncertainty about its environment's future actions on it.

Absolutely 100% here.

So we formalize it as a variational free energy principle.

So it's actually a thermodynamic principle that applies to all classical and quantum physical systems, not just to brains.

So we're actually, it drives the process of active inference, incorporates learning about the world as it presents itself, and actively probing the world to provoke informative responses.

So that you're constantly performing all of this, you know, is beautiful, and it also leads to, it's dynamic.

It is dynamic, and we're actually trying to figure out what is the self in a free energy principle, and what happens to the self as, you know, as you apply a variation to this.

And the time...

to support such an elegant theory like FEP.

So I should pause there to see anything else before we launch and just to the next chunk of the actual arty stuff.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Well, there's already so much.

I know, sorry.

For some of the formalisms, I'll look forward to it.

A few comments.

On the point of math and heavy machinery, they say don't derive and drive.

That's what I've heard.

That's great.

Then on the type one and type two, it made me think about how rather than a category

of thought or simple modes that are exclusionary to each other type one and type two are like axes in a space of behaviors and so there are quadrants so to speak and you're speaking to the phenomenology of the outlier which is that

flow with skill and novelty.

And then one last point was you talked about active imagination and that fits in very well with some of the computational models in active inference where attention is a policy selection

so it puts attention as mental action in the same exact formalisms that we would use for bodily policy selection and and uh the choosing from affordances attention and the inner world is like policy selection on inner landscapes and i think there's many angles to explore with

What does it mean to create?

What does it mean to recreate?

What's recreational?

What does it mean to member?

What does it mean to re-member?

What is this aspect of initial generation?

And what is the aspect of regeneration when we use our generative model as a regenerative model, potentially authenticating the observations like you described earlier?


SPEAKER_02:
Wow, that is so beautifully said.

I'm really interested in these inner landscapes.

Okay.

Yeah.

Once I talk about bacon and the BW body without organs, I would love to see what you think after that.

Excellent.

Okay.

Let's, let's carry on.

I love these talks.

All right.

So I think I briefly mentioned hesaity before.

I do think it's overlooked in the, in like the

the realm of neurology, and maybe we should take a look at it.

So, um, did losing Atari quote, uh, coined this notion of his Sadie?

Um, and what is this, right?

So the has Sadie, uh, we're going to get to get to the definition about two seconds, but it's a new take on what individuality actually means.

So it's an individuality that is devoid of, that is trying to free itself

from subjectivity.

So they say like trying to be a subject, sometimes that's actually too much to ask for someone who may be like, you know, hurting or in a state of like, you know, extreme pressure, maybe didn't do so well on something.

Actually requiring someone to be a subject could be too high of a toll.

And an individuality, a hesed evokes an individuality to something less than a subject.

I found it so freeing.

I was like, can I just please be a horse today?

Can I please just, you know, can I be a glass of water?

Can I have the being and the affordances of a glass of water and put aside the subject just for a second?

I need to rest.

Right.

So this is the kind of thought process that like happens.

And all of us know that in intense academic programs, you have to kind of rest, you know.

So when we talk about, again, the neuroscience of creativity.

So what does it mean to have a decreased activation of the sense of self?

So we asked this, Chris said this so funny.

What is this sense of self and how does it relate to the self?

Sense of self and how does it actually relate to the self?

Can you actually parse this?

Should we say that the self observes the sense of self?

Or does the sense of self observe itself, right?

And I know FEP can guide us through something like that.

There's not a lot of propositions that could, right?

If you don't have FEP, you may not be able to like fine tune this and this kind of dynamicism.

Most people would just jump right over it.

So these, like the reflexive play on words, which is the very ground of like priest, you

logic paradoxes and thought paradoxes and which she calls limit paradoxes.

So anytime you put it like a self-reference on a system, you're going to have these problems.

So we invoke this notion of an eigenform.

It's a fixed point of a recursive process.

And we're going to say that like saying, you know, that you have this this

iteration, this recursion, actually generalizes the idea of an identity operator and it's going to implement the eternal return.

So we're trying to sort of mix this reflexivity with authenticating an object

And what does that actually mean with the eternal return?

So again, Deleuze brilliantly says, it's the law of a world without being, without unity, without identity.

Far from presupposing the one or the same, the eternal return constitutes the only unity of the multiple as such, the only identity of what actually differs.

So coming back is the only being of becoming, and the function of the eternal return as being is never to identify but to authenticate.

So those two, once again, we are finding two worlds that are colliding on the authentication, different phenomenologies.

So if we conceptualize math, art, and all creative activity as ways of distilling experience into meaningful and memorable summaries or abstracts.

So how do you impose meaning?

Why does an agent impose meaning and how?

External meaning, internal meaning on the internal landscapes.

So we're saying that these are actually technologies for preserving useful and significant aspects of experience over time.

But we 100% say memory is constructive.

It requires an act of authentication.

You've got to be real careful about what's actually being authenticated.

Like you said earlier, member versus re-member.

So that qualifier re is actually kind of troubling.

So Chris brilliantly said, the dark ages lost not so much text, but the ability to read them.

So we say if identification is by definition post hoc after the fact, what is actually being authenticated?

What is this?

Once again, I think this is another limit paradox.

I'm taking the notion of authentication and ramming it until it's going to fall apart.

So Deleuze says Hesseity is, again, another mode of individuation, very different from that of a person, subject, thing, or substance.

You reserve the name Hesseity for it.

A season, a winter, a summer, an hour, a date.

They have a perfect individuality lacking nothing.

It is not a thing or a subject.

A degree of heat, an intensity of white.

Perfect individualities.

Notice this abstraction away from the subject.

We talk about the aha moment.

We're going to say that the aha moment does not obey the ordinary time of doing and happening.

So if there really is no self present during the aha moment, who is experiencing anything?

Time without present.

I without I. This is nothing of which one could say that experience, a form of knowledge, would either reveal or conceal it.

Commensurate with it, there is no faith.

That is Blanchot.

Powerful.

So we're invoking heavy continental philosophy at the same time of a neurological phenomena, the aha moment.

So Blanchot is powerful there.

Commensurate with that aha moment, there is no faith.

What is that?

Meaning there is nothing measurable in that moment.

So we say that the aha time of bliss obeys the time of hesaity.

It's a completely different time.

It's that flow time.

It's sharply contrasted with the situational time of doing and things to be done.

So we say the individuation of a life is not the same as the individuation of the subject that leads it or serves as its support.

So hesaity time, it's not in the same time, the same temporality.

I think this is beautifully said.

So eon, it's the indefinite time of the event.

It's floating.

It's actually, it's something that is both going to happen, it's just happened.

So Blanchot also has this beautiful notion of passivity.

Absolutely passivity, no self-present.

To categorize the other as a depersonal time of bliss, it's almost as an abdication.

So all of this is self-abdication, either through mathematics or philosophy.

So in this state, there really is no self to grant the authorization to say that anything happens.

If there's no self present, who's to say that anything happens according to the inner world of experience?

So he has this quote.

He says, I would prefer not to.

That statement is an abstention which never had to be decided upon.

It precedes all decisions and which is not so much a denial as more than that an abdication.

I thought that was beautiful.

It belongs to the infinitiveness of patience.

So that sort of hard infinity, no dialectical intervention can take hold of such passivity.

So we've fallen outside the world of being outside.

We're immobile, proceeding with a slow and even step, destroyed men come and go.

This is the realm.

I love this realm.

In this realm, can we mathematize what's going on here with FEP insights and condensed formalism?

So when you get to source monitoring, there's a sense of uncapturable time.

Unreportable events occur.

and possibly intended, but uncontrollable actions happen, and it's forced onto us by quantum theory.

Quantum theory is a beautiful theory about non-fungible or unshareable information.

Now, that's precisely the quantum phase information that distinguishes and individuates quantum states.

It enforces a radical uniqueness onto quantum systems, radically unique, challenges the very idea of fully transparent information sharing, non-fungibility.

So if we use the time of satiety, then it puts the reality monitoring in a new light.

In our own reality, we're monitoring, including our own ability to remember and authenticate.

But we are, moreover, only monitoring a simulacrum of the event itself.

It is non-fungible and unrecordable.

So we say that reality monitoring becomes a rationalizing reconstruction, a form of motivated reasoning.

It serves the need for a stability.

It doesn't really exist.

So the continuity of time, we are hardcore claiming that it's illusory.

So let's get into the self and jump into Grothendieck and Erdos.

This is really fun.

So we bring up Jung and some beautiful things that Jung was thinking about.

So the reportable self, the Shanna that, you know, participated yesterday.

It did all the things in the past and has plans for the future.

The self has beliefs and desires and other attitudes.

The self with relationships, right?

This is the constructed self of memory in words of Seth.

So the reportable self, the experienced self, the I that speaks and thinks, this is the I that directs the body, it's conscious.

But sufficiently severe anterograde amnesia can almost surgically remove the experienced self.

I spoke of Clive Waring before.

Clive Waring has lost personal memory, still has motor memory.

We'll walk in and say, I've never seen a doctor before in my life.

They visit him all the time.

I've never seen a piano before in my life, but can play one.

What sort of experience is this?

Clive has about a six second memory, right?

Where's the authentication in a six second memory, right?

So Clive's use of I is profoundly different than mine.

So I, Clyde using an I, this actually has no enduring first person subject reference.

And what can we make of that?

So we're going to formally distinguish this constructed Cartesian self from the ungraspable self of Hesiod, what Jung is going to call a virtual point.

So Jung started all this, virtual point.

It's a virtual point on some kind of scale between unconscious and conscious.

So our interest here is in what this experience itself is like, how it differs.

So here's the aphantasia spectrum that I spoke about a bit earlier.

A lot of people live without significant internally verbalized thoughts.

Now, for people in academia or people like Daniel and I, I'm talking to myself all the time.

So imagine a world where there is no internal verbalized thoughts.

So Zeman actually sharpened this distinction by introducing the Fantasia spectrum.

So people capable of experience rich multimodal imaginings on one end, people severely efficient in imagination in at least one modality on the other.

So we actually write in the paper that we ourselves, the present authors, are on opposite ends of the spectrum for the modality of vision.

I think Chris will remember like pure text, and mine has so many colors in it, I don't even know what's happening.

So aphantasia, it applies to all uses of the imagination, including the reconstruction of episodic memories.

There are some people who have no biographical memory.

Aphantasiacs also experience deficits in episodic memory, the purely verbal textbook-like episodic memories of C.F.

Crisfields.

So curiously, but dream imagery can be preserved in aphantastics.

Dream imagery can be preserved.

So somehow it's the conscious attention to imagination that is deficit.

And I found that perplexing.

But then Chris said, well, it's not really surprising.

Conscious attention is a competitive process.

Who or what wins the competition is not voluntarily chosen.

So many things are competing here.

So let's jump into the body without organs.

So we say if the self is actually a construction, what are its identity condition, right?

So what guarantees that the self that I construct now is the same as the self I constructed as a child, as a student, or even yesterday?

How can we make any sense of any proposed continuity of self over time?

Chris and I are still on this, right?

I am like enchanted by the notion of overtime.

What does that actually mean?

So the standard idea of like a closest like causal continuer, like the eye, the eye somehow moves through something that doesn't really straightforwardly apply is claiming that I am still the constructor of myself.

merely begs the question again.

So maybe we could see learning or experience generally as modifying the self either gradually or by saltations, which we think maybe that's what it is.

So Deleuze and Guattari posit this body without organs, right?

We're really going at it here.

where they say that a body is actually not defined by the form that it determines, that determines it, nor is it actually a determinate substance or subject, nor is it determined by the organs that possess it.

So Artaud was notorious for waging war against the organs, right?

I don't want the organs.

I'm independent of them.

And so they define this body without organs, which is actually trying to free itself from the determinism and say that it's a collectivity.

It's an assembling elements, things, plants, animals, tools.

It's not my body without organs.

Instead, the me, the me is on it.

Or what remains of me?

Unalterable and changing in form, crossing thresholds.

So Burroughs famously wrote about this, about how in some people's certain deficit, like functioning, organs would just seemingly sprout anywhere.

The crossing threshold is really fun.

So it actually, the VWO, it proceeds by contagion.

rather than by categorizable identities that, quote, stay stratified.

And so they call the three axes of stratification, organization, signification, and subjectivity.

So they say, after all, the organism, it's not at all the body.

It's a stratum.

It's a stratum on the body without organs.

So in contrast to the pressure of continually having the same self over time, whatever that actually means, they offer quite the opposite.

I love this quote in the text.

This is in the Capitalism and Schizophrenia books.

So they say, when a psychoanalysis says stop, find yourself again.

We should say instead, let's go further still.

We haven't found our body without organs yet.

We haven't sufficiently dismantled ourselves.

Substitute forgetting for anamnesis, experimentation for interpretation.

Find your body without organs.

Find out how to make it.

Most importantly, they say, it has nothing to do with fantasy.

There's nothing to interpret.

So Deleuze and Guattari famously are trying to overthrow ontology, get rid of interpretation, which seems to classify the very thing they're trying to free.

So through the BWO, I made this connection with Francis Bacon.

which I thought was really powerful.

So most people see the work and they're like shocked at the level of the nervous system or something like this.

So Francis Bacon did some wild things.

And Deleuze has a very beautiful book on him called The Hysteria of Painting.

So Deleuze views the becoming of painting in the form of a logic of sensation.

It functions through hysteria by way of a primordial pre-representative sensation.

It's foundational to and over any accessory forms.

That was my take on it.

So Deleuze claims that painting, in the sense of Bacon, becomes a hysteria.

Or it converts hysteria, because it makes presence immediately visible.

Immediately visible.

Painting directly attempts to release the presences beneath representation.

beyond representation.

The color system itself is a sense of direct action on the nervous system.

Watch the reactions people have looking at a Bacon painting.

If there's something, what is that?

And Deleuze is trying to classify that.

He says, this is not a hysteria of the painter, but a hysteria of the painting.

So with painting, hysteria becomes art, or rather with the painter, hysteria becomes painting.

So in a sense, where does the BWO come in, the body without organs, right here?

Well, it says painting liberates the eye from its adherence to the organism.

The eye becomes the virtually, the polyvagant indeterminate organism that sees the body without organs as pure presence.

So painting gives us eyes all over, in the ear, in the stomach, in the lungs.

The painting actually breathes.

So another piece that Deleuze finds in Bacon's work is the phenomena of autoscopia.

Autoscopy is the phenomenon where the body is felt under the body.

So there's transitory organs that are felt underneath the organization of the fixed organs.

And he says something like, it's no longer my head, but I feel myself inside a head.

I see and I see myself inside a head.

Is there a psychosis in the world that might include this sort of hysterical condition?

So what if we geometrize the otoscopia, right?

Here's where the math comes in.

Deleuze calls math a monster slang, and that's probably because it can do things like this.

So if the body, Deleuze talks about

the body passing through itself to escape itself so the body is sick of the organization it's going to pass through itself to escape itself and you'll see these various points in bacon's work and the triptychs and things like that so it escapes from itself through the open mouth or the stomach or through the throat or through the point of an umbrella

and the presence of a body without organs underneath the organism, the presence of transitory organs under the organic representation.

So again, with the BWO, you are freeing.

So it's almost like the hysteria painting is allowing the BWO to sit on side of the color system.

So again, Deleuze is not advocating any kind of destruction.

He's saying care and caution must be exercised to produce such a, I called it a solarium, spatium of intensities.

So what is sought, it's not forlorn bodies.

So they make this very clear in their book.

They're not advocating something destructive, nothing forlorn or, you know,

bodies that have emptied themselves of their organs.

He's saying make it more dynamic.

Look for the point at which they could patiently and momentarily dismantle the organization of the organs that we call the organism.

So I claimed that a body passing through itself was a body without organs that became a Hesed.

And then, so if you can see the body passing through itself as a hesaity, then you can see the body passing through itself in the ways of, Deleuze calls it like the spastics and the hyperaesthetics that are indicated by wiped or scrub zone against on Francis' triptychs.

And there's anesthetics and paralytics by missing zones.

So you can also get a phenomenology about what is missing in these pieces.

So he says the zones are actually rhizomes.

But what's really beautiful is that when the body is indistinguishable from the paint colors that are used to produce it, then the body actually passes through the paint at the same time as it passes through itself.

So Bacon's form of painting as hysteria, it's actually Hoseaity.

Once again, recalling that climate, wind, season, hour.

They're not of another nature than the things that populate them.

They sleep and awaken with them.

So Deleuze says famously, this sentence should be read without a pause.

The animal stalks at five o'clock.

The animal stalks at five o'clock.

No subject object like Coppola here.

So I kind of put a spin on that and I said, likewise, this should be read without a pause.

Hysteria, painting, body without organs, becoming painting, becoming animal.

So we're about to jump into Grafendieck Erdosch.

Maybe let's pause and see if any, let's recap BWO and then I'll get to Erdosch and wrap it up.


SPEAKER_00:
OK, I'll just add a few comments.

Just try to connect some dots for those who are painting along.

So first, authenticate.

that reminded me of how we describe our experience or indeed pleasurable experiences as authentic.

And also authenticate has a more technical definition with cryptographic verification.

So there's some relationships with kind of lock and key cryptographic ciphers and the integrity of existence.

You mentioned stratification and you used the terms organized, signified, and subjected.

And you said the body is a strata.

And I thought of riverbanks and the body in development does go through being a point with the zygote.

And then it's a...

moving through topological and geometric phases.

Now it's a two layer.

Now it's a trilaminar disc.

And so we have a stratification through development and that's part of like the evolution of developmental complexity.

Then art as site kind of disassembling, but embracing this deep,

pointing, deliteralization or something of the point and seeing performance art and all art as performance, but the locus of performance, kind of like the cloud of the performance is the site.

It's like, you have to go to the show.

You have to be there.

It's about the experience.

And then even a type of aesthetics like fashion, there's like the narrative that comes along with the t-shirt that might look the same.

But then when somebody has a different quantum reference frame or aesthetic reference frame, it can mean a lot more.

And then just the last interesting point was that escape from Autoscopia is quite an interesting thing.

idea and should we pursue how should we pursue why would we pursue such approaches just because we can drive off the road or drive off one road or turn right or turn left or take off these affordances that cognitive entities have how should they be regarded and selected


SPEAKER_02:
as to not imperil oneself if that is even something to be avoided oh wow okay i can't wait to talk about that one more yeah escaping autoscopia or autoscopia and like flipping it internalizing that even more um

Yeah, this is excellent.

Okay, let's see if we can link all of that with comparing two mathematical giants, undeniably, Groth and Deacon Erdos.

So there is a fields medalist that recently tried to, again, you don't want to classify anybody, but they seem to follow different tracks, whereas Erdos is more of a problem solver, right?

Problem solver leaving, you know, like little jewels, like I'll pay you if you can solve this, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, right?

Rampant, publishing so many papers and things like that.

Versus Grothendieck, laying heavy, heavy foundation.

I'm not sure I was concerned.

Again, I would have loved to have met him.

But I know not particularly concerned with problem solving, but theory building.

Theory builder, right?

I can't even list everything, right?

So...

When we juxtapose it, we're saying, which self and which time do these two mathematical giants actually obey?

And where's the creativity involved in this?

Again, we are going to be infusing math and art into all of this.

Both of these different fields are wildly creative.

Erdos, again, super famous problem solver and like kind of more peripatetic, you know, kind of traveling.

Everyone knows these sort of eccentricities of traveling around.

And he would actually have the host arrange where he was supposed to go next, cook for him and things like this.

Completely different from Grothendieck who literally left.

like an erasing, an abdication.

So let's talk about these in a little more detail.

Again, we're just going by like references.

Neither one of us have met these people.

So Erdos is famous for saying, you don't have to believe in God, but you should believe in the book.

So the book is this, he actually believed that there was a book that contained the most elegant theorems and expressions.

And we say, what can we make of this sort of, he treats the self as it's purely as its mathematical value.

Self as mathematical value through his belief in the book of divination, containing the most elegant proofs and theorems.

Literally, according to like the life, I think according to Erdos was in its mathematical value, that's it.

How many things can I publish?

What can I do?

He is famous for stopping the use of an amphetamine or something like this for a month because his friends were worried about him.

And anyway, so he famously says, you've held mathematics back because you stopped me.

I looked at the blank paper like an ordinary person.

That's what he says, right?

So it's a little ruthless, you know, but it says that you held me back.

I looked at the paper like an ordinary person.

This is all in the autobiography, and it's also in the paper we talk about it.

So Young quotes St.

Paul famously, and he says, yet not I live, but Christ liveth in me.

So we ask, did Erdos not live, but the book liveth in Erdos?

I think that's one of our most profound statements in this paper.

Let's jump to Groffendieck.

Groffendieck was after, he actually writes about what he says is a profound symbiosis between the hand that writes and the spirit or thought and of the creative act as the archetypal act of the human spirit.

So by stating something like that, there is a thought to believe that Groffendieck was aware of Jung's work.

And this is very reminiscent of the actual virtual point.

So Grothendieck does not attend the Fields Medal ceremony, grows up stateless.

It's a completely different being and a completely different relationship with self.

So we say, what can we make of his literal disappearance?

So being in the IHES, he was heavily anti the military funding and stuff like that, but literally just left and said, what can we actually make of that literal disappearance?

Can we in particular see in Grothendieck's concept of a site, which is, again, I haven't defined that.

It's a category with a topology on it, very particular topology on it.

Can we see in Grothendieck's concept of a site, is that an abstraction of a point, an urge to grasp the virtuality and dislocation that Jung ascribes to the self?

So what is that?

You know, is that an actual way of grasping the virtuality and dislocation that Jung ascribes to the self?

How do you go from topos theory, laying the wakes for beautiful work in like a telco homology, algebraic geometry, you know, Grothendieck group, laying the matter for K theory, all of this stuff, to a question that haunted Grothendieck, which was, what is a meter?

What is a meter?

We have a very, very technical definition of what is a meter.

People, I think, have been kind of harsh with him and said something like, oh, well, at that point, he just lost his mind.

I'm like, is that what happened?

You know, is there a possibility that like, what is the time of mind loss?

Can we be a little more gentler with that?

You know, so, you know, you go from Topo's theory to like, you know, a complete hermit existence after that.

So a closing thought that we have to ask is about the limit paradox.

And we say, we are left by the above, not with an entity wrapped in a Markov blanket, but with an imagined entity wrapped in an imagined blanket.

So we say a quantum reference frame specifies a semantics.

So hence in the limit in which two agents fully share a common semantics and hence a common language, they no longer have separate identities.

Language itself becomes paradoxical.

Information is nonetheless shareable, although unfungible.

Communications exist.

This text exists.

You reading it exists.

The meaning you ascribe to it exists, most importantly.

Contradiction.

Indeed, a true contradiction, a dialithia, a limit paradox.

So we say such paradoxes arise wherever there is self-reference.

And it shows how science applied to itself generates these limit paradoxes.

So indeed, creative acts are limit paradoxes.

We can go, like, you know, the model that we construct, I want to, like, formally finish there, but everyone can find, there's more information about the very, like, empirical model that we define.

Our most important theorem is that an entropic categorization is a condensed set.

So we talk about, like,

the phenomenology of categorizing, you know, events, places, things, people, memories, and, you know, we call time is actually entropic because there is a flow of information that values learning over forgetting.

So, once you have a disruption in this flow of learning versus, you know, versus forgetting in something like in Alzheimer's or something like this, then

is time no longer entropic in that case.

So that's why we call these categorizations entropic, and we're going to say that this is condensed set.

So our famous prediction is that human retrospective and prospective memory are implemented by what we're going to call sheafification functors from a single pro-attel site.

So it's a site with a weekly attel topology on it.

So again, we're saying that monitoring the event-dependent phenomena through sites is the way that, you know,

is a better way of monitoring continuity, quote, over time.

So we're going to say if that's correct, then we expect to find no persistent neural representation of either past or future events, only mechanisms for constructing instantaneous representations.

Yeah.

And I think I just talked about that.

Yeah.

Why has sayity and the questions and yeah.

So again, you know, can like sites, you know, reframe authentication dialytheistically and

you do have this like over time kind of thing what time is that you know great okay so i'll stop there or stop like the formal thing there to begin a discussion if you wanted that i'll pause there in time that i will pause there then that i that i will pause somewhere yeah and that's what that's the beauty of it it's like

you know, you can trip over reality, right?

But as you zoom in, it's very curious as to what is, like, what is holding all that together?

And it's very curious that the physicists working on that, you know, dive pretty heavily into Eastern thinking, or you have Groff and DeGroote and Young, you know, like trying to figure this stuff out.

I don't know, what do you think would have a take on juxtaposing these vastly different

ways of existing and interpreting their worlds, right?


SPEAKER_00:
I want to pick up there and then of course we'll just see where we go and anyone who's watching may also add questions.

So the juxtaposition of Grothendieck and Erdos was very interesting.

And you described Grothendieck as a theory builder and Erdos as a problem solver.

And that seemed to map back into that type one, type two space.

like type one intuition is problem solving.

It's like the thing is falling off the table and there's a reflexive response

to solve the problem even before there's a theory of the problem or someone is skiing and they're able to use their body and extended cognitive apparatus and skill and all of this to solve problems that aren't even stated.

In contrast, the development of theory and generalizations and to codify is a case of

independent process.

You're solving a ton of problems.

You're solving every problem of a nail needing to be hit.

The hammer solves above any specific nail, but also it solves no specific nail.

And that I felt like was very illustrative and spoke to potentially other continua of doing and thinking.

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_02:
No.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Just again, it brings me back to this, like St.

Paul, like beautiful quote.

Yeah.

Not I live with Christ live within me.

So that also seems, uh, that's tricky.

I'm not sure if that's like case independent.

Right.

Yeah.

It's almost like, uh, I like that solving the problem before there exists a theory of the problem.

That's tricky.

That's tricky.

Uh,

and you know the the question is like what is the sense of self of a problem solver and versus a theory solver do you have to have a uh less tethered sense of self to be a theory builder because you're trying to figure out for all possible nails and that's i think that's i think uh

I think a lot of mathematicians do that, right?

Because it's just all about the, nobody really cares if you're well or not.

It's sort of just like, did you ace this exam?

Did you ace this exam?

Did you finish the theorem?

Did you do all of this?

And so everybody knows, you know, the reason there's a lot of like, you know, mental health, like scares and feels like that is because nobody really asks how you are.

So I'm wondering if all the ideas about how is Shanna?

Is she eating today?

She's sleeping all day.

You have to push it aside.

And look at all the pressure that Grothendieck's under.

You have to push all the Grothendieck aside to be an abstraction to create these theories.

To create these theories.

Let me put the self aside in order to create that many theories.

Versus somebody like Erdos, I don't think was particularly deeply emotional about these things or something.

But you know, Grothendieck had a lot.

There was a lot there.

And it's notorious in his like...

you know 800 page letters to people right something like who is he writing for who is he writing for he dipped out does not want to be found so there's a nice website that kind of like talks about like last interactions some a few mathematicians kind of saw him so they opened the door and the look was sort of like you know i i don't want to be found so what can you make of that like i don't want to be found yet i'm going to be writing

profound volumes right i don't even think what do you i don't even think that's a self that it's interesting to not want to be found but to continue to write who's who's the writing for when it is still in this sort of like epistolary form who's he writing to

So it's almost like, again, like you had to get rid of all the emotionality or put it somewhere else, which makes me think of like any mathematician is skilled on that, that young sort of line between conscious and unconscious and the self being like a point on it.

You know, a lot of mathematicians will identify as heavily, um, you know, autistic or something like this.

Right.

And why is that something that helps the mathematics?

Is it because your mind was free of the emotional turmoil of being a subject of something like this?

It's really sad.

What if you had something emotional happen to you?

Everybody knows you're not going to be able to perform very well on a math test.

So what is that?

What is it that the theorems are trying to trump the emotionality or something like that?

So you almost have to be in this monk state.

Probably or have a life that does not have a bunch of peril in it to do well on these things.

And so what do you think about that?

Like to do some of these like hardcore sciences, maybe you have to put the self aside or you abstract it.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
a few things there it seems related to maslow's hierarchy of needs and indeed the um higher order though higher and lower is just a spatial metaphor um it's possible for someone to be having the worst emotional day of their life but their blood pressure is regulated and there are complex feedbacks the way one feels can influence their physiology and vice versa but

Then zooming out to the level of the researcher involved in theory building, as well as the problem solver involved in applications like kind of research and practice, that is enabled by the physiology of society.

And so it is a scaffolded work that can influence the whole.

You mentioned the epistolary nature of growth index writing, which means in the form of letters.

And that's quite a connection, not just to the Bible and certain books of the Bible, which are written as letters, but also to this

emergence of art as sight if the art is a letter a letter is to someone someone could write a letter to themselves in the future or it could be like a letter whose kind of ironic performativity is that it's to no one or it's to um some imaginary character but the genre and the format of art that is a letter is


SPEAKER_02:
needing to be mailed and it has to be opened and read and so i think the letter is like a very plain text performance art yeah that's really beautiful because again you know there's like some sad things that occur by letter too right so some things it's interesting it's interesting that it's like let me write this let me deliver it to you so that i'm not there when you open it

It can take, you know, that's like the nature of surprise or maybe like a partner leaving somebody, you know, you hear these horrible stories, right?

All right, suicidal thing, like I left a note.

It's interesting that the letter writing, yeah, what is that?

I like that, needed to be mailed.

I love that.

You know, there's like photos of the place that he was at, like in France, just in the, I don't know, I think the population is like 150.

It's tiny.

And volumes, volumes.

Like it's like mailed to whom?

And what sort of mail system?

I don't think this is like, you know, Hedwig sending it by owl or something, but it's almost like, I don't know.

And that's why we were fascinated by that.

Because you go from someone who already excelled in everything, but had a very harsh upbringing into that world.

And they all say that.

They're like, you know, this isn't like the normal person that comes to like a, you know, mathematical like place.

And so in one sense, like, you know, I like that.

I like that it gave him more, whereas some people saw him as so strange.

I was like, maybe that's why, you know, he did so much, you know, because he came in with something different.

And, you know, you could also say that he was just sick of sort of the bureaucracy of everything.

But, you know, we, you know, are like lost mind.

And Chris and I were like, maybe there's something deeper there.

Can we be more gentle to someone in a state like that?

You know?

So I like this needing to be mailed.

I have no idea.

And a lot of mathematical working in Robert Langlands, like it's famous for trying to language program by writing a letter as well.

But it didn't have the same like depth to it.

So Glothendieck was on something else, which is why I really relate, because he's always about the philosophy in there.

I've often been perplexed.

I remember whenever I learned acceleration or something per second per second.

It's like, what is that?

And then you can do it again per second, per second, per second.

And it's like, what are these fundamental units?

Beckett talks about that in a lot of his work as well.

So we're really perplexed that Chris and I were able to slide around.

We know who we are in a sense, but we're not tied to something.

And we're open, that we ourselves can be able to intersect, I think, these heavy ideas and look at these grandiose personalities

from such a different space.

So it's like, yeah, there's theory building, but again, like, you know, when you mail a letter indefinitely, is it a message in a bottle that only somebody will read?

And, you know, there's kind of different, it's like, is it a mail, is it a letter addressed to someone or is it just addressed, you know, to the fact that quantum mechanically it'll be opened at some point, you know?


SPEAKER_00:
All right, a few interesting thoughts here.

Very early, you said thoughts, and then you quoted an author, and you said the paragraph begun with, at any rate, you have them.

Well, rate is what?

Something through time.

So even that just...

turn a phrase speaks to time and then is the self a theory well it does theorize about certain things and that was related to self in the sense of self is the self a problem to be solved is the self a solution to a problem

So where in the Grothendieck Erdos type one, type two space is self, self as problem, self as solution, theory of self as problem, theory of self as solution?


SPEAKER_02:
I love that.

Oh, wow.

Maybe that's the open-endedness.

Because I know some of the math stuff stopped, and then he was just enchanted by this notion of meter, light, speed of light, and things like this.

I don't know.

There's been a lot of cool work about

different physical theories about like a non, a variational speed of light and things like that, you know, or like primordial black holes.

So there was like, you know, or maybe is Grothendieck just really alone?

Was there like, well, you know, you, you have to think about things like that.

You know, if you had a collaborator or somebody that talks to you, like you or me, would that have changed something?

I don't know.

I don't know.

You have to think about like, is the abdication like,

Yeah, is the abdication a problem or a solution?

I'm not sure.

I'm really not sure, you know.

So, but again, like, you know, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Don't the solutions one day turn into problems tomorrow through time?


SPEAKER_02:
See, through time.

At any rate, you have them.

No idea, you know.

yeah and again we all know that to be high level functioning like you know someone like you and i are people watching this able to like follow this thread um you have like we are able to function so chris told me that very well i'm highly imaginative super hyper uh fantastic right and yet i'm like extremely functional extremely functional so we all know that deficit functioning can start plaguing um you know certain people like uh diagnosis schizophrenics or something like this that are actually unable to recognize the internal thoughts

as their own thoughts, you know?

And so

Sometimes neurology can be a little like not so kind with something like that and say, oh, you're unable to recognize the inner voice as your own.

Remember, I asked Chris that a couple of times.

I was like, Chris, whenever we're sitting there thinking to ourselves, like, who is that?

Who is that that you're actually talking to?

And he said, Shanna, just open, like speak whenever that thought is there.

Whenever the internal thoughts are there, just open and speak.

Sure enough, it was the same speaking voice that was inside.

And I thought, okay, so that, that's, that's not as mystic as I thought, but somehow if you're unable to source monitor and reality monitor that, like, what does that actually mean?

You know?

So in the case of like deficit functioning or something like that with these, like, you know, with schizophrenics, then you have to think, um, like how can you slowly reintroduce noticing the inner self to an extent that doesn't like blast apart the

you know, the current self, if that makes sense.

You know, it must be kind of scary to say, oh, wow, there's another person inside of me that thinks like this.

Or, okay, that's not the other person that thinks like this.

It's actually me.

I'm just not recognizing the other axes of me, like you kind of said earlier.

So I think, you know, you either have to be very chill with the fact that you have so many systems running at the same time, or you're hyper aware like Chris and I are, and you're functional with it.

Because I think if you're hyper aware and you're non-functional, then you're not going to be able to leave the hyper fantastic world and save your child.

You have to come back.

So people like John Nash and things like this.

Again, math and physics will do this to people because it's such a pressure cooker, such a pressure cooker.

And again, I think you have to put the self aside or something like that.

which needs to be dealt with.

But at a certain point, the hallucinations do occur.

And John Nash is literally seeing people.

And that famous scene in A Beautiful Mind, where he's like, I'll watch, I can give the baby a bath.

And the baby is almost drowning.

And the wife runs in, his wife runs in.

And she's like, what happened?

He goes, well, Charles is taking care of the child.

So for me, it's like,

I'm interested in this.

Can you be an excellent mathematician on this scale of Grof, Indyk, and Erdos and still care for your child?

Can you swing back to the actual conscious?

If you're a virtual point, if you have to, quote, focus, right?

People say, I need to get rid of distractions so I can focus.

Can you actually focus and then go save your child?

right?

Like this would be a sense of self.

What do you think about that?

Then you're like, I'm able to recognize my inner thoughts.

I'm not going to be pushed to a deficit functioning, right?

I'm going to be able to recognize what is real and what is not.

I'm not going to let hyperphantasia tilt my complete axis, but I'm going to be able to come back.

I'll be able to go fully to the imaginary space and come back and take care of my family or stop at that red light.

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, a few things.

I'll respond to that.

And then two other areas that we're going to be touching upon are art, visual art, and history of philosophy.

Just kind of planting that.

So as to the, is it possible to be functional and imaginative in the context of deficits?

What if we flipped it and said it's a surplus of free energy?

And the lack of the deficit is the surplus.

And so that just does this kind of minimum maximum inversion that happens so often in the FEP.

And then also,

with this, again, type one to type two, problem solving to theory building, Erdos de Grothendieck axis that we're working with, it seems like both of them in a social cultural context can be aligned with service or not.

Someone can develop theory or they can ruminate on theory and have a failure to serve.

And although some mathematicians, and there's a particular mode with academia and everything as we know it today, where people might be obsessed with a proof and that leads them to neglect the bathwater, somebody else might be thinking about free throws in their head.

or they might be practicing their other skill and so there's different modes of rumination that might be just for different people in different situations look more professional technical academic or might be which is theory building right

or closer to problem solving and thus resemble more of a mechanical obsessive compulsive situation to art well in the title of this paper there's of course the creative and fun portmanteau of math art

And also the paper situates itself as describing the period from 1920 to the present.

Now, I guess it's always the present.

That's why they call it the gift.

But we can just take it as 2022.

So what happens from 1920 to 2022?

Why 1920 as a beginning?

And could you mention any movements in aesthetics or art?

impressionism cubism pointillism all these just different schools of art and fads and hype cycles what has happened since 1920 and how does that relate to your deeper stances yeah so again we're just seeing that through line that you know


SPEAKER_02:
of elimination, abstraction, reification, Yives Klein, blue on blue.

Where do you go after that?

Where do you go after white on white?

And so I think we're saying you have endless places to go through white on white.

So instead of just giving up and saying that once you've abstracted everything to a point,

I think that's where it's almost like, it's like, it's like a seesaw or something where art, you know, thought it was maybe kind of done, math swooped in and said, you know what, what is a point?

What is a point?

What is color?

Why don't we try to create dark colors?

Right?

So we all know that, you know, dark energy and things like this are what 90% of this place.

baryonic matter is like such a small percentage.

So you have a light spectrum, you know, that, I don't know that white light is prismatic.

What about dark colors?

You know, since dark energy does not interact electromagnetically with matter, then we create a dark energy equivalent of the cover color wheel.

You know, the color wheel looks like the circle of fists.

So I think there's like a lot of places for, you know, uh,

white on white to push through towards when you start questioning what is white what is things like this so we're saying that like through that abstraction through the dissolution of the self if you're going to abstract it away you have to really talk about what the self is if you think you have abstracted it away you really need to talk about what the self is and so i think

What we've done is shown that through 20s, right, with data and all this kind of stuff, you know, advent of like quantum mechanics and things like that, huge explosion on all kinds of realms.

But I think you can be guided by a couple of things, limit paradox.

Limit paradox, right?

The nature of self-reference.

You know, even when you have something as anesthetic, a term as self-reference, what is this self?

So I think what math is going to do is ask art to

Please ask, what is self?

And can you take these two lines?

Can you draw from a virtual point?

What does Jung have to do with the intersection of math art?

Is math art an inevitable consequence?

And that's what Chris and I are kind of like alluding to, that you have to join them possibly to get out of white on white.

Join them together, let them merge forces, and then you can start mathematizing Autoscopia and figuring out different spaces.

Right so like if a point is no like how do you define a point like a zero dimensional object or something like that, but if you re identify point.

As a growth and excite then you have actually infused a new set of infinities into that point so Chris and I are advocating for.

If you think you've done it if you think you've gotten rid of the self if you think white on white if you think you've just.

squished everything to a point or something like that well the gothic notion of a site and category theory is going to always allow morphisms and ways out so i think it's kind of cool that like you know in the vein of like deluse we should follow deluse and gattari uh through this work of his deity try to invoke a mathematization of his deity and then you can see something like

body passing through itself like i think art can always go further go through white on white what does that actually look like you know like create create the white hole create quote on the other side create all sides at once i know i always do this thought experiment of like you know what if i could draw an object from 360 degrees or what if i could be you know

Or like, you know, if you want to proceed by the way of like limit paradoxes.

Why is it that every day I wake up and I'm the same?

You know, I'm not like a lobster or something like that.

So these kind of thought experiments, I think can like, I don't know, I don't know if what I said makes any sense.

But does that make any sense that you can push through this?

And that maybe possibly math art is like a necessary emergence?

Or does math art become the space of affordance?

You have such great ideas.

What do you think of any of that stuff?


SPEAKER_00:
Well,

to return to this historical dance and interplay with philosophy art and math

I'm reminded of the development of perspectival drawing in the, let's just say, latter half of the 1000s millennia, where there's a few points.

There's the vanishing point.

That's like the classic, you know, on the horizon, you draw the string and all the buildings go towards it.

and then there's also the the point of perspective and there's like the light point source and there's the center of gravity and all of these complexities relational complexities do play into that zero dimensional point concept

If we have a rich point concept, like to point at perhaps, to point at a locus of action, or to use a point concept like that from Bucky Fuller's synergetics, where a point is just a tetrahedra that you're seeing as a speck, but it's a geometry of lumps.

And so you have space packing of finite, actual space enclosed shapes.

and a point is just one that you're really far away from it's outside of your kind of tuned into it then there's more richness and there's also a an inherent plurality in those points whereas the vanishing point and the cartesian observer it's um it's narrow

and then that leads to potentially a narrow or fragile or overfit self for whom even small changes can be extremely troubling whereas if the self is more like a swarm or a locus of action then certain phenomena that might be more troubling potentially up to and including death


SPEAKER_02:
are more naturally part of the becoming of that locus rather than the cessation of a point I love that and then from the nature of authentication if the self is multiple so I completely agree with you on that there is nothing fixed and a swarm can more quickly uh be able to respond react

Can like theory, perhaps theory building will lead us to the self to be multiple in a swarm.

I agree.

With the ability for each point in the swarm, act, act, act, act, act, act, act.

So it could lead to a crescendo of actions.

I agree.

I know in like, you know, in really, really beautiful, like martial art training or something, teach you to be ready.

Be ready, be open.

Because if I'm sitting here like waiting for somebody to come this way and somebody comes behind, I'm already lost.

Be open, be omni, right?

So I think that's like, yeah, it's a different state.

It's a different state.

So theory building, I think absolutely relates with swarm thinking and swarm multi.

So if point is multi, then point is able to engage

with with more things.

Yeah, I agree.

And I think that's what sight is doing.

So instead of having a, like a final point, this is like the final point, you know, she theory and stuff like that is going to say above every point, you actually have things that collapse down to the point.

So it's no longer even about the point, it's about taking the inverse image of the point and seeing what lives like upstairs.

And hopefully that that's what never ends.

Yeah, so point more as portal, I think is what I'm more interested in, you know, or self as portal, something like that.

Yeah.

Versus in this finitude, I am this, I am this.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
That's...

how we end sentences with a point.

So it does have a finitude.

A few more art comments.

Kandinsky, the artist, had works that considered, for example, point and line to plane, which looked at some complexity of geometry and topology on the plane.

And also wrote concerning the spiritual in art.

and spoke of an outer sound and an inner sound.

And I think that is kind of presaging this dark matter of colors.

Aren't colors defined by their visuality?

It's like, well, yes, and matter is defined by its interactivity with other matter, yet

under those calculations, most of it isn't even doing that.

So what is the inner color such that even though we know that the printed image or the computer screen is only displaying one RGB value, what is it that allows you to look at someone's cheek and see depth

And how does that sort of inner sound and inner color relate to the letter being received?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I agree.

And I do think Deleuze helped Harold that while that book is not written in the 1960s, but like the, you know, I mean, like, wherever he says the, you know, painting as hysteria.

So I agree, it gives that sort of, it's no longer about the color, the color

passes through at the same time.

So there's levels of becoming.

So the brush stroke, right, becomes an antiseptic or like a form of abdication, body leaving.

At the same time that the smear or the brush stroke, right, leaves color.

So color becomes representation.

I becomes polyvalent.

And that's the kind of thing that I think, with respect to what you said, that Deleuze can give us that.

So Kandinsky saying inner sound, outer sound, and Deleuze I think would completely agree and point to something like

Francis Bacon, whose work is defying that subject-object relation.

So you just see like a scream, right?

A lot of his figures just have open mouths and things like that.

So you're just seeing the intensity of it without the subject-object copula.

And for some sense, there's an immediacy in that, like there is an aha.

So the sense of the scream is definitely not, I don't think it's of the same time as like,

I paid my rent today, right?

You know, so it's at the level of ghastly, which whatever that is.

So that's why Chris and I are saying that all works are, you know, creative, like whatever type they are, in the proportion of like true provocatization, right?

So here I am, here's a work of art, I'm going to like take away your continuity and subject object Coppola, and I'm going to make it a hysteresis.

And I'm going to put eyes everywhere.

Eyes everywhere.

So that leads into, again, like multiple swarm, swarm thinking, you know, put eyes in your head, you know what I mean?

Eyes everywhere.

And so I like what you say, like, it's not about RGB.

It's not about RGB.

And you have to think about people like, how does Clive Waring see color?

So I think we need to be really careful about these sort of, like, molar structures.

Color is this.

And rephrase that as to what color could be when it leaves, like, circle of fists or when it leaves this.

Or merge color with something else, you know?

Have another, like, synesthetic experience.

And what is that?

Yeah.

Yeah, so I think Deleuze did that really well of taking these ideas and actually noticing in Bacon's work like a symptomology, a symptomology.

Oh, this is a symptom of hysteria, right?

And not hysteria, again, like not hysteria of the like painter, but hysteria painting itself.

So I think that's very cool to give life force to the painting and allow painting itself to

to become, but you can't like fix it.

So I like how he says that it's like, he has this whole book about becoming sorcerers and things like that.

And so he was like a critic of Freud that sometimes for reducing everything, people would come to him with severe problems and he would say, oh, it's because a dad issue or something like that.

So it always like localize it versus having like polyvagant organs everywhere, you know, something like that.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah right i'll give some comments and i'll read a very nice quotes from ali in the chat so what that made me think about is the hunter is an identity hunting is a process that's happening in time but the hunt

the game the forage those are more of these um hesedis they exist abstracted from the process and from the identity though we may linguistically symbolize it um so i'll read some quotes that ellie's added these are um i think bring a lot of depth to the pieces you've raised so

recur returning earlier to discussion of problem and problem solving so this is from jeffrey bell an inquiry into analytic continental metaphysics and the quote is a problem is a non-mereological

parts and wholes, non-mereological part of its solution, meaning a part that cannot be separated and detached from that of which it is a part.

And this is a part, moreover, that is not exhausted by the determinant solution of which it is a part.

And I think in terms of the history of philosophy, and then feel free to add any comments, we can contrast this problem concept, theory of problems, Grothendieck on Erdos, and we can contrast this enmeshed relationship of problem and solution with a classical Hegelian dialectic of the sequential nature, problem,

solution consequence or other ways to state the hegelian dialectic but that is often framed in time

as like first there's a reaction then there's a counter reaction then there's a synthesis as opposed to this instantaneous assemblage concept of problem and solution in which they're all coexisting and so therefore the seeds of the solution are in the problem and vice versa now rather than through time only and maybe both are


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I like that.

Yeah, thank you for these beautiful quotes.

I do love, I always tend to respect everyone for trying.

So everybody's trying these theories.

And, you know, I myself always had a problem with it's like, okay, you know, nature of the problem, like thesis, antithesis, or whatever, and then synthesis.

So I jumped right into Adorno's negative dialectics.

I thought that was really powerful.

Because in Adorno's thinking, you know, like, that synthesis is

Don't let the synthesis hurt the multiplicity.

And so it's like, can you have thesis and antithesis and then have a synthesis that doesn't destroy both?

That's why we think the nature of this is to go through dialetheism.

Imagine a beautiful world where you could have A and not A existing.

And this is why I think people wouldn't hurt each other so much, you know, or wouldn't like make these harsh comments like, oh, they lost their mind or something like this.

Maybe they're in this dual state.

Maybe it is the state of, you know, Shanna wants a banana, but she also doesn't.

So I think the way out of this is going to be kind of hefty, and it's going to be through merging these two beautiful quotes that were just spoken.

Can you merge these in a way that doesn't lose them both?

And that's the nature we've been struggling with for a long time.

The nature of conflict, could it be to lessen the conflict by going the dialetheistic way through negative dialectics?

Can you actually do that?

What kind of a space?

What kind of new affordances would you actually need to be able to hold both states?

And I think possibly that's where we're getting.

Could you be both Grothendieck, Erdos?

Could you have Hegel and Adorno actually in a room talking to each other?

And what does that actually mean?

We just need to always be quick to not mute or take away the voice of someone who possibly cannot speak.

know so to just say deficit functioning is what's causing these things like can you actually can we hold clive can we like hold that space uh and i think in the nature of these two quotes i'm reminded of a clive a quote that clive said where they asked him uh where is home i've spoken about this before and he says home is yesterday so i found this doubly perplexing because here's someone whose concept of time is six seconds

Clive doesn't even have a yesterday, according to my sort of Western thinking.

But yet he says home is yesterday.

And Clive is not an invalid.

There's something actually here.

So I think, you know, to say thesis, antithesis, synthesis, you could be excluding the synesthetes or somebody hyperphantasic like me that can at the same time see a problem, like can see all of them at once.

And it becomes like almost unbearable, you know?

So what kind of mindset are we valuing?

When we value like someone who can actually see these, what about for someone who they all happen at the same time?

And so that's like in the synesthetic realm, I think we need to not exclude that.

Let us not exclude that.

But also with regards to those two quotes, you have somebody like Barth saying, if you're really gonna have like a synthesis, please make sure it is not antiphrastical and that we are not lying.

Please make sure you're not saying that you support something which you actually aren't.

Don't try to support the voice that you're diminishing at the same time.

So I agree.

How do we hold affordances that will lead to a swarm, a very dynamic agent, a dynamic agent that is capable of becoming?

Cable becoming and not lost in it.

Let us not find nihilism in the limit paradox.

That's the beauty of math.

That's why I think math and art can really help each other.

Because mathematicians will just like, oh, you're telling me there's no solution to x squared is negative 25.

Well, I'll invent i. You know what?

I'll go up a dimension.

And so that's what I think we need to do to logic.

Can we add another dimension to logic?

Can we actually work in dialectism?

How can we do that?

Can we add another axis on painting?

Art is wild with that.

Can we add another axis of creation?

Can we try to paint from 360 degrees?

Can we imagine everything from all points of view?

Like that would be a purely omni existence, right?

I had a discussion, it turned out to kind of a feud with a friend who, you know, I don't like losing things and it's very hard on me.

So like people or, you know, animals and things like that, it makes me very sad.

But it was like, you know, I was like, I wish everything was infinite.

And he actually challenged me that I wouldn't be able to handle hard infinity because he said even the horrible memory would last forever and things like this.

So is there a way for us to like,

put the thought and the spacing so you're able to handle these things that were possibly infinite infinite Becomings and things like that without doing the Infinity and they're like nihilism you know thank you for those quotes they just spawned all of that you know could you describe what dialectic means and how it's used here

Yeah, so dialetheism is a logic that removes the law of the excluded middle.

So if everybody knows this, I always find first order logic very limiting to creatures such as vivacious as us.

So the excluded middle says something like, you know, P or Q, not P, therefore Q.

I thought this was so incredibly boring and limiting.

You're assuming that I am not multi-sentient, I'm not a multiplicity, and then I'm definitely not a synesthete.

So, Dialetheism is going to replace that and say you can have a logic that's structured such as P or Q, not P, therefore P.

So I think it is completely revolutionary and it's a very, it's a nice logic that would be fit quantum mechanics and things like this, right?

It is the very nature of having a parallel universe.

So if you do believe many worlds, which I think most people have to at these days, unless you posit an infinite observer, then you are guaranteed the existence that at every mode of uncertainty, there is no collapse of the wave function, everything is realized.

How do you do that in a language

the language would have to be dialetheistic.

You'd have to replace the law of excluded metal with something like, oh, Shanna chose the pink sweater to wear for the talk today instead of the blue.

The instead of also has its own reality, but the ontological status of that is very beautifully questioned by Chalmers and all these amazing people.

And so the dialetheism would actually be able to give you

pink sweater and not pink sweater.

And so I think something like Chris and I being trained in that are able to hold these very interdisciplinary papers.

If you know me, I'm such an advocate for like, can we please design like a universal institute where like, you know, Daniel, me, Chris, everybody's in a room thinking, artists, mathematicians, like physicists.

So there is excellence to being the problem solver just with respect to your discipline.

But can we open this a little bit and become more theory builders?

So I think that by merging, you know, I think you have to have a different mindset, something like me and Chris that are open to the sort of P, you know, that this is natural to our language to say both P and not P. Then we're capable of writing these very heavily interdisciplinary papers.

You do find some people that are like, I don't think I'd be able to work interdisciplinary because my field is this.

Well, why don't we merge them?

You know, and if merging leads to contradiction, that means our definitions weren't good enough, right?

Like math people love paradox and, you know, limit paradoxes.

It's like, let me do better.

Let me try a little harder.

Let me make that definition just a little better.

Point leads to like UV infinities.

I don't like this thing.

I'm going to make a string.

I'm going to make a string.

I'm going to make a string.

That might help.

What is a string?

I don't know.

And so there's this wild aha intuition driving all the physics.

They're very, very, very, all the hard sciences are very heavily trained.

So we're saying like, don't lose the aha.

And it's perhaps the aha

Joined with the technique that's actually doing something like this.

So again, if you could, that's what dial atheism means.

And so in this case, right?

The dial atheistic work is that you have both a painting of color, but you also have an autoscopy at the same time.

It seems like those would actually tear apart the notion of form, but it's like you have this notion of underneath, right?

So dialethism is questioning whatever you're calling the level of awareness and like, you know, fundamental units of life.

So, you know, I've taken, you know, sick people in comas and things like that.

Like sometimes they can still hear you.

It's like, let us not be so hierarchical about the fundamental unit of life, you know?

And so if you can open yourself, then you can have like, I don't know, maybe Chris and I are just trying to get quantum mechanics, like more in the macro state.

And then you have like, you know, dialethia and stuff, but I'm also more gentle about

Because I know it's hard.

You're like, no, I want that.

No, I don't.

That's like the basis of very human existence, right?

I would love that, but I wouldn't.

So it's like we are those kind of creatures.

So we're just trying, kind of like Deleuze is doing with hysteria in saying that painting releases the presence underneath representation.

Chris and I are trying to write interdisciplinary works to release the dialetheism beneath

this sort of silo-ness, you know.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, thanks.

Just a comment and then some more great from live chat.

So if there is a unitary Cartesian observer, perspectival, drawing world that we're in, then it's not even really an excluded middle.

It's just either in one place or the other.

Yeah.

Whereas the swarm, the assemblage must be in multiple places.

And so it can be wearing the pink sweater and the blue sweater.

Yes.

As a quantum multiple worlds.

Yes.

As an imaginary counterfactual and in embodiment.

And so that's why the assemblage can do things now that even the most advanced processor can't do in series.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, absolutely.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me add some more great comments from the chat.

So Ian from Innersense, this was referring to your desire and or not for a banana.

Holding both states, taking the awareness of being in two minds about whether I want a banana or not and applying that to global issues

and group sense-making, so multi-scale holding space.

And then also, Ollie has added several comments, which I won't read all of them, about different spaces and metric spaces.

And also noted, Corey Shores, the logic of Giles Deleuze discusses dialetheism at length in the context of Deleuzian thought.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Yay, the logic of sense.

Yeah, that's like one of my favorite.

Oh, what a beautiful audience.

We should all write papers together.


SPEAKER_00:
In our closing sections, where do we go?

What do we do?

What are next steps?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah next steps we go everywhere so Chris and I are working on that like like that you know that if we could just get this theorem like you know an entropic categorization is a condensed set then all in that one sentence we're saying time is entropic it's still dynamic and we're saying that like um making like but it's not what we think it is if we can get an event

independent an event dependent logic an event dependent notion of time to make time itself be this multiplicity then we're actually going to have like a way to mathematize where maybe other fields stopped so where i think where we go there's so many places to go we start merging we start heavily more interdisciplinary fields i want to you know what happens when the when the guitarist paints

What happens when the painter sews?

I'm really interested in these intersections.

Use the things that we're really good at.

It's like my literary skills that made me really good at math or the way that I talk.

I don't play in this.

Look at how I speak.

How is that?

It's the artistic side.

And are these actually mutually opposed?

No.

So I think what we should do is advocate again for this multi-ness, not thesis, antithesis, synthesis.

How about thesis, antithesis, negative dialectics that every voice has heard?

How do you do that?

in a way that does not lead to utter chaos is through the dialetheistic way.

Can you see both points of view?

Can you see both of these?

Can they make sense in both ways?

And also to reincorporate imagination.

Imagination.

Don't forget it.

Don't forget the value of creativity in these things.

And to really hone the aha moment.

like take care of it you know so we're introducing something that's like let us be more like more more caring in these fields so when you think like and think about the sense of self that drives the next space so we're saying like hey let's take this what does math art actually mean math art is now and it's like a you know a dynamically growing portal neurodiversity right can we amplify the variations in these fields

And that's why I think it's going to get a lot of resistance with like, no, no, no, my field is this.

My field is this.

But we're into amplifying the variations of whatever actually made that field.

So I think now is the best time ever to... It's like amplify FEP through math art.

Are there actually mirrors of each other?

The mirrors of each other in a way that doesn't die out.

It's like, what happens when two mirrors see each other?

That's what we're after here.

It's like, we can actually try to get a more...

more dynamical definition of self and to not just toss it away and to say deficit this deficit this deficit this deficit this you know it's like oh tell me how you see things how do you see things because we all know you see what you are it's undeniable you see what you are uh inner thought outer thought inner sound outer sound so we're here to like

I think the more people in the room, the better, right?

So these very like exclusive institutes, I just work on this, I just work on this.

I think like, again, my ultimate aim is to have this like universal institute where everybody's working.

Everybody's working because you know what it's gonna do?

It's gonna refine that problem in a way that's universal.

So I'm really into universal languages, universal problems.

Can you take that rigid point of view that you have and make it dialetheistic?

Can you imagine?

Can you imagine everybody problem solving by universal languages or by dialetheisms?

then the nature would already be, you know, people that have six languages.

It's impressive.

It's amazing because they can just like tilt, tilt, tilt, tilt.

Like the basis is universal, but I can tilt if I actually need to.

I can tilt and just speak English.

I can tilt and just speak Mandarin, whatever.

But I am trained in the higher dimensional space.

So I actually think that we do have these like Jedi powers and we need to actually like retrain ourself.

And don't forget that imagination is a gift.

So if we can actually use it and not have it so excluded in the heart sciences, like it's like that aha moment is what led me to that, you know, that is pure aha thinking.

And then, you know, perhaps if we were more gentle to things like that, we wouldn't lose people like Grothendieck.

You wouldn't lose these, you know what I mean?

Like you just have to be more caring and open up the neurodiversity realm.

So that's what, and all the things that I'm in, it's like, that's my new like advocation line.

And so Chris and I think that through more interdisciplinary works,

you know we can actually hone that dialetheism you can actually hone amplifying variations um yeah and amplifying like adaptivity so i think the only way to survive like what's going on right now is to be adaptive right and so we just want to merge fields so that we can actually you know uh merge a lot of like math into neurology so it's like could you actually have a brain as a you know could you have a quantum mechanical notion of the brain brain is hologram

You know, is there a non-local behavior in the nervous system, right?

A lot of neurologists are not trained in stuff like that, right?

But infuse the mathematician, and maybe we are.

So after the MOC talk I gave, like, you know, these really brilliant, like, neurologists reached out, like, hey, I really like the model that you're doing.

So I just want all of us to sort of, like, work together.

So if we could posit that universal institute, I think that's in the nature of, like, FEP, you know?

I don't know if what I said made any sense, but you can tell that I care.

And so what are we trying to do?

It's like, we're not stopping with this notion of self.

We're going to try to come up with theory of thoughts, and we're just going to keep going until we try to reach that universal language.

We're comfortable with limit paradoxes, and we'll say it upfront.

What is the nature of true contradiction?

The fact that you can still understand me in this very nature.

You still exist, but I don't know how.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, very nice.

I'll add a few thoughts as we come towards our closing.

So different fields, connecting different fields.

First, couldn't ask for a better last name or collaboration to make it happen.

And is integrating different fields, like building bridges between different agricultural fields, they're different spatial locations, or is it actually like the electro and the magnetic fields in the sense that these fields are actually different measurement devices might pick up on one or another, or one mathematical model might consider these fields, but they're not spatially adjacent.

Yeah.

or sequential, but rather they're overlapping and they're enmeshed.

And therefore, how we model those fields and how they're connected, it's like that was the transdisciplinarity that we needed.

It wasn't a problem out there to be solved by concatenating or composing.

It was something about our own process.

And then just one last to those general questions.

And important social and participatory comments you brought up.

some other work we've been thinking about how the disciplinary model groups people according to their identities affiliations and their practices so biology department might have affinity with other departments at that school or with other biology departments and there might be a culture of microscopy and there's the person who's skilled in microscopy and those practices are what create that locus

It becomes that kind of a thing.

And the person with a microscope might be asking identical questions and have identical intentions and attentions to somebody who's using a satellite imagery or somebody who's writing poetry, yet the disciplinary model has fragmented those latent possibilities.

And so in contrast with that disciplinary model based around shared practices and identities and affiliations in a commons model,

people are linked through their shared concern, their shared stewardship, and their meaning.

And in those situations, we can be some people enjoying the park, some people are clipping the roses, other people are researching which fertilizer to use, or if we even need fertilizer, and there can be many practices and affiliations at the public park

under the auspices of a commons and so potentially thinking of the epistemic ecosystem as a commons to be stewarded collectively rather than some sort of corpse to dissect in a disciplinary fashion might bring some new people into the picture


SPEAKER_02:
wow i love the shared stewardship like that is so that is so beautiful you know it's like wow can you imagine if like every hard science had to have an elective like building a garden can you hold that harsh theorem and like take care of like a plant like that would be wow that would be so amazing daniel i think we have to like wow let's grow a plant

Let's make the shared stewardship.

Wouldn't that be so cool?

And they kind of do it with trade tech and stuff like that, like tech places.

But I think, yeah, it's almost like Elon's Ad Astra.

It's like, let's make it ad infinitum universal or something like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Take it to the limit.


SPEAKER_02:
Let's do it.

I'm so down.

I mean, you have the audience for it.

What a great community.

Yeah, shared stewardship.

Wow.

Hopefully one day let's keep fighting for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Indeed.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, thank you so much.


SPEAKER_00:
What an amazing conversation.

Really happy that you're all working on this vector and that you made time out to speak with us.

So great times.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you so much for having us and thank you for your lovely community that supports us.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Farewell.


SPEAKER_01:
Bye.

Bye.