## -qZYxSbJ38E

SPEAKER_01:
All right, hello and welcome.

This is ACT-INF Lab live stream number 40.0.

It's March 10th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on the slide.

This is recorded in an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

Check out ActiveInference.org to learn more about the lab.

All right, in today's number 40.0, the goal is to learn and discuss this very cool paper that was published on Archive on December 30th, 2021, A Free Energy Principle for Generic Quantum Systems by Chris Fields, Carl Friston, James F. Glazebrook, and Michael Levin.

And just like every video, it's going to be just a conversation going over some parts of the paper.

It's not a review or a final word.

And if anything, it's a cry for help or at least a cry for participation because there's so many areas where somebody with different experience or more knowledge about any of these domains could connect some dots or...

give some useful comments or critique.

So especially with this video, though, Blue and I had help from our colleague Jason Larkin with many of the details.

There's just so much to unpack.

So we'll try to make this a useful dot zero.

And then we're really looking forward to the dot one and dot two and so on when we'll be able to really go into some of these directions.

So

I hope if you're watching live or between now and the .1, check out the paper and listen to this discussion that we'll have now and ask some questions because this is just the beginning of a few new threads, probably more than the answering of questions, especially to any desired level of completeness or applicability.

So it's just the beginning.

That's what the .0 is about.

It's a new decade, 40.0.

So...

We'll just introduce ourselves and then go through a bunch of the paper.

And yeah, thanks again to Jason for a lot of help and Blue for awesome work on the slides too.

Okay, so I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass to Blue as facilitator.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm Blue Knight.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico.

And I have to shout out to Daniel, too, because you're always saying thank you to me.

But, you know, we all have to say thank you to you for providing the affordances to be here and, you know, discuss these awesome questions.

Big paper.

I am excited to delve into this.

I think it will, you know, start a lot of new trails.

So I think and also to bring back Mike Levin and to bring back Chris Fields and to bring back Carl Friston back to the active lab to discuss the dot one.

with us hopefully um okay so is there anything particular that you are excited about daniel or do you want to just power through it let's get let's jump in

So this paper really was trying to unite the quantum principles and the free energy principles.

So quantum mechanics and kind of delving into that.

And we will see some threads carry over from the last time that we had Chris Fields on here, maybe the last time we had Mike Levin on here also.

So how is the free energy principle related to quantum mechanics?

What does the FEP gain from quantum?

What does quantum gain from the FEP?

Are we using the FEP now to model quantum systems?

And why are we pursuing this intersection?

So this was kind of like the big questions kind of maybe we can start to answer with this paper.

So we are here.

Daniel, what's this map about?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, it's a question we're going to probably ask ourselves multiple times so we can insert it like a little emoji, but we can think of among the axes of variation or variability that we're going to explore or where we're going to tune our regime of attention or what perspectives we're going to take.

It's going to be like along two axes ranging from on the right side, FEP act-inf-like and

to the left side, which is like pre- or non-ac-dymph-slash-FEP.

It's the x-axis.

And then the y-axis is the continuum between quantum, which we'll probably nuance and hear many perspectives of what is and isn't quantum, but just to summarize it by saying quantum, and not quantum, like pre- or non-quantum approaches.

and so quantum FEP is in the upper right corner and we can think of it as being like connected in different ways to quantum non-FEP in the top left the blue and then FEP but from a non-quantum perspective like all pre now FEP active in green

And then what are all the other connections?

And so who's right?

Who's wrong?

Who's useful?

Where's their pragmatic value?

Where's their epistemic value?

What are we really talking about?

Do we agree on the phenomena?

Where is there agreement or disagreement?

Where are we in this complex landscape?


SPEAKER_04:
So I think in mechanics, we refer to it as classical mechanics and quantum mechanics.

So now we will be, this is like the dividing point maybe between classical FEP and quantum FEP.

Perhaps.

Let's see where it goes.

So the aims and claims of the paper, there are pretty much three, and we'll revisit these at the summary, because we're gonna just give you a broad overview of the summary of results right now.

Given the standard free choice assumption, the intuitive ideas of an agent or information gathering and using system, IGUS, can be fully formulated within background independent scale-free quantum information theory.

The second claim is that FEP can be a quantum theoretic formulation that renders it applicable to generic quantum systems.

And do you want to read the last one, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Three, when formulated as a generic principle of quantum information theory, the FEP is asymptotically equivalent to the principle of unitarity.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Do you want to read the first section of the abstract?


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

free energy principle or fdp states that under suitable conditions of weak coupling random dynamical systems with sufficient degrees of freedom will behave so as to minimize an upper bound formalized as a variational free energy on surprisal also known as self-information this upper bound can be read as a bayesian prediction error

Equivalently, its negative is a lower bound on Bayesian model evidence, also known as marginal likelihood.

In short, certain random dynamical systems evince a certain kind of self-evidencing.


SPEAKER_04:
So here we reformulate the FEP in the formal setting of space-time background-free, scale-free quantum information theory.

We show how generic quantum systems can be regarded as observers, which with the standard freedom of choice assumption become agents capable of assigning semantics to observational outcomes.

We show how such agents minimize Bayesian prediction error in environments characterized by uncertainty, insufficient learning, and quantum contextuality.

We show that in its quantum theoretic formulation, the FEP is asymptotically equivalent to the principle of unitarity.

Based on these results, we suggest that biological systems employ quantum coherence as a computational resource and implicitly as a communication resource.

We summarize a number of problems for future research, particularly involving the resources required for classical communication and for detecting and responding to quantum context switches.


SPEAKER_00:
It's like, okay, cool.

What does it mean?

How will it be useful?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so we're gonna unpack a lot of this and hopefully give everyone a good framework with which to kind of go forward into the dot one and dot two, maybe a little bit of background understanding.

The paper is very beefy, so we'll do our best to kind of lay the framework down.

They give us a good roadmap.

So there's five sections, the introduction, physical interaction as information exchange, and several subsections within that.

repeated measurements and system identification and subsections, the FEP for generic quantum systems, and the discussion.

And I think that they actually outline what's in each section, so we'll give you that outline overview as we go through the paper as well.

So just we're gonna use, we're gonna actually reuse some slides from active stream number 17.

That was when we had Chris Fields presenting information flow in context dependent hierarchical Bayesian inference.

I think contextuality is like an underlying thread that's pretty important here today.

So Chris kind of lays that out in that paper.

And so if you want to get into

and dive deeper into two spaces and channel theory, which we'll talk about a little bit, but yeah, that's there.

So use that for a resource.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one foreshadowing here.

The two pieces that they claimed in this paper as their goals was to connect contextuality to category theory and two spaces, and then connect that yellow formulation

to hierarchical Bayesian inference, more looking like the statistical models.

And so this paper is kind of building a category theory bridge with Bayesian graphs and statistics and category theory.

And then that's probably going to hinge over to a few other areas.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So we can jump right into the introduction.

And we're just going to highlight some keywords as we go through.

The authors didn't really give keywords for the paper, which I'm kind of grateful for because there's so many other things to unpack here.

So they highlight some things about the FEP in the words of the authors.

Since its introduction as a theory of brain function, the variational free energy principle has been extended into an explanatory framework for systems at all scales.

The FEP is a statement that any measurable bounded and macroscopically persistent system will behave to satisfy these requirements.

What else Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
It was just cool how they brought in the FEP as being the overarching level as

describing how these particles do two things, which is possess internal dynamics that are conditionally independent

from the environment and performing this self-evidencing feature by returning to some non-equilibrium steady state.

And so just which parts of the FEP they entered in at or emphasized, which we can assume are setting the stage up in their mind best for the interfacing or the on-ramping into quantum, whereas somebody interested in like a system or integration other than quantum might take a different approach.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

I think that they borrow also from our particular physics.

We're going to talk about particles.

And they talk more about particles in the discussion.

Maybe we can have a deeper conversation about those in the dot one and dot two.

But they say the Markov boundary of any particle that's an open exchange with external states via its Markov boundary underwrites conditional independence between its internal states and the external states of its environment by localizing and thereby restricting information exchange.

So the Markov boundary separates internal and external states by mediating their exchange.

We've seen that before.

Cool.

So what is active inference, Daniel?

Can you break it down for us?

Two-sentence overview.


SPEAKER_01:
That blanket that Blue just described with the insulation, incoming statistical dependencies can be interpreted as perception and outgoing statistical dependencies can be interpreted as control.

And depending on the situation and what's zero and what's not zero,

that can have a lot of dynamics that are similar to some other classic settings in decision making, gambling, experimentation, quantum measurement in this paper.

Very cool.


SPEAKER_04:
So what is quantum theory?

This is cool.

Just some pictures and it's connected in many, many different fields.

So there's a cool kind of concept map of where quantum theory intersects.

But, you know, the quantum theory here is the idea that that.

All physical systems, including the environment, can be considered observers that act on their surroundings to prepare them for subsequent observations.

That's become common in quantum theory, replacing the wave function collapse postulate of traditional quantum mechanics with interaction-induced decoherence, which is like the dissipation of quantum coherence.

This is like the thing that generates classical information.

And they say, indeed, while quantum theory was originally developed and is still widely regarded as a theory specifically applicable at the atomic scale and below, since the work of Wheeler, Feynman, and Dutch, it has over the past few decades been reformulated as a scale-free information theory and is increasingly viewed as a theory of the process of observation itself.

Yeah, I think when we think about quantum, we think about the observer.

At least I do.

I think about the observer phenomenon.

Just the act of observing a system changes the system.

So that's kind of a fundamental thing that comes to my mind.

What comes to your mind, Daniel, when you think about quantum theory?


SPEAKER_01:
Reading that leaves me uncertain whether we're talking about organic chemistry and the pi orbitals and covalent bonding and emission and all of those things that particles do, which is what it sounds like they're talking about in this orange part, a theory specifically applicable to the atomic scale and below.

And then this blue part makes it sound like they're opening it up into a much larger space.

So I think we'll probably learn a lot about that.

What does quantum mean here?

Are we talking about electrons and protons?

Or is this something that is like Bayesian inference in that it's scale free or scale a priori or scale friendly or something like that?


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Scale independence.

So we're going to jump right in.

So section two, they talk a lot about physical interaction as information exchange.

And that's something I wonder also, like, is, you know, we have the classical mechanics and do the laws of quantum always apply or at some scale are they, you know, not applicable or can we extend them into something like quantum?

theory of everything, like are we getting there maybe?

But here in this section they say that they use the category theoretic formalism of channel theory to formalize the operational semantics of natural languages.

So they develop a generic formal representation of quantum reference frames and show how the non-commutativity of quantum reference frames

induces quantum contextuality and i had fun really digging into this um at a level that i felt comfortable explaining it at so i'm excited to see if i if i bungle it or how it goes let's see okay what is quantum wow when physical interaction is used information exchange why is it quantum becomes obvious the fundamental quantum quantum of information is one bit

one unit of entropy that one system exchanges for another.

So one bit, one quantum of information is the answer to one yes or no question.

That is quantum.

Do you want to add anything here, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
this is the block text is from the paper and just one piece that will be interesting to explore is just how does time and temperature come together like i had just heard or thought more about the space required for storage and

not really seen it as much connected to the speed of obtaining that yes or no answer at different temperatures and what that might mean for biological or for digital systems but i'm sure that's a very um foregone conclusion maybe working with a quantum device but

new to me.

And Jason was like, Oh, yeah, of course, that's the case.


SPEAKER_04:
And they talk a lot.

So foreshadowing, they're gonna, you know, really present this within like a space time independent context, which is kind of cool, and then like, link it back to time, which that kind of gets a little interesting.

All right.

So moving on, Hilbert spaces.

So

Daniel, do you want to say a bunch about this?

Or what do you want to say about this?

And then I'm going to highlight some stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll just read what they wrote.

The red part was our comments on what they wrote.

People can pause it to read what they wrote.

The Hilbert spaces contain all states described as a vector.

And this is one way that qubits are constructed.

by relating two levels of a system, like electrons in a ground or excited superposition, and then the collapse into one or those other bands.

And so that's more of like a uncertainty to discrete transition.

But then in the limit of high temperature, there's a lot of blur or experimental factors that can be modeled as blur that results in a smoother distribution of outcomes.

and um here this hilbert space is describing how the experiment is set up and the information that's being modeled at a given time so the state of that this space consists of the options for is like the just the experiments space including the total target system and the observer

Maybe.


SPEAKER_04:
So I like this quote at the end that, as Fuchs put it, infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces are, from an information perspective, merely a useful artifice permitting computation with differential equations.

And they contain all the possible states in an experiment as vectors.

There's more to read about that and also the mathematical notation if you're curious about kets and bras and some of these brackets that we had to dig through to find solid ground.

Yeah.

Okay.

So the principle of unitarity is the principle that observable information like energy is neither created nor destroyed by physical processes.

And I thought that this was interesting.

So time reversal symmetry is essential for the conservation of information.

So a system is time reversal symmetric if its equations of motion allow perfect prediction of the starting point based on knowing the state of the system at any given time.

Thank you.

So like if you know a time, whatever, X time steps, you can still say something about the starting system because you can run it forward and backward in time.

And there were some cool things like about if you pulled up a mirror, that's like enables the time reversal.

So some things go forward, but like the spin of an electron is spun backwards in time, right?

So it's like those kinds of things, like some things are parallel and some things are opposite in time reversal symmetry, but anyway.

I thought that was interesting and fundamental to kind of the principle of unitarity and also because we're going to talk about time in a cool way, I think.

OK, so.

Yeah, unitarity.

What do you want to say about unitarity, Daniel?

I said a little bit, so let me pick out some things here that you want to talk about.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

This was all with just Jason helping us.

And again, it's like an opportunity for anyone who's familiar with these two formalisms to help us a little bit more through, but just to pick up on one point, just one,

as we mentioned, like we're doing experiments where it doesn't matter what time we started at in a sense, like it may matter in the sense that the different times lead to different results, but a statistical framework for observation that can

cut through some of the parts of the experimental context that are not relevant to compare different events that happen at different time in a unified statistical framework.

And so that was what led to this principle of unitarity that the total probability distribution is preserved with like a mass of one.


SPEAKER_04:
so that there can be information evolution but it's happening in a certain space where there's a certain invariance that allows useful computation to happen cool oh yeah conservation of probability so that's something that maybe came up um like the probability that a particle is somewhere like it's somewhere there's 100 probability that the particle is somewhere so it didn't disappear so that was another kind of interesting point we were talking um

before this.

I mean, that's kind of how you get the conservation of observable information as well.

Okay.

Separability and holographic encoding.


SPEAKER_01:
okay this one just to uh briefly look at a previous slide I think this was from 32. we were looking at sparsely coupled systems from a Matrix perspective and so the dense coupling of like subunits one through six with each other was mainly like within the click of the red or the blue but then there's these off diagonals that reflect the sparse coupling of denser clicks and so

In section 2.3 of this paper, they're also talking about coupling patterns in systems, specifically ones that have a separability

So, like, one of those blocks could be the experimental system, the quantum computer, and the other one of the blocks could be the experimenter, and then there could be sparse connectivity reflecting the experimental apparatus.

But that was being approached from a quantum holographic angle, also setting up for a Markov blanket take.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So one sentence on this page that I think is important is underlined here.

The entanglement entropy is a mutual information measure that detects quantum correlation or coherence between A and B.

And so that defines separability and either a system is separable or it's entangled.

So separable states are also called decoherent and entangled states are also called coherent.

So just point out as we go forward and kind of dive a little bit deeper into the math.


SPEAKER_01:
It's kind of like if it was parametric classical statistics, we would say uncorrelated or correlated.

If it was information theory, we'd say no information or yes, it gives information.

Bayesian graph, yes, it has causal influence or no, it doesn't.

And then this is the quantum take.

Yes, it's entangled or no, it's not entangled.


SPEAKER_04:
Also, don't forget conditional dependence or conditional independent.

So where is it conditionally dependent?

And we know that like the Markov blanket

can help to define conditional dependence when we've looked at active inference in the past.

Okay, cool.

So do you want to talk about the Hamiltonian?

Or not at all?

What do you want to say?

Not at all.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Not sure what you're saying.


SPEAKER_04:
So there's one cool thing that I want to point out here.

You know, we talked about like weak interactions, strong interaction, different timeframes and how these are going to vary as we go forward.

But here, I really just wanted to point out that this H of AB is like the Hamiltonian.

So we're talking about matrices.

separability, interacting matrices, conditional dependence, just on the last slide.

And so the interaction between the Hamiltonian of the matrix can be decomposed into this HAB, where this is like the interaction between A and B. So HAB can be looked at as we go forward as the energetic interaction between

matrix a and matrix b state a state b position a position b or um they gave it to us in a very generic form so i didn't really know how to apply that going forward but maybe if the authors are listening they'll come in and rescue us um that's the only thing i really wanted to point out from from that side

And then this is kind of cool.

So this equation six, which we just looked at, which is the energetic interaction between A and B, this is physical interaction, which I guess could be physical interaction between A and B. That could also be energy, right?

Matter.

equals MC squared.

Physical interaction equals thermodynamics times yes or no questions.

So it's cool the authors say, this formulation emphasizes what quantum theory is about.

The process of obtaining information.

Obtaining information from B requires in particular that A acts on B by asking questions.

As Wheeler puts it, no question, no answer.

All inference in this framework is active inference.

Equation 6 does not allow passive perception to be a physical process.


SPEAKER_01:
Super interesting.

Agreed from a lot of angles.

It almost takes it to a level we haven't seen from just saying, well, perceptual inference, even the generative type, so not just the signal processing, but even a predictive processing generative type,

framework for perception that doesn't take action into account is incomplete, hence the motivation for active inference.

And this is somehow escalating that

into saying that all inference in this framework is active inference and i wonder if that's because like a frame is always needed some kind of generative model is always needed as a recognition model dual for any observation so if you're in the business of making observations you're in the business of generative model modification one way or another or you're not the kind of thing that does either of those but they might come into play

in the minimal active entity or the thing that can be modeled as a minimal active entity and so there's a lot of interesting areas and i think it's also quite interesting with the natural language equation so how should we read that dot thermodynamics what yes no questions and then times or what does it mean


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, there's the category theory, like that dot operator.

I forget how to read it.

So hopefully it's being rescued.

But yeah, I read it at times because I'm old school.

So going back to that same equation six, I thought that this was important.

It involves no assumptions about space time, objects, or motions.

It is strictly topological.

Given separability, it identifies a boundary, fancy B, between A and B,

at which the energy interaction, physical interaction between A and B is defined.

So I guess that would be like a space.

Well, I guess it's not space.

It's not space.

It's not time.

It's a physical, it's an energy interaction, H-A-B.

Anyway, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
And this is the Markov blanket fancy B holography connection, which is that all the information that is making the sparse connectivity of A and B, we're talking about systems that have like this screen slash blanket slash experimental apparatus fancy B and the properties of it.

For a system that might be making classical-like measurements,

Or maybe it's making quantum measurements.

So implicitly the prior work had been thinking about what was on the other side of that experimental apparatus from a classical or from a non-quantum perspective.

We'll see.

And this is taking it more into asking what kind of mathematics would be needed to look at it if it were a quantum system that were being investigated.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

And I think that takes us into figure one.

So here, Daniel was foreshadowing, doing a great job of the holographic screen.

So this is a holographic screen, fancy B, separating systems A and B with an interaction, HAB, given by equation six.

And so this says that this screen can be realized by an ancillary array of non-interacting qubits that are alternately prepared by A and then measured by B.

Qubits are depicted as spheres here, and there's no requirement that A and B share preparation and measurement bases.

So these are quantum reading or quantum reference frames.

So this is like they share the ability to prepare or measure.

That would be like quantum reference frame.

And we're going to get into the quantum reference frames just here in a couple of slides, I think with a pretty good example.

Anything to add or do you wanna like unpack it with the next couple of slides?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, just thinking about this as like a quantum holograph is sort of the generalization, maybe, of thinking about this in the classical information.

What if this were the chat between Blue and I?

So we could have different perspectives, different reference frames, different semantics.

But if we're not in the same chat room, then we're not in the same chat room.

That's like the holographic screen or the observable that's getting passed between these two systems A and B.

and they don't have to be two people it could be like a person and some other system on the other side of the holograph information channel and the whole question is what kind of math describes that classical information channel case and how is that similar or different or compatible or whatever with thinking about it not as a information bit from a standard probability distribution but like a quantum information bit with a complex statistical distribution


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So they describe the holographic screen, actually, as they say the holographic screen, fancy B, has an obvious interpretation in the language of the free energy principle and active inference.

It implements the Markov blanket that separates from B. So we've seen the Markov blanket before and mentioned it here, but I think that they are going to implement this holographic screen of this Markov

like it.

Yeah, perfect, cool.

Oh, and then the quantum reference frame, fun.

So here they say, we show in particular that the FEP emerges naturally in any setting in which an agent or particle deploys quantum reference frames, namely physical systems that give observational outcomes and operational semantics to identify and characterize the states of other systems in this environment.

And so this was kind of a cool figure that I pulled down.

So it's like a man on the train.

To the man, the train is moving.

And to the person on the train, the man is moving, right?

And so it depends on your perspective.

And this is kind of what a quantum reference train is.

is getting at here.

So this says, quantum features such as quantum superposition are only defined relative to an observer.

When we look at the train from the point of view of an observer standing on the platform, the train looks in a quantum superposition of different positions.

However, an observer sitting on the train sees the observer on the platform and the ball in a quantum superposition.

So it's a cool illustration of just kind of how things look differently depending where you're standing.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, this is awesome.

I like how you brought in the art and the images are a little subtly different, but then in a way that really makes one think.

And the classical case would be what if both of them were moving or still, and then they only got to get a frame update once every two seconds or once every five seconds.

So then there'd be like still an uncertainty distribution, but it'd be a classical parametric statistics or information theory, uncertainty about location.

And that's going to be the big question.

How is that variance estimation that we've already been exploring and that type of inference related to quantum information where there's something a little bit bigger and more complex or different than just simply low sampling rate leading to positional uncertainty of a massive train that's not subject to so-called quantum effects?


SPEAKER_04:
Well,

Did you wanna, so this is kind of cool.

Do you wanna unpack this slide here, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm just looking forward to what the free choice assumption means in quantum setting.

But we just highlighted what is this all gonna say about free choice, this specific slide, but also the broader discussion.


SPEAKER_04:
So I agree, too.

I think the free choice aspect is cool.

Here, the authors say, provided A and B are separable, assuming that there are no super determinist a priori correlations, ZA and ZB, what is the Z?

I'm not sure what the Z is.

Oh.

choices of Z. So Z is the choice.

The choice of A and the choice of B are uncorrelated.

This is the free choice assumption.

Free choice is often claimed to be essential to science as a practice.

If it characterizes any bounded system, consistency with quantum theory and special relativity together requires that it must characterize all systems.

So free choice of a basis introduces quantum noise.

that is indistinguishable observationally from classical noise.

And noise is gonna become important here as we move toward the end of the A and ZB.

So yeah, anyway, that's cool.

Nice.

So here they talk about the Z axis in figure one.

I should have pasted figure one in here.

They say that the Z axis is a reference frame.

Free choice of the axis generalizes the free choice of the reference frame, encoding each qubit on the holographic screen fancy B, right?

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
And the part in red, looking forward to unpacking.

A QRF cannot therefore be fully specified by any finite bit string.

It is non-fungible in the terminology of Citation 40.

It's the quantum act-inf NFT crossover that we all needed.

We have it, but we need to explore it and find out what it means.


SPEAKER_04:
Super cool.

And they say that they consider A and B to be isolated during the time interval between preparation and measurement steps.

And I think that we'll get into that in a little bit more like preparation and measurements as we talk about time and memory encoding.


SPEAKER_01:
And that's what this nine formalism is roughly describing.

Something like that.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, I think, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
What is happening with it?


SPEAKER_04:
So it says the idea of a computation is this.

So you have bits at one time step going to bits at another time step.

And then you have the Markov blanket at one time step going to another Markov blanket at T plus one.

And then this, is it ZA?

Is that free choice that's in there?

No, it's IF.

So I'm not sure what that one is, but.

Yeah, we can unpack that more.

I will unpack some of the later math, but this, I think it's just important to establish the quantum reference frame.

Anyway, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
That's good.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Okay.

Next.

Where are we?

Ah, here we go.

See, I'm going to start to unpack some math now.

When I start to roll out the variables, here we go.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So...

We will be interested in what follows in quantum systems considered to be observers that deploy one or more distinct quantum reference frames to measure particular subsets of the bits encoded on their boundaries slash markup blankets.

And yes, these will effectively decompose the holographic green fancy B into disjoint sectors that we will label E for the observed environment, F for the unobserved environment, and Y for the memory sector, respectively.

Yeah, we're gonna break that out, I think.

Yeah, attention also, so they really talk about the sectors as a sense, right?

Like, so I have like my vision sector, my hearing sector, my taste sector, right?

And so like I'm making observations of my environment with all of these, like my temperature sensing sector.

So there's all of these different ways to observe the environment with different sectors.


SPEAKER_01:
So yeah, it's kind of like saying you win some, you lose some, you don't play every game.

It's kind of like whatever space we're talking about here, which happens to be this boundary that has all these interesting properties.

There's some that are being observed, some that are being unobserved and a special sector that gives continuity of information in some way through time.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So this is cool here.

Free choice of a decomposition of a holographic screen, fancy B, into sectors with different quantum reference frame induced semantics is indicative of agency.

So I like that.

And I'm curious to unpack that maybe a little bit more, something to ask the authors about in the dot one.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Or also all non-trivial agents are cognitive systems that engage in active inference.

What is non-trivial?

To who?

Like how do we escape or how do we escape this infinite multi-perspective multi-scenario universe or do we just have a way of working with that


SPEAKER_04:
I do think that they get into non-trivial here in a little while, but yeah, they say a non-trivial agent is a system with internal dynamics that breaks the swap symmetry of its boundary Markov blanket holographic screen.

However, they're going to start to use these things interchangeably.

So I'm just going to keep saying holographic screen, fancy B. But, but I guess if your internal dynamics don't break the swap symmetry or right, like if your internal dynamics are, are,

um, trivial or like not relevant.

Um, or if you don't, if they don't have an effect on the boundary, maybe that's, that becomes trivial.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Wondering if that's the mirror versus adaptive active inference boundary that we've discussed or what, what this maps to, where does this kick in or not?

So we'll explore it though.


SPEAKER_04:
It totally seems like it's definitely the mirror versus active inference.

That's how I interpreted it as I was reading it.

So yeah.

Sounds like that to me.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, and okay.

Now we're going to head into some 17 related information because they're going to turn this discussion from QRFs as reference frames to channel theory, which is going to enable this context switching discussion that's important later.

So this is brought up in number 17.

and 17.1 is where we had Chris Fields and a great discussion there.

So continue, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Yeah, so...

Channel theory of quantum reference frames.

So I think we've said channel theory is an application of category theory to two spaces.

And I'm not gonna read the paper here, but I'm gonna go back to some of the slides that we used from 17, because I think that we kind of unraveled it there in a way that was maybe digestible more so than reading equations off of a paper.

So this is the choose space.

Daniel, what's a choose space?

So K is a set, A are objects, X are attributes.

A choose space fancy A over the set K is the relationship between the objects, A, and their attributes, X. I thought of it just like a computer function, like in Python or any language that's just taking in three kinds of data


SPEAKER_01:
the set, the objects and the attributes.

So describing a large variety of things, but it's just kind of integrating those three types of data in a principled way.

and enabling transformations between different representations that might look very different or allow for different implementations, but also commonly use like all of this information or even just a subset of the information because that just throws out information, which you can always do.


SPEAKER_04:
I really like the Python example.

So like if K is the Python dictionary, A are the keys and X are the values, like you can describe the relationship between the keys and the values with a choose space.

Like that is what the choose space does.

So like you could say, you know, your keys are apple, orange, banana, and your values are red, orange, yellow.

And so then the choose space is how you describe that relationship.

Color of fruit, something like that.

Okay, so going into channel theory and how channel theory works.

So it says, in channel theory, two transforms become isomorphisms, which are natural maps between classifiers.

So classifiers link tokens to types that encompass them.

Like for a stoplight, a set of tokens would be red, green, and yellow.

So that is the set of tokens.


SPEAKER_01:
I think this just builds one level on what you described, which is instead of just the data structure of just saying this is what the function is requesting or this is what is being stored in memory, this is like saying we're going to interpret some of these edges and relationships as classifier mappings or infomorphisms like information sharing or statistical dependencies or some other type of informational edge.

but on that space that we've been discussing.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

So they take it to a diagrammatic level where at the center, it's almost looks like a pyramid.

So there's a C and this core C is the information channel.

This is the infomorphism that allows semantic information.

And this, I thought it was very cool that it's very different from Shannon information.

It's not just bits.

It's like the meaning behind the bits.

Like you can say, you know, you can see the word bank.

And are they talking about a river bank, the bank that holds your money or like a bank shot in pool?

Like there's some underlying.

I would dare to say context that is important for not just the letters B, A, and K in that order.

So it's not just the tokens in the particular order, but it's like the semantic context that allows transmission between classifiers.

So I look at this like a shared memory.

So if we look at the classifier A1 here, which would be stoplight, the tokens are red, green, and yellow.

Classifier A2 would be motorist actions.

The tokens would be stop, go forward,

Or I say proceed slowly, but it's really get out of the intersection, right?

Like that's what yellow means.

And then there's other classifier types.

It could be like pedestrian actions, child's game actions.

Like when you're playing red light, green light, do you run?

Do you stop?

Like freeze?

Or do you walk, right?

So there's all these different classifiers that can then map via a core information channel C, shared memory, semantic information between those classifiers.

Cool.

Okay.

So going on, they build from this pyramid.

They invert the pyramid to form this cone-cacone diagram.

So they say that...

A commuting finite cone-cocoon diagram is made of a cone, which is the upright pyramid, and a cocone, which is the inverted pyramid, on a finite set of classifiers.

It illustrates commutativity.

So specifically, these operators, G12, G23, like you can go all the way out to the set.

Like there's a commutativity or like a...

superimposability, commutativity, with a shared infomorphism, if that makes sense.

It also captures a more subtle duality between processes.

It enables object files, tokens, and histories to be viewed not as tokens, but as types that organize respectively trajectory components, features, and feature-based singular categories, and make them mutually consistent collections.

So like where you have all of those classifiers, they're consistent across the board.

So you can use them to map and unmap, right?


SPEAKER_01:
If I can just give a take on this.

So G12 is saying that there's a relationship between A1 and A2.

It could be like appending by one row or maybe changing one little bit through time or having some ability to translate like a state machine or something like that.

let's just say that there's some relationship and then there's also these f functions that allow the a's to be part of a shared context like the pedestrian scene that makes sense and then that is shaped like a cone

and then that is kind of like sense making that semantics is making sense and then this cocoon or the diamond shape is where there's c and d who are both like cognitive sense making frames and then now they're having a shared holograph


SPEAKER_04:
a or a shared access and then it's that is a different object with a different geometry yeah that would be like i'm looking at the same set of classifiers that you're looking at and we both see we both know what they mean we both know that red means stop and um green means go semantically exactly yeah

Right, right.

Or red could mean apple, depending on where you're going with that, right?


SPEAKER_00:
It could be an inside joke.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Okay, cool.

So there's the cone cocoon.

Hopefully that was unpacked with some level of intelligibility.

So now we can move into figure two.

Okay.

where they attach this cone to cone diagram to measurement operators, any set of measurement operators that are used to measure the states on the


SPEAKER_01:
boundary that defines the relationship between A and B, this HAB, between system A and system B. We're the scientists, we cared about our context C, we're system A, we're making measurements from our perspective of a screen, and we're setting the context of interpreting those observations in this situation.


SPEAKER_04:
Totally.

I could definitely be standing on the other side of that holographic screen, making my measurements from D, from the inverted, from the upside down pyramid, but they would be left and right pointing, measuring onto the same screen.

If I was system B and you were system A, in that kind of context.

Cool.

Anything else to add?


SPEAKER_00:
No.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Okay, so this is just some more, I think, this slide talking about the cone-cocoon diagram, but something that's to point out that there's the dual construction, that is when it commutes.

I think I did say that already.

So when the infomorphisms on the same classifiers where all the arrows are reversed, when it's reversible, then that's a commuting cone-cocoon diagram.

So non-commutativity is the opposite of that, right?

So we're going to talk about non-commutativity as we go forward.


SPEAKER_01:
And here, what's one thing that I think is happening, hopefully, is like we have been discussing this in the context of two different observers having the same semantics from the same screen, C and D. And then they say if C equals D or C prime equals D prime,

Then you can sort of draw another consistent world.

And this is sort of like a recognition semantics.

And then the out cone is like an operational or generative semantics in a different way.

Cause it's like generating the observations or something like that.

But there's going to be like a dual between the diamond and the hourglass.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Cool.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

All right, here we go.

More of this commutativity.

So here they talk about commutativity as Bayesian coherence.

And we talked a little bit about quantum coherence earlier, but they're bringing this notion of Bayesian coherence up.

So viewing commutativity and Bayesian coherence as fundamental to the definition of measurement, like if I measure the length of the salamander and Daniel measures the length of the salamander,

there there we could get the same answer or not um so and hence also to the definition of preparation or action on the environment um so this suggests this foreign rule which is that's what you blew up daniel don't know what it is let's learn about it yeah okay yeah that was that one's um right let's learn about it let's let's let the authors unpack that one for us

Oh, yeah, that's the rule.

So here, blow it up again for me.

Oh, I'll blow it up, actually, myself.

So... Ah!

Too far.

So they say the probability of obtaining X with a state X is the sum of observations over states.

Is that observations over states?

I should have defined these.

And the probability of obtaining...

measurement?

Is it a measurement?

As an observational outcome?

Is the description for coherently assigning amplitudes to components?

Okay.

So, anyway, we can let the authors unpack that one for us.

I can't do it.

Okay.

All right, repeated measurements and system identification.

So this is section three, moving on.

We develop in section three, a generic formal description of how one quantum system identifies another quantum system as a persistent entity, a thing.

So here they're gonna talk about thingness and measures, records and compares its states by deploying specific sequences of quantum reference frames.

And so like, how do I know that Daniel is a different thing than me, right?

Yeah, that's cool.

Sometimes I think we're the same thing because we're doing the same thing at the same time.


SPEAKER_00:
Is there a group thing?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a group thing.

We're having a thing at my house.


SPEAKER_04:
That's it.

All right.

So they break this section.

So these sections get really awesome.

So memory, time, and course grading.

The idea that a system must possess a quasi non-equilibrium steady state solution to its density dynamics and hence be restricted to trajectories in its classical configuration space that do not diverge exponentially over time in order to be observable as a thing immediately raises the issues of time as a measurable duration and of memory

as persistent over measurable time.

And so that they show in this figure that the agent A can only detect changes in

the nest density and employ them as basis for inference.

If actions and actions, if a can write time ordered records to subsequently read from the memory sector, why?

So here the memory sector is why the environment is E and this G I J here, I think it's better done than the next one.

Oh yeah.

Perfect.

We have the next screen right here.

So E I J is this a time clock, a time step from,

One memory, that's the dynamics of internal time.

Internal clock, that's what it is, of the agent.


SPEAKER_01:
We talked already about the different parts of the screen and how some are being observed, some are unobserved, and then there's the memory sector.

And here, the unobserved environment is the biggest set, I think.

It's like...

mostly at least in this image and so one question is just what does this represent in terms of our computers or our sensory apparatus and how is it related to some of the work that they like cited and some related work about attention and bayesian graphs this is a cool representation also like notice that your observations are


SPEAKER_04:
different and not overlapping from your memory.


SPEAKER_01:
Like if your old memory, the new information isn't coming in, if you're not paying attention to anything, it can't have an effect, like that type of thing.


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

And so this is an illustration of quantum reference frames required to write a readable memory of an observed environmental state, E.

So E and Y read the state from E and write it to Y respectively.

And the clock is a time quantum reference frame that defines the time coordinate A. So at the time step, you read the environment and then you write it to memory Y. It's cool.


SPEAKER_01:
And there's papers.

A little perception action loop with memory.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep.

In a loop.

Sorry.

Cool.

Awesome.

So figure four is,

It's a memory read-write cycle defining one tick from I to J of the environment.

So here it's like you read from the environment, measure or read-measure, and then write-prepare.

So like you prepare for the next time step.

All quantum reference frames and the comparison functions are implemented by the quantum dynamics PA, which is the big block arrow.


SPEAKER_01:
So if this were like a EEG headset that was measuring at 100 hertz, 100 times per second, that would be like 100 classical information reads per second.

And then you could do signal processing.

I think this is kind of like the time step is the sampling frequency of the experimental apparatus that's defined by this partitioning mechanism.

of the blanket fancy b holograph and then subsectors with these different interpretations of being like observed unobserved or memory components and and the authors say here they say formally we think of this pa um as the weighted sum of all possible paths from the boundaries boundary


SPEAKER_04:
From the boundary the fancy B at one state to the boundary the fancy B at the next state so that is the internal dynamics are how the holographic screen is shifted from T to T plus one and Also, this is where there's the cone So the the B are like those that line of A's that are all lined up and then now it's bottlenecking This is the hourglass and then going back out Yes

Yes.

Superpose those figures for next time.

Yeah.

Yeah.

All right.

Then memory, time, and core screening.

So the internal dynamics that operate on those states to maintain a non-equilibrium steady state density are spatially localized inside of the boundaries.

And the boundary represents a Hilbert space where we talked earlier, and it's not a physical space-time decomposition.

So the boundary B is all those little spheres.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Still.


SPEAKER_01:
What is memory?

We'll discuss it later.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, and importantly, they say figure four illustrates an important distinction between classical and quantum representations of dynamics.

Classical physics assumes a space-time embedding, and the quantum does not.


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I'm curious about the self-evidencing that they mention here also.

I'll have to ask them about


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, cool.

Learning and generative models.

I'll let you take this one away.


SPEAKER_01:
This kind of took us almost briefly out of the quantum, but just to give an example of a simpler thing that this is like an elaboration or a generalization of a Bayesian approach like Kalman filtering, which is just taking, it's like a dragging an estimate through time as new information comes in.

And so that's what's happening in a sense here with formalism 27.

There's a prior and a posterior, and that's moving forward.

So it's kind of like using this dragging filter through time, if that were classical information, and then there's something different happening with quantum.

And that's that piece that we're going to keep on returning to.

But this is like a Bayesian analog filter.

And now the math is being used to describe these quantum systems.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

Okay, moving on.

Section 3.3, identifying and measuring systems embedded in E. So we've so far considered only observers A that measure the states of their observed environments E without decomposing E into systems that have their own specific states.

And the question of how an observer distinguishes a system from the environment in which S is embedded is central to classical cybernetics.

So I think that that's...

important like are the other agents do they matter are they just part of the environment like there's always that um question of of you know is is it its own thing that other person over there or it's just my perception of my environment and the second part there is like it's um that sort of entity niche differentiation or delineation and then under the rubric of object persistence


SPEAKER_01:
conceptuality of thingness to cognitive and developmental psychology so that's like children with peekaboo and so it's like what connects the child playing peekaboo to the cybernetic entity differentiating causes and how does quantum with its observer based relationality connect those areas


SPEAKER_04:
So here they use a special delineation for an environment that indicates the remainder of E when other systems in the environment are removed.

And the question of how an observer distinguishes an external system from its surrounding environment prior to and as a precondition for measuring some state of interest.

is not something that people traditionally address because it is thermodynamically and computationally difficult, demanding special requirements on the observers.

Cool.

All right.

So figure five shows us a system.

I think it just shows us like pretty much where we are.

Systems S, you know, here you have A and B identifying a system.

requires identifying some proper component R that maintains a constant state or a density of time average samples as the pointer state of PI, right?

So you need a pointer to point to the system or density of time average samples of interest varies.

Oh, so like as this goes to attention, right?

So what is your, what are you pointing to?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, another way I was kind of seeing this one was it's like a clock hand.

So this could be like a time scenario or it could be quantum with like the spin or with the angle in a complex field or something like that.

But you can decompose the total system S

into the time invariant part, which is like your Python data structure.

And that's like saying, here's the structure of the variables.

And then just like the variables themselves that are time variant, which is like the clock hands.

So there'd be like the body of the clock that's time invariant.

And then there's the parts that are time varying.

I don't know how that R and P and S partitioning connects back, but that's what this kind of looks like.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

I'm also kind of unsure about the pointer states and, but I think it's the interest varies, right?

So, um, yeah, which I think, I think that points to attention, like as your interest, as your point of focus shifts, like what are you pointing to?

Because like, as you look here in one direction, there's a set of variables that are there in that direction, like this wall, that corner, this refrigerator or whatever.

And then as you shift here,

your interest or attention is shifting to a new set of variables, but you still know that that other set of variables is there.

That goes to the object permanence that we were just talking about before.

So like, I know that the refrigerator was in my first point of view, but it's not in my second point of view, but I know that it's still there.

That to me kind of is how I think about this, the pointer.

It'll be cool for the authors to maybe unpack this one a little bit more for us.

Oh, okay, we did talk about the Markov kernel versus the Markov blanket.

Daniel, you so eloquently explained it to me.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one possibility is the blanket is the set of states that insulate the internal and the external, making them conditionally independent.

And then the Markov kernel could be like that applied through time.

And it's kind of like a Rima model.

You could have like a temporal depth of an auto regression.

And then the temporal depth of the Markov kernel through time would be like what time steps are able to


SPEAKER_04:
carry forward but let's discuss that with people who know better yes cool okay good um all right so non-commutativity uh context switching so we talked about non-commutativity we talked about what commutativity means and so non-commutativity would be the opposite of that um so here they say as emphasized by bohr

100 years ago, a finite quantum of action partitions the set of all possible quantum measurement operators into a set of complementary non-commuting pairs, the most well-known being position and momentum.

So if you're trying to measure the position of a particle, you can't simultaneously measure the momentum of the particle at the same time.

So that's non-commutativity.

Yes.

And so why does context switching matter?

They say an observer A capable of switching between non-commuting quantum reference frames must, to maintain an operable memory, implement a clock that is invariant under basis rotations on the energy between A and B, or the physical interaction between A and B. If measurements made at clock ticks I and J do not commute, however, the corresponding clock operations will not commute.

So non-commutativity forces TA, which is time, or the time step that it takes to record a memory, to be unidirectional, and hence memory records to be encoded irreversibly with an accompanying expenditure of free energy.

So the internal clock thus defines TA as entropic time.

I thought that was super interesting.

So it's not like...

actual time but it's like time that you paid entropy for like time that entropy was expended for i'm on the clock that time requiring work right or over time over time okay something to that end all right uh

Cool.

So context switching between non-commuting quantum reference frames, like position and momentum, while holding the other quantum reference frame constant.

So that's the one that's constant is here, the one that's rough in this figure 34 or equation.

What is this thing?

It's a diagram.

That's what it is.

So in this diagram number 34, these different pointer sectors, U and V, could be like the different non-commuting points.

and then you have overlapping but mutually communicating operators in a canonical canonical context switch so that's like someone could be standing not at the

train platform or on the train and be observing both of those people, I suppose.

Different frame.


SPEAKER_01:
A bigger context.

They each have their own local coherence, but it's interoperable.

So it's part of a bigger umbrella, which is like the big C at the top.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

Good.

So that's diagram 34.

If it fails to commute...

then the observables are non-code deployable.

So that's like position and momentum.

Those are non-code deployable observables.

So non-commutativity in the

in diagram 34, has been specified in terms of non-existence of a consistently definable joint probability distribution of conditionals.

So that's like the conditional independence, right?

This non-codeployability of observables amounts to the occurrence of intrinsic quantum contextuality in relationship to that diagram.

So this goes really back, it speaks a lot to

what Chris talked to us about when we did number 17.


SPEAKER_01:
So let's get notes on this stuff.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, for sure.

So they say in 4.2 below that context switching increases variational free energy by generating prediction errors.

And if you're in one context and you have a prediction, and then you move to another context with the same prediction, your outcome's going to be different.

So it increases variational free energy, which makes minimizing variational free energy and complying with the FEP more difficult.

So going from my same generative model from one context to another context to another context makes it hard.

but can lead to radically better generative models.

So you're always updating, your model becomes more generalizable under different contexts.

So yes, context switching poses a fundamental challenge to any classical formulation of the FEP and a fundamental explanatum, I've not heard that before, for quantum formulations.

I wonder if this provides like some evidence for us having a shared reality.

And I've brought that up a couple of different times too.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

It's the fact thing or expression, which is to be explained or explicated.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Now let's get to the paper.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_04:
We're finally here.

We made it.

This is the best part.

Yeah, the FEP for generic quantum systems.

So all that background was to lead you here to this place where we are now.

So how the FEP emerges in this setting, and we're going to look at its asymptotic behavior, considering how it addresses the fundamental problem that's posed by quantum context switches.

All right, we're getting there.

All right, you want to take this one?


SPEAKER_01:
going to go into more detail so that we can get a lot more into this dot zero but we've seen the variational free energy in the context of perceptual inference where there's a surprisal and a divergence term that gets bounded so this is kind of like the snapshot question given the incoming sensory observations how should i update my generative model it's learning it's like a perceptual common filter


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
It doesn't have action involved.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

They have this formulation of prediction error.

And this is actually from section 3.2.

It's a representation of the prediction error of system A or agent A. So this E-R-E-K.

So K, let's go through these black ones first.

So K is the internal time clock.

So agent A's internal time clock, T-A.

It counts it.

It ticks it up.

So fancy B is the holographic screen.

PB is the dynamics of the interaction partner B. And then this M sub E with respect to K is the observable behavior of the holographic screen fancy B localized to the sector E up to time TA equals K. So like up to leading up into this point.


SPEAKER_01:
And E is the observed environment just to connect it to the previous formalism.

E is the observed environment.


SPEAKER_04:
That is it.

So here, this M-A-E, this is the agent A's generative model of the action of the unknown dynamics, P-B, with respect to time, I think.

Oh, yeah.

On the Markov boundary holographic screen, fancy B, in sector E, the environment that we looked at.


SPEAKER_01:
Which is kind of like saying you only need to have a generative model on where you're expecting to find observations.

If you're going to measure just the thermometer, you make a generative model with just a thermometer.

And that's how you get the cone, co-cone, diamond, hourglass that isn't like with extraneous or redundant or incompatible elements.


SPEAKER_04:
So here, this equation prediction error, it's like ER sub E parentheses K. This is the agent A's total reducible uncertainty about agent or system B at time TA equals K.

So this is like the uncertainty about another system within the environment.

That's why the system separation that we saw in figure five was important.

So if we're gonna define a system, we're gonna look at how other systems interact on the holographic screen, and then we're gonna think about what, can we predict what that system is doing or not?

Like the environment's not doing anything, because it's just sitting there, it's the environment, but that's at any given time step snapshot.

So it is therefore an upper bound on surprise, and now we get to f of pi that we just looked at earlier that Daniel mentioned, the upper bound on surprise.

Cool.

Okay, here we go.

Getting into how the quantum does the FEP.

All right.

So a generic quantum system A will act so as to minimize er sub x for each deployable quantum reference frame

So a system A has different deployable quantum reference frames that's analogous to a sense.

I have hearing, vision, taste, smell, temperature sensing, et cetera, many different deployable quantum reference frames.

And I will minimize my total reducible uncertainty at each time step for each quantum reference frame.

Yes.

Still there?

Okay, so a trivial agent can be viewed as executing a trivial quantum reference frame as only exercising choice of basis for writing to and reading from the holographic screen fancy V as a whole, and so satisfies the FVP trivially.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Let's have a round table on what that means.

We should do it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.


UNKNOWN:
4.2.


SPEAKER_04:
That's it.

Or 40.1.

And here's equation 40.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.


SPEAKER_04:
There it is.

All right.

So the authors say uncertainty and prediction error and hence variational free energy is generated in the current formalism by system A's in principle ignorance of both the state of B and the dynamics P of B of its interaction partner B.

As the bits A reads from the boundary fancy B are written by PB, this is like the agent or system B is writing to the boundary.

So A's ability to predict the future states of its observable sectors and hence to minimize that ER sub X for each quantum reference frame X

through equation 40, which we just looked at and we're going to look at it again, depends on its ability to predict the behavior of PB locally on each observable sector.

So I have to be able to predict how Daniel's going to smell, how he's going to look.

So my ability, if I'm looking at my other agents in the environment, over each, what temperature he's going to be, is he going to have cold hands or cold feet or something like that?

My ability to minimize my variational free energy over another system in the environment depends on my ability to predict their behavior right into the environment on all of those quantum reference sectors.

Good?

Enough?

Good enough?

Okay.

An animal, for example, must employ its available senses, hence its observable sectors, to predict the nutritional value of food.

Okay.

Here we go.

So this is where I get, it gets a little fuzzy for me.

uh i was good up until this point um they say the weak interaction limit that allows separability between a and b is significant so hab which is the physical interaction between a and b and hence the boundary the holographic screen between a and b must have significantly lower dimension than

the physical location of B, and hence the observable dynamics of B, if the weak interaction limit is to hold.

My brain is melting now, all the way down.

So, yeah.

Anyway, what do you think?

Do you have any thoughts on that, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Not sure if it means that the sparse coupling has to be sufficiently sparse.

It has to be a lot lower dimension than the system.

Otherwise, it's not appropriately

bottlenecked so there's a lower dimensional interface that's like sparse coupling it's physical interaction in the h um frame and it's the holograph slash markov blanket with the fancy b but if the interaction is with the h and that's kind of what we'll

discuss like are we talking about physical interactions of quantum systems are we talking about any mechanistic interaction between any mechanistic system or are we talking about statistical edges statistical interactions like an interaction term between two different systems


SPEAKER_04:
And so just what I've written down here kind of paraphrases what they said up there.

So the ability for a system A to predict the dynamics of system B depends on the dynamic complexity of the interaction between system B, which is PB on the holographic screen.

So what is B writing to the holographic screen?

Like what is my refrigerator writing to the holographic screen?

I would say that's a trivial system, right?

It's like outputting a little bit of heat.

It keeps my food a little bit cold most of the time.

So I can with,

pretty good reliability predict the dynamics of my refrigerator.

I have less ability to predict the dynamics of Daniel or my children who are like total agents of chaos.

Right.

So, but, but like, I want to minimize my uncertainty.

I'm pretty certain about what my refrigerator is doing.

I don't know what my kids are doing when I leave the room.

Yeah.

So that, that kind of made sense to me, but.


SPEAKER_01:
The Schrodinger's cat to blues children pipeline.


SPEAKER_04:
We just got there.

Anything else to add here, Dan?


SPEAKER_00:
No, let's...


SPEAKER_04:
Moving forward.

Okay, so here is a little diagram of what it looks like for me to predict the dynamics of my refrigerator.

So this is figure six A. It says the trivial agent in figure six panel A looks like a noise source to A. So yes, my refrigerator is a source of noise.

It actually literally makes noise and puts out a little bit of heat.

So it says emission of Hawking radiation from a black hole provides perhaps the most pure example of such a noise source.

While the intervention inside the black hole can be arbitrarily large, the internal dynamics are uncoupled from the classical information encoded on the horizon and hence have no classical computational power.

Yes.

Okay.

Maybe my refrigerator has more computational power than a black hole.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, we move on.

Here we go forward.

So the more interesting parts of A's option space for prediction are shown in panel B, C, and D, where B is non-trivial.

If B is non-trivial, it deploys at least one quantum reference frame, X of B, so that's sector X of B, acting on sector FB.

As discussed in section 2.5, B sectors must be mutually decoherent.

So the action of the dynamics on the sector of B is independent of action elsewhere.

It is this independence that makes prediction possible.

If X of B does not overlap any sector for A, B will appear trivial.

So if the green cone is totally removed from where the red cone is, it's a trivial thing.

If my kids aren't here right now, they're not immediately acting on my environment.

So they're trivial, I guess.


SPEAKER_01:
This made me think about if someone was speaking a language that you didn't understand semantically,

not even in the cues and in the metadata, like there's kind of speaking past each other, even though you're sharing a screen, but that's like an attentional informational interpretation.

And this is in a quantum interpretation about the shared semantic frame ranging from identical to overlapping to disjoint.


SPEAKER_04:
So in a disjoint,

Wait, I'm trying to think of what else would be there.

So like a different language is good, but like, what about something like radiation emission, right?

Like, so something's emitting radiation, but I can't perceive that radiation.

So like the thing emitting radiation doesn't appear like it's impacting my environment at all.

So maybe something like that.


SPEAKER_01:
And that'd be like maybe unobserved, the part of B, the holograph that's not in the observed or memory sector.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, like that.

Okay, cool.

So...

The interesting cases are the ones in which A and B's observable sectors overlap.

In this case, intuitively, in which A and B can see each other and hence interact in the ordinary non-technical sense of that term.

In panel B, sector XB fully contains XA.

We out.

Okay, so let's look at the whole figure now.

So we saw all the ones trivial and non-trivial.

Okay, so A is a trivial agent, so they're not putting out any code.

B encodes a sector that contains XA, but is bigger.

So I like to think about this as like a teacher.

So we're going to get into like teaching and learning.

So this is like a teacher that knows more than the student can pick up, maybe.

Okay.

in that kind of way.

So the bits on XB but outside XA encode non-local hidden variables for A.

And then in diagram C, the sectors of A and XB overlap, the areas of non-overlap become noise sources.

So here it's like, you know, I can understand you when you speak English, but not when you speak Chinese.

So like when you're speaking Chinese, we have this non-overlapping frame.

Anyway, how do you think of that, Daniela?


SPEAKER_01:
This is just speculative, but in the case of B, so we're the observer investigator A. So in the case of frame B, there's so much information like in the linear regression data set by quantum that there's basically anywhere we look, we can totally get all the information.

So it looks like there's non-local hidden variables because it's like super determined.

In the case of C, the regression has like an R squared of 0.5 or something or 0.6.

And so some of it lines up semantically.

But if we, of course, had the perfect attention or the perfect observation, we would be able to make a better regression.

But then I'm just trying to take the linear regression, normal information framework, and then...

that's where having people familiar with quantum will be really helpful and i hope they find this discussion and the upcoming dot one and dot two as like just the introduction of hopefully some bi-directional exchange because this may be something where active inference is complementary isomorphic incompatible

like let's not lose touch with the active inference thread.

And then also how is this relating to quantum?

And that's how we're going to get up in that quadrant where they're both are.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So in D, where the sector of X is equal to the sector of, sorry, the sector X of A is equal to the sector X of B. So that means that the quantum reference frame is identical.

It's an identical frame.

Like we are sharing a quantum reference.

We're both standing on the platform or we're both on the train.

And so that sector A is equal to sector B. Any variational free energy there between A and B is generated by insufficient learning.

It's not like we both can't see the train or we both can't see the platform because we're in the same place.

But so there's somebody there is doing some insufficient learning.


SPEAKER_01:
If this is the case, then you just simply need to sample more.

But you already have the right scope and you're not at risk of oversampling.

but it's a little bit more quantum.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

And that brings us to this beautiful formulation in equation 41.

Variational free energy equals noise plus insufficient learning.


SPEAKER_01:
So noise is capturing that bottom left part that we just discussed, and insufficient is capturing the D case.

And so if it was...

more and more overlapping, then you want more and more sampling.

But less and less overlapping is gonna require less and less learning, or learning will be less and less helpful.

So how is this compatible, incompatible with the Act-Imp framings that we've seen for VFE?

and EFE?

And then how is this compatible or similar to some of the formalisms and the framings that are really familiar to statisticians and to quantum information scientists?


SPEAKER_04:
And I would also like to like, know what teachers think that you're a teacher and you're watching this.

Like, like, what is your take on that?

Do you minimize free energy by minimizing loin noise?

And, you know,

Maximizing learning or, yeah, like that.

Okay.

Cool.

So asymptotic behavior of the FEP.

So we have these two formulations, surprise alone divergence, which we've seen before in a similar way many times, and then noise plus insufficient learning.

So now we want to say, how is it minimized?

How does an agent act in accordance with the FEP?

What do you want to add here?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just they wrote, comparing equations 35 and 41, it becomes clear what this amounts to.

A system self-evidence is by behaving in a way that minimizes noise while improving learning.

And so here they're juxtaposing the F of pi on surprisal and divergence decomposition of variational free energy with this noise plus insufficient learning

framing so we'll have time to unpack that and hopefully connect it to some systems but it's just a very interesting way that they've reached this trade-off learning requires seeking it's like how do we get there


SPEAKER_04:
Well, that goes back to the context switching.

If you're always in the same context, if you're always listening to the same music, you're never going to learn any new music that someone else might know.

So you have to kind of change your context, maybe.

Take someone else's perspective.


SPEAKER_00:
But, you know, seeking what?

But we'll get there.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

Okay.

So...


SPEAKER_01:
Let's also save this for dot one, but the asymptotic behavior of the FEP, let's just say, why does it matter?

Why are we studying asymptotic systems?

What is happening with the FEP asymptotically?

Asymptotically meaning what?

But I think that that's a large discussion about entanglement and where everything is going and how it relates to the principle of unitarity.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

Okay, cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Just we'll get there in dot one.

Unitary asymptotic behavior.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that's a good answer.

Yeah, there's only one more slide is the how, yeah, the FEP drives, it becomes the principle of unitarity.

So we can discuss that in dot ones better.


SPEAKER_01:
How does it, does it, why does it matter?

Why would it matter?

Cool.

Okay, discussion.


SPEAKER_04:
Drive us home, please.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

We're not going to discuss any of the discussion here.

We're going to look at the summary of the results as they give it.

And then we're going to have a bunch of slides that will just be like a topic.

And then with the dot one and the dot two, we're just going to go to that topic and probably start with just reading a quote from that paragraph.

or hearing the author's or the participant's perspective on each of those topics.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

You can go for the summary.


SPEAKER_04:
Come on, help me out.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

You read the three, just the three big texts at the very beginning.

But the first summary of the results that the authors say is that they can formulate this agent or information gathering and using system

not just within the classical information theory context that we've been talking about informational and strategic agents, but in the context of quantum information theory.

Point two is not just using a generic agent or information gathering using system, but specifically connecting the FEP to its quantum theoretic formulation

for generic quantum systems, insert all the asterisks and other symbols about what that really means and about how active inference plays in, et cetera.

And then three, the part that we didn't really go into in this discussion, when formulated as a generic principle of quantum information theory, the FEP is asymptotically equivalent to the principle of unitarity

And Ander asked in the chat asymptotically in what parameter, just exactly.

To what end, in what parameter.

So that's the summary of the results.

But the authors then embark on an awesome series of kind of like standalone paragraph vignettes related to a wide set of other ideas.

So for each of these ideas,

I'll ask the question on the top, and then if you want to give a thought on that topic or not.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, so the first topic is... Let me answer the question.

So it says actually asymptotically perfect learning.

So that's the asymptotically perfect learning that drives to unitarity.

On what axis?

So anyway.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
What is observation?


SPEAKER_04:
That's deep.


SPEAKER_01:
several paragraphs they wrote about that and this quote the idea of a metaphysically solipsistic or solipsist theory of observation is self-contradictory what but we'll discuss okay

what is an agent and again we'll keep in mind classical physics classical FEP non-classical FEP that where are we bigger from earlier I'll copy that one back in because this is definitely like a where are we like what are the similarities and differences in the agent model

for FEP and not, and for quantum and not.

Any thoughts or things that you'll want to ask about this?


SPEAKER_04:
What is free choice?

I think that was cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And like, do you get degrees of freedom or free choice over cognitive parameters, action parameters?

Which one do you want choice over or all them preferences?

Okay.

what is self-evidencing so we've talked in several other discussions about classical or bayesian inference as self-evidencing like finding oneself in likely states expected and preferred states how is that different in active than other physics that's like going from the bottom left to the bottom right

then how is this different within active inference with this quantum integration and boost yes okay what of asymptotic behavior

yeah um so i think here it's the asymptotically perfect learning like what is a gauge theoretic perspective i don't even want to open that can of worms at all yeah also this is like the quantum formulation the quantum formalism is background free space is simply an observable represented by a qrf that a system may or may not deploy

It can therefore play no ontic role in maintaining distinctions between systems.

This reflects the general role of physical 3D space in quantum field theories.

Space is there to enforce separability.

C68 for general discussion from a gauge theoretic perspective.

So like the space between is what?

I'm going to also copy in a comment that Andre wrote in the live chat.

Anyone who asks questions, just put it in live chat or put it as a comment under the video or email us.

It helps us and it's awesome questions that people ask.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
We will definitely look at this before we do the one.

And so you're welcome to join us, get in touch if you want to participate live, but also like we will ask these questions and we leave them in the chat.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah okay let's go to close out almost kind of getting there applications to biological cognition um and then they wrote in this paper in addition to the results listed above the current framework

the paper we've been discussing has a variety of more specifically biological consequences some of which have been discussed already in citation 13. and here's citation 13 fields glazebrook 11 minimal physicalism as a scale-free substrate for cognition and consciousness and here's the sections of that paper

And so it's just kind of cool to connect back to the basal cognition, computational boundaries of a self discussion that we've been having.

Livestream number 39 just today.


SPEAKER_04:
And we also have neurons as hierarchies of quantum reference frames, which I haven't read yet, that this was just published in January of 22.

I think that was co-released with this paper.

So I'm excited to read that work also.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So yeah, what are the biological implications?

Okay.

Quantum frames for foraging.

Okay.

So unique explanations and predictions.

It predicts, for example, that moving an ordinary 3D space does not require a QRF for Euclidean space and hence does not require an experience of space.

So like the fish could swim without knowing 3D.

And then from a classical perspective, okay, so I guess that means non-FEP and or non-quantum.

This is certainly true, evidenced by place and grid cells in mammalian brains, etc.,

And then what happens when we integrate FEP in the classical?

Well, the coarse graining would then be mandated by et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

We'll explore.

Okay, then what happens if we go from classical to classical FEP and then now go from FEP to quantum FEP, still thinking about like foraging or information seeking and processing?

Okay.

contextuality we talked about that a lot in 17.1 but just what is context environment surrounding is this what people mean when they say set the context for the dinner party or give context for a video that they sent what is that everyday sense of context and what is this sense of context

Okay, next steps.

So these are the last two lines of the paper.

And they wrote, in closing, we hope that we have shown to readers familiar with the FEP and active inference framework that quantum effects are worth considering both theoretically and in experimental design.

For readers not familiar with the classical FEP, but literate in quantum theory,

or vice versa, we hope this paper has gone some way to contextualizing your QRFs in sensemaking via Markov blankets and their underlying holographic screens.

So this is like saying, if you were familiar with either quantum, not FEP, upper left, or classical FEP, bottom right, or maybe bottom left, neither, then this paper

hopefully brought you towards that upper right corner of quantum FEP.

And just like the classical, classical way to end an FEP paper was like, we expect and prefer that this reduces your uncertainty.

This is like the classical quantum way to end the paper by saying, we hope it's contextualized your QRF.

the clever ending to a very complex paper and it was really fun to work on this for a couple weeks leading up to these discussions and what else would you say as we now head into the dot one and two


SPEAKER_04:
So thanks for putting up with our rough interpretation of this paper and we hope we didn't butcher it too badly.

We tried.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, if you know more or would like to contribute to helping others know more about these topics, that's what we're working on all the time in Act and Flap.

So if you've made it this far and you're riled up or curious about something, then get in touch and let's try to make all of this more...

handleable and able to be translated and learned and applied let's try to align our quantum reference frames with respect to active what else can we say all right so see you all um soon thanks a lot blue thanks also jason and thanks everybody who will participate in the upcoming ones too so see you later bye

## NkJKl_yF274

SPEAKER_09:
All right, hello and welcome everyone.

It's March 17th, 2022.

We're here in ACT-INF Lab live stream number 40.1 discussing a free energy principle for generic quantum systems.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is recorded in an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, all QRF.

And video etiquette for live stream will be hopefully following.

To learn more about Active Lab, head over to activeinference.org.

And for the rest of Active Stream 40.1, Blue, thanks for being the facilitator.


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

So in this stream today, our goal is to learn and discuss this paper, A Free Energy Principle for Generic Quantum Systems by Chris Fields, Carl Friston, James Blaisbrook, and Michael Levin.

And we have both Chris and Carl on the stream with us today.

So we maybe want to just start off briefly with doing some introductions.

So my name is Blue Knight.

I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it off to the first author, Chris.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, good morning, and thanks for attending this discussion.

This is a paper about active inference and how to place the active inference framework in a quantum information theoretic setting.

So what I thought I should do to introduce it is just give a little bit of the motivation for doing that.

Quantum information theory is an outgrowth of quantum theory that started in the 70s, or even you could take it back to the 60s if you wanted to.

And its goal was to consider physical interactions as information exchange processes

and to reformulate quantum theory in this way.

And so it has a very natural kind of overlap with what Carl has been doing with the free energy principle in terms of reformulating physics, essentially all of physics and information.

in decision theoretic terms.

So why quantum theory?

Why go to this theory that's often thought of as a theory only of very tiny objects that are moving very fast?

And the reason is that it's scale-free.

And conceptually, quantum theory is very simple.

And it has one

core hypothesis, which is the principle of unitarity.

And the principle of unitarity is simply the idea that total information is conserved.

So quantum theory is based on a conservation law, a proposed conservation law, conservation of information.

So what going to quantum theory really forces us to do

is to take seriously the project that Carl spent a lot of time on in his particular physics paper in 2019, which is to understand what we mean when we say that we've observed a system multiple times.

What we mean when we say we've interacted with the same object

multiple times and it forces us to or at least it encourages us to take that question seriously and it provides a number of tools for talking about that question and we'll talk about that as we get into the paper but and that's in a sense our motivations to take this

very nice, quite abstract, but in a sense, very fundamental toolkit that's based around the idea of conservation of information and apply it to this question of active inference.

So I'll let Carl pick it up from there.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

It's a great pleasure to be here.

I have to say I was hoping to learn more than provide a background.

So this is a great opportunity from my point of view to hear a conversation and participate in terms of

how it's held under control, scale-free, background-free, and that's what I think is one of the most attractive, parsimonious benefits of taking a quantum perspective on this.

It reminds me of the Quinean desert landscape, a minimal assumption, which

i'm always drawn to and apply this to some fundamental questions which have actually been beautifully listed for us at the top here about things and crucially um how things coupled to other things in terms of measurement and observation and inference so i'm personally

delighted and hungry to learn about how simple questions about the nature of things we observe and measure and make inference about can be cast from this fundamental perspective of quantum information theory.


SPEAKER_02:
Very nice.

Thank you.

James, thanks for joining us.

Would you like to introduce yourself and maybe say a few words about the paper or pick it up from there?


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, hello.

You may call me Jim.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_07:
You want a potted biography, do you?

Anyway, I'm a retired academic emeritus professor at Eastern Illinois University and adjunct associate professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

My background is global analytic science.

geometry and some related areas.

But in the last 16 or 17 years I've been applying mathematical techniques to cognitive neuroscience and foundations of quantum biology and more recently quantum information as it relates to the free energy principle.


SPEAKER_03:
Great, thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Stephen, do you want to maybe introduce yourself and give a thought about the paper, something you liked or remembered or were curious about today?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, thank you.

Hi, I'm Stephen Sillit.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm just doing a practice-based PhD into social topographies and community development.

And I have got a background many years ago in chemistry.

And I'm really curious about...

The way that this idea of something that's scale-free also ties to something which seems to be very specific on scale, i.e.

where something that's highly contextual and highly bounded by degrees of freedom at a certain scale, and then how something could be inferred that's across all sorts of scales.

So that's really something that I'm curious about on this particular piece of work.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

Daniel, do you have any other particular questions that you want to address?


SPEAKER_09:
just looking forward to seeing the uh discussion and anyone who's watching live can ask a question so i'm curious about how also like stephen said the specificity of a given experiment interfaces with general aspects of the formalism and uh many other things but we'll go go ahead blue


SPEAKER_04:
Well, do we want to maybe start there?

Do you guys want to speak to that scale deterministic aspect of the quantum FEP?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I can say something here.

Any information theory will start with some state space, so some set of degrees of freedom that have some set of values.

And in the paper we restrict ourselves to finite state spaces because we're really interested in systems that only have access to finite energy, and so finite computational resources.

So one starts with a state space, and in a sense that state space, when viewed from kind of the external perspective of the theorist who's defining it, sets the scale of the problem.

Because in defining the state space, you're saying what the values are of the degrees of freedom,

And when you say, what are the possible values, you are implicitly making some assumptions about resolution and making some assumptions about measurement.

So for example, if we think of a canonical quantum system, which is a qubit, just one, a particle with a spin, and we say the spin can be up or down,

then we made an assumption about how we can measure the spin.

And the most natural mathematical framework is a three-dimensional ball of values or a sphere of values if you normalize them.

And that's making an assumption that we can measure the spin in any one of three directions.

And so here we have imposed some possible values on this set of degrees of freedom.

And so in a sense, we've set a scale for the problem.

Similarly, if we're talking about interactions between human beings,

Well, clearly there are lots and lots of degrees of freedom that we can think of, but we typically think about only a tiny handful of degrees of freedom that have to do, for example, with verbal communication or visual communication, olfactory communication or some other kind of communication.

And we always impose resolution restrictions.

We can say this difference is detectable and these other differences aren't detectable.

And whenever we make a decision like that, we're setting a scale.

And when we characterize the information theory as scale-free, we're just saying that the formalism doesn't change when the scale changes.

So the formalism, the mathematical description, remains exactly the same.

regardless of what scales we pick by choosing the possible values of the degrees of freedom that we're talking about.

We don't change anything else about the way the theory works.

So that's all that scale-free means.

It doesn't mean that we've somehow abolished the notion of scale.

That's part of our experience.

So it's not something we're gonna make go away.

It's that we haven't changed the way the math works depending on the notion of scale.

And the most notorious example of that thing that we're not doing is the historical division of the world into kind of a quantum domain, a classical domain, and a cosmological domain where you use three entirely different theories.

like quantum theory, classical physics, and general relativity to talk about what's going on.

So that's not scale-free.

There, you're radically altering the mathematical description to deal with different kinds of problems.

So that's what we're not doing, trying to use the same mathematical description to deal with all problems.


SPEAKER_04:
I think that's a really helpful description, Chris, because so many times when we think about quantum, we think about the very, very, very small, like subatomic particles.

And so it's pretty amazing to see math that's interchangeable with my level of existence, like not just tiny little pieces of me being used from quantum theory.

What...

Is there any other math that you know of or any other examples of math that's been interchangeable with classical and cosmological and quantum scales ever before?

Or is this maybe the first time that's ever been done?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, no.

If you look back to classical physics in the era of Newton,

Or even I think the better representative is classical physics is reformulated by Laplace.

In that era, electromagnetism wasn't really understood yet.

So people were thinking about classical physics in terms of mechanical interactions in gravity.

But the idea at that point was that forces act instantaneously.

and forces act with one over R squared dependence.

That was the only force that was really understood, the force of gravity.

Forces were symmetrical, right?

Newton's second law, action and reaction.

And this theory was meant to be universal

And so if you look at the structure of that theory, as various people have pointed out, Nicholas Geisen has written a couple of papers about this.

It's a non-local theory.

And even in Laplace's era, they realized that there was a deep issue with this theory that if a rock rolls downhill on the moon,

then that immediately affects the state of everything on Earth.

In fact, immediately affects the state of everything in the universe.

So that starts to look a lot like entanglement, that states are not locally independent.

And that's the fundamental thing that Einstein attacked about classical physics in formulating

the theory of relativity was to insist on non-instantaneous forces, which just means forces transmitted by some carrier, which we call light.

But light is really just a carrier of information.

It could have been anything.

It could have been neutrinos or something like that.

so what einstein did that was most revolutionary was to impose locality on physics and that in a sense divided the world into realms that from a formal perspective not just a practical perspective could be treated independently

And so it's no surprise that Einstein hated the idea of entanglement, because entanglement was undoing precisely what he had done to, in his mind, repair physics.

So yeah, I mean, classical physics of the time of Laplace was formally a scale-free theory.


SPEAKER_04:
That's awesome.

Thank you for the clarification there.

So Einstein broke physics.

Stephen, did you have a question?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, just one question sort of following from that is

As someone sort of thinking about how this might play out in other ways, is it useful to think about things all the way up from the smallest and systems all the way up down from the biggest and classical as being where we're trying to name things as systems?

Because often I hear people talking systems, systems, systems only, but the use of things seems to be important.


SPEAKER_00:
as well and i'm wondering if we should have more thinness in our way of looking at the world uh shall i comment on that yeah okay um yeah this i think you're raising here a really interesting question and uh when we talk about

things, as Carl so beautifully emphasized in his 2019 paper, we are implicitly talking about something that has an identity and that maintains that identity through time.

And that's a deep

philosophical assumption that's nearly always implicit.

I mean, people just don't talk about that assumption very much.

And when we use the word system, we're, I think, often trying to speak a lot more loosely, but in fact, our language doesn't let us speak more loosely.

If I talk about a system,

then implicitly I'm saying I've got a particular state space.

That's what a system is.

And if I talk about a different state space, then I'm talking about a different system.

So let's apply that to something interesting like embryology.

I pick a set of degrees of freedom that are meant to be the degrees of freedom of a zygote.

And I then, you know, a few days later, have a set of degrees of freedom that are the degrees of freedom of some kind of early stage embryo.

But I want to say this is the same thing as the zygote.

Well, I'm now really abusing my notation, right?

In a really serious way by saying that these two are the same thing, even though they have different state spaces.

So this is a, I think this is a fundamental question for

any science that bases itself on the notion of a state space, how to talk about moving between different degrees of freedom and associating those things with some kind of evolution of a kind of meta thing that we regard as a single entity.

And this is one reason that at the beginning of this paper, we assume that we have some single system that we divide in two.

We draw a decompositional boundary.

And that decompositional boundary is basically arbitrary, or it's completely arbitrary.

But when we're doing something like embryology,

we're looking at a decompositional boundary between the thing we're interested in, the embryo, and the rest of the universe, including us, that's getting bigger and bigger and bigger.

And so we need a way to talk about that sort of thing.

And we just, we allied that problem in this paper.

We talk about a fixed decomposition of,

that divides the entire universe into two parts that we can characterize the interaction between.

But yes, underlying all of this is this much larger question of how we think about decompositional boundaries that are expanding with respect to some parameter that we call time.

And of course, that time is not anyone's observable time.

because we're trying to talk about it at the level of the universe as a whole.

So we can very quickly get into extremely deep questions.


SPEAKER_04:
So two things that came up there really for me is like okay yeah you're thinking about the embryo suddenly that's like a system that's separate from the world but even like within the embryo like where do you draw the line between the placenta and the embryo and when?

So like there's even some fuzzy blurring at the developmental scale and also really the notion of time and time irreversibility

and memory and encoding was just something I found absolutely fascinating about this paper.

So you mentioned that the quantum, the free energy principle for generic quantum systems does not imply like a space-time background, like it doesn't need a space-time background to operate, but then like brought time back in, in terms of memory and encoding.

And I just wonder if anybody maybe wants to speak a little bit more about that or help us understand how and why you don't need space or time for it to work.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I could talk about that a little bit if no one else wants to pick it up.

Let me go back to the first thing you said, though, Blue, which was about boundaries and how hard it is, for example, to draw boundaries in something like embryology.

There's another deep, deep assumption that we make that the boundaries that we draw in the world are somehow ontological, objective, and observer-independent.

And quantum theory and many other sort of theoretical approaches remind us constantly that that's a bad assumption.

That drawing, thinking of these boundaries as ontic causes all kinds of formal problems.

So for example, the associativity of the state space multiplication operator becomes invalid.

So you have to throw out the whole vector space formalism.

So I mean, real problems.

So boundaries are observer dependent in any formalism like this.

So what do we mean by this universal time?

it's a construct.

It's, it's a theoretical convenience and we map it onto our observable time, which is time measured by our clock.

And since we're, we're the theorists, we can say, okay, we're going to privilege our clock.

And, uh,

we're going to assume that our clock is somehow universal, even though we know that that doesn't make any sense.

And when we think of space-time, I mean, the term background-free comes from cosmology or quantum cosmology.

And it's the idea that

if we want to understand gravity, or if we want to understand space-time as an emergent phenomenon, then we need a theoretical approach that doesn't build space-time into it.

But if we think of biology, how many organisms, what fraction of organisms have anything like our experience of space?

To what extent

is space part of the world of organisms that we're interested in?

And to what extent is space as we see it a construct of our ability to make certain kinds of measurements?

And in a strict quantum theoretic formalism, time is not an observable

but distance is so it's an observable like any other so in a in a very strict sense quantum theory is not a mechanical theory because it's not really about things going on in an independent space-time did you have a question


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, I'd just like to comment on, I say thanks for referencing state spaces for systems.

I think that's really helpful because I've been wrestling with this dynamical part of systems, which is really helpful to thinking dynamics.

But most or a lot of people, when they talk about systems, they just think about relationships between things and system dynamics.

It just flows as if it's like things being passed around rather than dynamical things.

like processes.

So I think it's helpful to think about state space in that way to frame systems.

And I'm just, yeah, I'm curious about how we have to be careful about people who use systems in those other ways and don't have a dynamic or

concept of something which is non-linear being taken into account, because that seems to be something that this approach really gives the ability to do.

So I wonder what your thoughts are on that.


SPEAKER_00:
Carl, would you like to say something to that?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah i'm not sure it's going to be deeply informed um so i'm i'm as i'm listening i'm sort of trying to translate all these beautiful ideas into a classical framework that i'm much more comfortable with so the the last point is um from the classical perspective absolutely fundamental i mean you start with a launch valve or a random dynamical system

that is just cast in terms of flow operators or movement operators that you can connect with time if you want to.

But just to reinforce Chris's point, time and space are both constructs and they're just explanations

for these flow operators.

So if these flow operators have a dynamics, then implicitly you've got a rate of change with respect to something which is time, but that's quite a big move.

So putting things in terms of mappings, I think is absolutely fundamental.

So, Steve, if your point was when you need to think about

um systemic processes or systems from the point of view of mappings usually associated some time i get the impression from um working with chris and jim that um you know there is an ordinal or a sequential aspect so just coming back to the question is where did memory get into the game you know there has to be um there has to you know there can still be sequences or um you know

sets of things that constitute a memory, but it doesn't have to have the attribute of time in the sense that we would understand a flow from the point of view of a differential equation.

So I'd like to hear Chris and Jim's comments on that.

While I'm talking though, just this importance of

time as a construct.

It does strike me that that takes, there's a lot of heavy lifting if we just abandon the notion of some universal or clock time in relation to what I would

from a classical perspective, read the scale-free aspect of it.

I'm thinking here of the renormalization group.

So I'd be interested to know if there is a renormalization group or the apparatus of the renormalization group in quantum physics.

But from my perspective, that notion of having a scale-free approach is exactly

what is the aspiration of any, in particular, the free energy principle approach would have when trying to account for the progressive

increase in the scale of a system, but preserving exactly the same dynamics, the same Lagrangians, the same, again, from a classical perspective, the same functional forms for the things that are conserved.

So to reiterate Chris's fundamental point earlier on, that we're not talking about a commitment to a particular scale, be it very, very small or very, very big.

What we're talking about is a commitment to the same functional forms and the apparatus and the mathematics that underwrite the dynamics, if you like, at any given scale.

And then that calls then into question

how do you get from one scale to the other?

And one thing that sort of jumps out at you when you look at the renormalization group in relation to summarizing dynamics of random differential systems,

is that you get this time dilation or you move from one time scale to another time scale.

So I'm coming back to the point that when you talk about time, what time are you talking about?

evolutionary time?

Are you talking about the time that the fetus is enjoying in its mother's womb?

Are you talking about the time scale appropriate for the fluxes of ions over a cell membrane?

So the deeper question here is that how does one time relate to another?

um the people that i know who are interested in this issue from the point of view of the perception of time or time as a construct um usually fall back on information rates they usually fall back on the the rate of belief updating or the amount to which you have moved in some belief space technically a statistical manifold from a classical point of view but as soon as you say rate

With respect to what?

And then, of course, you're back with some time.

Which time?

And where you end up is, well, OK, I can't talk about any absolute information rate, but I can certainly talk about the number of moves I make at one scale.

per number of moves I make at another scale.

Even we could be doing that in our heads.

When we, very high scales, say from the point of view of a generative model in our heads, dealing with things that unfold,

very slowly in relation to fast-moving updating much closer, say, to our sensory organs or actuators, that it does make sense to actually talk about how far have I moved in terms of an information length.

um in my belief updating in um at a higher level of a hierarchy or your higher scale in relation to the to the number of moons or how far i have moved okay

We've got so many chatting away.

All good.


SPEAKER_04:
Jim, do you want to mute if you have background noise, please?


SPEAKER_09:
Okay, or you can just... It'll be muted on live stream.

Continue.


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, please continue.


SPEAKER_01:
That little response was very rambling because there are so many interesting questions that have come up over the past 10-20 minutes.

I'd like to pass back to Chris and Gin now.

to get their take on how comfortable they would be by taking the notions of say the renormalization group as applied to path integral formulations of random diagonal systems and whether that has any homologue or any currency in a truly background-free quantum formulation.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I don't know.


SPEAKER_07:
Basically, I think what Carl is proposing concerning the renormalization group and van der Waals theories is something to be investigated, but I'm in consonant with Carl concerning

um the aspect of um memory from the informational point of view and um may i speak about the specifics of our construction namely the cone cone diagram which um yeah i'll be there hello yep


SPEAKER_09:
Continue, Jim.

Okay, you could mute or just do Yeah.

That's all good.

We're going to be looking at the cone cocoon.

Maybe just Chris or Carl, you can give a first pass.

Like what is this being shown?

And also how does it relate to active inference?


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, hello.


SPEAKER_09:
Okay.

Welcome back.


SPEAKER_07:
Continue with the local distraction.

Yes.

Okay.

Well, you see, at the beginning of the paper, when we discussed the holographic screen, which underlies the Markov blanket, you have these preparation measurement operations, which

feed into the diagram 14, of which the lower part emanating from D' is a memory write system.

So as the top part is picking up information from

the measurement and preparation operators, there is a memory rights system being implemented from the opposite direction.

One thing I would like to say about the individual classifiers that

we haven't sort of fully mentioned in the paper that an individual classifier can be the result of an algebraic operation on two other classifiers.

These algebraic operations can be of the type such as concurrency,

or orthocurrents, for example, when you have a system of trains going through a system of stations, the classifiers in question can be combined to that extent, and also by choice.

So I think the scope for

What is happening informationally in diagram 14 is quite significant.

Originally, two spaces were applied to such areas as concurrency and high dimensional automata.

And also,

we can look at the possible uh possibilistic uh case and there are ways of interpreting diagram 14 in terms of the graph network too so um

I know this doesn't exactly answer Carl's questions, but I want to say that there is the mechanism there for the memory, right?

So this is, of course, influential when you see that active inference leads to minimizing the

variational free energy principle.

If you have any questions about those diagrams, please ask me.

Perhaps Chris can elaborate on what I'm saying.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, let me make a background comment here.

which in a sense goes to one reason that we're using this quantum theoretic formalism.

If we think of everything in terms of a quantum theoretic formalism instead of a classical formalism, then

The only place that there's any classical information in the system is actually on the boundary between the two interacting components.

So in that original,

I don't know whether it's figure one or the very original idea in the paper is that we have some closed system, which we can think of as the universe as a whole or the universe of interest as a whole.

And it's in some quantum state.

And if we divide it into two and we make the assumption that

the joint state after the division is separable, that we've divided it in a place where the interaction of the system with itself is weak enough that we can think of the two halves independently or the two components independently.

Then we have this natural sense of classical information written on that boundary.

And that's the sense of classical information that one encounters in the holographic principle in cosmology.

And it's in that sense of classical encoding that this boundary serves as a Markov blanket.

But since the boundary is the only locus anywhere of classical information in this formal description, then any classical memory has to be resident on that boundary.

And

This actually brings to mind a picture which was not included in this paper, but that I'm using in a subsequent paper with Mike Levin, which really is just thinking of this boundary using a pie chart, and as we pointed out in this paper,

Another kind of classical information is the classical free energy flow that powers information processing.

So this actually isn't the right picture.

And so one can immediately carve off a large chunk of the boundary and say, okay, this is just thermodynamic exchange.

These bits aren't useful to anybody.

They're

They're the bits that are being used, burned as power.

Yeah, this is a better picture for that.

And then there's a chunk of the pie chart that we can think of as perception and another chunk of the pie chart that we can think of as action.

But then some other piece of the pie chart has to be allocated to memory or there's no internal time.

Having an internal clock and having a memory are the same concept.

If I don't have any memory at all, then I have no awareness of the passing of time and I have no internal clock.

So when Jim talks about, in that previous cone-cocoon diagram, a memory-write operation, it's a memory-write operation on the boundary.

And of course, the opposite partner in the interaction, my memory segment of the boundary, from my point of view, might be my partner's perception segment of the boundary, or might overlap with my partner's perception of the segment of the boundary.

I have no idea how my interaction partner cuts up the boundary from their point of view.

So,

This is, yeah, that's what this picture sort of illustrates.

So this question of what is the memory also becomes observer independent, which gets back to this question of time and the relationship of time to a local clock and the relationship of a local clock to memories.

So whenever we talk about time as observed by someone, we're making reference to a local clock and a memory resource, and of course, an energy flow that powers that memory resource and prevents it from decaying entropically.

So we keep circling back to this abstraction of the universal time that parameterizes the universal dynamics.

And this formalism, like any such formalism, requires that concept as a theoretical construct.

But at least it doesn't confuse it with the experienced time of any particular observer, which has to be represented in this very different, in this very distinct way.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thanks.

So I think that is a perfect segue into a question that was asked by Franz Kuchling in the live chat.

And also Mike Levin has joined us.

I don't know if he's able to talk.

He says he's having some internet issues.

Mike, did you want to say hello before I ask Franz's question?

If you can.

Okay, I'll ask the question and then we'll see if Mike figures out how to unmute and say hi.

So Franz asks, how does the definition of a thing that maintains its identity over time scale with time scales or over time scale with time scales?

There you go.

How does the definition of a thing that maintains its identity over time scale with time scales?

What?

I still didn't get it.

For example, I would call something a thing if it persisted for some time with respect to my observational timescale.

So in other words, can quantum theory say something about how to set temporal observer limited boundaries of defining a thing?

There's a lot in there.

So how does the definition of a thing?


SPEAKER_09:
Can I give one first off, Lou?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, yeah, yeah.


SPEAKER_09:
We see many ways, some that are actually implicitly scale friendly or scale free, like the hierarchical parametric models in SPM, statistical parametric modeling.

That's separating like in a multi-scale experimental design from an experimentalist's perspective into signal and noise, including the combinatoric interactions

in a classical parametric state space.

And there's also the Bayesian identification of parameters, which also is just as was brought up, scale implies choosing what the state space is.

And so what...

statistical variance gets partitioned into the noise term, or the kind of ripple term, and what gets partitioned into the wave term, into the signal, into the regression slope, rather than the variance term.

These kinds of variance partitioning questions

can be approached in a instantaneous sense, like descriptive statistics, even if it's about time series.

And I think a theme that we're hearing brought up is that taking repeated measurements seriously brings in a whole host of essentially cognitive features, like as well as information, theoretic,

perspective, dependence, all of these features that are tucked under the rug or down projected onto in a special case.

If we just assume a synchronous universe or a synchronous regression, it's a totally different scenario.

But considering this quantum statistical background helps us

deal with the cognitive modeling, and also take the consequences of action into account because action is implied in the measurement, preparation, recording, experimental, active inference cycle.

It was just so subtle in the paper where he said all inference in this scheme is active inference, but the paper was about quantum and the FEP.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_08:
Could I bounce off what Daniel just said very quickly?

Sure.

Because I was also thinking about the nature of action.

So I thought what Daniel just mentioned there ties in with if memory happens via there being some action and then the action defines the memory scale, so I think that makes sense.

that starts to define a scale.

So I'm curious if there's something different between the temporality of a thing maintaining its thingness and the sort of temporality of actions by systems of things.

Because I think things can only act to maintain their thingness, but they don't, if they start doing things with others,

they become a system.

So I suppose you've got where that action still starts to come into the equation.

Or am I mistaken there?


SPEAKER_00:
Can I address that briefly?

Yeah, I think the relevant fable here is the fable of the two drunks who are walking home from the bar leaning on each other.

And if they're lucky, they manage to keep each other upright.

If we think of an observer in an environment, and so we draw a boundary between the observer and the environment,

and we think about the observer's interaction with its total environment, then we've divided the boundary up, as we were talking about earlier, into a pie chart where a large fraction of the bits are fuel, and so they're uninformative, and there's a perception space and an action space and a memory space and so on.

Now let's think about what happens when the observer identifies a thing embedded in the environment.

So the observer has now segmented or sectored the perception part of the space into a part that includes bits that represent the state of this thing.

and the rest of the perception space, which are bits that represent the background that the thing is embedded in.

So the thing's environment.

And so the question becomes, what does it mean to say that that thing remains, retains its thingness, its identity over time for that observer?

Well, that means that that observer is able to maintain this distinction between bits that communicate information about the thing and bits that communicate information about the thing's environment.

So this becomes a cognitive question about the observer.

So it's

The question, how does a thing maintain its identity, is replaced in this way by the question, how does an observer of a thing maintain the thing's identity for himself or for itself?

How does the observer maintain the ability to lock in on this thing as distinct from the environment?

And so let's go to an example, right?

Think about motor babbling in an infant.

So here's this infant.

She's lying on her back.

She's waving her arms and her legs around.

And what she's doing in this motor babbling is figuring out the relationship between the motor system and the visual system.

So among other things, she's figuring out that something that she sees, some visual stimulus, is actually part of her body.

It's a hand.

And that at a certain moment, she begins to be able to control what this hand is doing.

using visual and motor feedback.

So here's a living example of an observer fixing the identity of an object.

And what we're trying to do here in a sense is use this as to insist on thinking about

Beinghood always in this observer-specific way.

So I noticed that Carl just raised his hand.

So let me turn it over completely to him to carry on with that or contest it or give a different perspective.


SPEAKER_01:
No, I don't want to contest it.

I want to fully endorse that.

And if you just...

look at the free energy principle as classically formulated, it is exactly along the lines of the thingness being an attribute of the observer.

So if you just start off with the notion of a Markov blanket that stipulatively defines thingness, how is the Markov blanket defined?

Well, it's defined by the conditional independence between the dynamics on the inside versus the outside.

But of course,

those dynamics are not observable once they're on the inside from the outside by definition.

So you're immediately imputing some magical observer that could actually recognize that independence before you've even defined what a thing is.

So I just wanted to, in an abstract and possibly even philosophical way,

reinforce this notion that thingness is an attribute of something that could possibly observe it, even from the classical perspective of the free energy principle predicated on the notion of a Markov blanket that is in turn defined in terms of conditional independences or disentanglement.

That example of motor babbling, I think, is again a lovely illustration of observation underwriting thingness, and in this instance, a highly anthropomorphised thingness, namely selfhood, to develop the hypothesis or the explanation

for my holographic screen or all the information on my Markov blanket, that a plausible parsimonious explanation is that I am a thing, I am a self, I am me.

It actually takes months, if not years, to fully actually arrive at as you're an infant, slowly discovering that I am different from mum, and perhaps mum is different from her background, and ultimately, perhaps I am something like mum.

So the emergence of thingness, I think it is quintessentially observer-dependent.


SPEAKER_04:
both mathematically and in terms of developmental psychology great thank you oh did you want to add up sorry let's try and lower my hand it does that by itself i think oh how lucky the technology

So maybe I will put this back to Carl.

Maybe you were talking earlier, before Jim started talking, about the rate of information flow and the rate of belief updating.

And so I just wonder, I've been curious about this actually,

just in terms of human information, like are we really bombarded with more information now than we used to be?

And is this like influencing our rate of cultural change, cultural evolution?

Because as a culture, like we update our beliefs more often.

Do you think that these two things are proportional, the rate of information flow and the rate of belief updating?

Something I've been thinking about.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, no, I'm sure that's absolutely right.

And right, I think, at every scale of analysis.

So you could look at it from a point of view of culture and the availability of information on social media and globalisation at a cultural scale.

But you could also, I think,

bring us back to motor babbling, you know, the degree of bleep updating an infant has to do is clearly going to be much greater than somebody of my age.

So, you know, time will, a year in the life of an infant will not be the same as a year in the life, in my life, you know.

And I think that that is a direct reflection of the degree of belief updating.

Interestingly, that question touches upon the separation of time scales, which I think underwrites everything that we're talking about here.

So just to stand back again and go back to some of Chris's early observations about the remit of the paper in question,

It was really at any given but not specified scale where we could assume that we didn't have to worry about the separation of time scales.

From the point of view of a cognitive neuroscientist, for example, what we're talking about is inference, where inference in this instance would be read as a kind of reading and writing.

onto this holographic screen, or if you want a classical perspective, the updating of active and sensory states on the Markov blanket.

But under the assumption that

other things that change at a slower timescale are not changing.

And those other things might be, for example, at a slower timescale, they might be learning.

So you've got this notion that the formalism at hand, the reading and writing at hand from the quantum information theoretic perspective,

could be a very good metaphor for inference over a short time period where things are not changing very quickly from the point of view of the things to be learned.

So within a few seconds or minutes of the life of the zygote.

acknowledging that you could apply the same apparatus and the same mechanics at a slower time scale that would account for the transition from a zygote to a neonate as it learns.

So the difference between inference and learning, I think, is a nice, common, sensible example of this separation of time scales.

So when you ask about cultural information available, I think you're probably talking about a

a scale of learning um and absolutely you know when we learn we update our beliefs there it will be from a classical perspective a statistical manifold that um holds those beliefs and you're literally moving over that um and with respect to an another scale um then the degree of belief updating the degree of asking questions the degree of rewriting um will certainly be you know

be a function of the amount of reading and writing that's going on.

And I can imagine that somebody who has access to Wikipedia or news or social media is doing a lot more read writing than I was, say, in the 1960s.


SPEAKER_09:
Okay, you're muted, but to me, Blue?

Yes, to you.

So, Carl, you made a fascinating point about connecting the motor babbling and taking it into the informational and the belief updating domain into the adult, where we're kind of motor babbling on social media in a way that has different dynamics than before.

And people often give the example of like, well, a year feels longer for a seven-year-old because it's a seventh of their life.

But then for the 80-year-old, it's an 80th of their life.

So that piece of the pie is smaller versus bigger.

And that is implicitly the fallacy of the observer independent time.

as if there was a linear chart that was being linearly divided by some static observer whereas another way to look at that or an alternative model is like the rate of development or experiences or change or novelty or continue to explore and don't worry i'll mute james oh he's muted on the live stream so it's all this um that uh rate of belief updating

could set that internal kairos, that biological time, like that biological information geometry.

And so it connects the cognitive sciences and also the statistical perspectives that have been discussed to this time question, which as also brought up earlier, does so much work in so-called dynamical modeling.

And it just makes me think about how there was a movement from the observer independent synchronous

into the relativistic which prepared and almost like prepared the um partition to exist so that all these other domains like the holographic principle could come into play so my question for any of the authors is where does the qrf come into play and how does this relate to discussions of pluralism and polycentrality


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome question.

Jim, did you want to answer?


SPEAKER_07:
I wonder if you can bring up a diagram there in the paper.

Let's see.

Yes, it's diagram 34.

Well, there you have configuration that relates the QRF to the Cocoa Cone diagrams.

And we say here that, let's see,

Well, here we focus on co-deployable observers when this diagram commutes.

It's interesting, of course, when the diagram doesn't commute and then you have a kind of intrinsic context, reality.

So,

I think what this is saying is that there are certain elements of information represented by the logic of the distributed system in question that are

kind of ambiguous, or rather they're manifest in classifiers and infomorphisms that aren't defined, or the co-limit, the bold C at the top there, does not exist.

So this is a very useful criteria, I think, to distinguish between sort of empirical models, which the best part are based on code deployable variables.

and what happens when quantum contextuality occurs.

That is diagram 34 doesn't commute.

So there's some sort of discrepancy there in the mechanism of the quantum reference frame relative to the dynamics of

the Markov blanket or the holographic screen underlying it.

So there is some kind of distortion in meaning that results in this sort of intrinsic contextuality.

I don't know if that's a satisfactory answer at all, but


SPEAKER_02:
When this breaks down.

I haven't seen that before.

Sounds good.


SPEAKER_07:
I'm sorry.

There's another local district.

It's all good.

Go ahead.


SPEAKER_04:
Chris, did you want to add on to that or make another comment?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I wanted to go back a little bit to the basics of what a quantum reference frame is because this is a concept that is both very familiar and I think a little bit unfamiliar.

And the term was only coined back in the 1990s when the idea of a quantum measurement was associated with the idea of

the units in which the measurement is made and what are the requirements for a measurement being meaningful and we're going to get right back to the same issues we've been talking about with respect to time and thingness but a reference frame is just a way of giving meaning to an outcome

And it's what allows outcomes to be compared.

So if I have an apparatus like a meter stick, I can go around and measure lengths.

And as long as I believe that my meter stick maintains its identity, as long as I believe that my meter stick remains the same thing, then I can compare the lengths that I've measured.

But if I don't believe my meter stick remains the same thing, then these length comparisons are meaningless.

So the notion of a reference frame is intimately tied up with this notion of meaning, which in this free energy principle context is really a notion of actionability.

Can I use what something means to guide my actions and my decision-making?

So this notion of a QRF becomes a notion of giving an outcome value that I obtain and write in memory comparability with other outcome values that I maintain and write in memory.

And we're very used to, as human beings, we have this incredibly complicated sensory and inferential apparatus that involves many, many degrees of freedom and many, many values that are distinguishable.

So I think if we want to think about something like the role of reference frames in perception, it's

It's better to think in terms of something like E. coli.

So think of a much simpler kind of system that can measure fewer things.

E. coli can measure concentrations of salt and sugars of various kinds.

And those concentrations are meaningful to it.

those concentrations allow it to make decisions because its internal biochemistry assigns them an actionable meaning.

So chemotaxis in E. coli works because the level of phosphorylation of a particular chemical

remains reasonably constant.

That's the reference frame.

And concentration levels can be compared to each other as long as that phosphorylation state remains reasonably constant.

That reference frame is meaningful.

And so chemotaxis makes sense because E. coli has, if you will, a slow clock.

The phosphorylation state of QiY.

that assigns, that confers meanings upon its outcomes.

So now we can spool back to what Jim was saying about code deployable reference frames.

Reference frames that I can use at the same time that I can obtain information from simultaneously have to commute.

This is what Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is about.

And if I can't use them at the same time, it's because they don't commute.

If I use them in different orders, I get different answers.

And what that means is that by switching reference frames, I'm effectively changing the calibration.

I'm effectively changing the meaning that I've assigned.

And I think...

A very beautiful place to see this is a paper that we referenced here from Cervantes and Zafiroff called the Snow Queen Experiment.

The paper's called Snow Queen is Evil and Beautiful.

It came out a few years ago.

And basically this paper is demonstrating quantum contextuality in human decision-making.

And it's doing it by exploiting differences, context-dependent differences in the meanings of words.

So it's perfectly pointing out this relationship between meaning and co-deployability and hence context-dependence in human cognition.

So that's a paper I'd very much recommend reading.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you so much.

Carl, did you want to comment on that also?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm aware that Stephen also has a question, but just to follow up on that beautiful deconstruction, this is more of a question, but I'm going to state it as an observation.

This notion of the QRF as being fundamentally getting measurements right or metrics right,

would be understood from the point of view of inference, technically, as getting an internally consistent metric correct.

And the metric we're talking about is a Fisher information metric.

So if you look at all reading and writing or action and sensation from a classical perspective,

as just trying to minimize some divergence or some prediction error.

What you are saying is that you are trying to find an internally consistent metric in an information space that makes sense of your active sampling, querying the world.

So it just sounded to me as if what Chris was saying was exactly getting the measuring stick

at least behaving consistently.

You'll never know whether it's changing its length or not, but at least if it behaves consistently in relation to what you can see of the world, the way that you can query that world actively, then that's good enough.

And that, of course, is one way of simply stating that the name of the game in Active Imprints is just to minimize your prediction error, where you are now reading prediction error

as a KL divergence.

And of course, the information length or the amount, the measurement of movement, the metric is just a path integral of infinitesimal changes in KL divergence.

So it's been from a mathematical perspective on the perspective of information geometries.

There's a beautiful link here.

between aligning your QRFs and getting your generative models right to make the most sense in the sense of minimizing or making as internally consistent as possible all your information metrics.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thank you.

Before we go to Stephen's question, we have a question or two from Amber Aguirre in the live chat.

He asks, does the existence of a holographic screen slash Markov blanket automatically yield a statistical manifold for the belief state of the agent?

And is there a canonical renormalization procedure for a quantum mechanical system?

If there is one, how would the core screening translate into the statistical manifold?


SPEAKER_00:
I can take one whack at that, which is if I'm coarse-graining something, if we think of this in terms of QRFs, then I'm deploying a different reference frame with lower resolutions.

So in a sense, what's being renormalized is my representation of the units that I use to distinguish states of the world.

So if I have a meter stick that's made of stainless steel,

that has millimeters indicated on it, then I can go around and make measurements in millimeters.

But if I coarse grain to a meter stick that only has half centimeters indicated on it, then I've lost a factor of five in resolution.

I've coarse grained by a factor of five.

And so I've in effect rounded off all my outcome values.

And now my function of comparing outcome values is differently defined because it has to work at this lower resolution.

And if I want to compare my previous values to my later values,

I have to incorporate this explicit roundoff function into my comparison of values because I've changed my QRF.

So, coarse graining, which of course couples to scale changing from the very beginning of our conversation, can be thought of as a transition from

a QRF with some grain size to a QRF for a similar degree of freedom with a different grain size.

And that has ripple effects through everything, including the free energy cost of memory.

If I'm writing two-bit numbers into memory, then that's a lot less expensive than writing five-bit numbers into memory.

So this raises another aspect of this question of renormalization, which is how does it influence, how can I use it

to solve the trade-off problems that arise if I'm an organism with a limited fuel supply, which of course I am, going about the world trying to gather, preferentially gather the information that's going to be most useful to me at the lowest possible cost.

So again, we get back to this

he issue in all of active inference of balancing the risk of exploration against the reward of new information.

And coarse graining is intimate to that.

And it involves the choice I make of the tools that I'm going to use to make measurements.

and how that choice impacts my need to allocate computational resources and energy resources to what I'm doing too.

To the complex task of getting new information while at the same time surviving.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thanks.

Daniel, did you, oh, Carl, do you want to speak to that first?


SPEAKER_09:
perhaps stephen should ask but then i can come back to to what just said yeah i'll um make a note and then carl would be great to have your response then steven's your question so to transpose it into statistical parametric mapping the true classics there's a mapping from the measured voxels

which are being defined by the resolution of the EEG or the fMRI machine, that's the holograph.

That's like what the experimental apparatus is providing is the measurements.

Those are the O in our partially observable Markov decision process.

It's the predicted value in the regression.

And that space, if it's 128 channels in the EEG and they're getting this sampling rate, that is the state space that's being discussed.

And that's being transposed or mapped or connected to a different statistical space with different features.

And rather than the voxels,

there's like the mapping onto resels.

So Carl, that's why I'd appreciate if this is true or not, but those are the resolution elements and that it can be like a coarse graining.

And in that stretch meter stick,

and different space there's a lot more statistical inference options available that are just not accessible at all from the um voxel coarse graining which is noisier and there's a signal enrichment in the coarse graining to the resolves that's appropriate and then that gets um

juxtaposed with the contrasts, which is the experimental design of the scientist.

Like you couldn't differentiate A versus B category if you only tested A. So the experimental design, and that's where like the statistics actually comes into play.

And then just as Chris said, there's the organism with limited food supply.

And then there's like the scientist with limited time, attention, computer storage, processor time, funding,

maybe seven billion people like it just there's plausibility and so that's where this operational code deployment connects with experimental design and so many of the patterns and analogies exist in the purely classical domain of the parametric statistics like spm in the classical physics and the flow and the information flow area that's coming into play and also these more recent in quantum areas so carl would love to hear your thoughts on that


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, of course, I'm mindful that Stephen's still got his hand up.

Perhaps I'll speak to that and then Stephen can ask a question.

But yes, I think these questions and Daniel, your responses are touching and Chris is touching on something really fundamental.

So just to answer the question from the point of view of Markov blanket, yes, it does automatically yield a statistical manifold.

or at least it looks as if there is a statistical manifold if you can observe the behaviour of the thing that you are observing.

The second thing, question, which we've been focusing on, the core screening, I think that's a really fundamental thing.

I would argue, though, not to conflate too much the notion of renormalisation, which would be, I think,

more a question of how you get from one scale to another scale with the notion of coarse graining, which could be read just simply as the degree of quantization or choosing the right resolution element, the right coarse graining of a given QRF at any given scale.

You could argue that you could contextualize it, but I think there's a more fundamental argument here.

And that's the argument that there will be

from a statistical perspective, an optimal coarse graining for any given holographic screen or exchange over a Markov blanket.

And that's the one that statistically maximizes the marginal likelihood

which you could, if you like, relate to this sort of getting the measurements as internally consistent as possible, maximizing the predictability of the next measurement you make.

That goes hand in hand with a maximization of the marginal likelihood or a minimization of the variation of free energy.

That is important to remember because the marginal likelihood can always be expressed as accuracy minus complexity, where complexity scores the degrees of freedom.

you're burning up, if you remember about the bits on the holographic screen, you need energy to, from a classical perspective, represent.

What that translates to in a very simple way in terms of probability distributions and functionals is that in maximizing the marginal likelihood or the evidence for your

aligned or model of the world you are to maintain a certain degree of accuracy trying to minimize complexity so you're using as few degrees of freedom your core screening to the extent you can get away with

while maintaining an accurate account of, say, the sensory states or the perceptual space on your holographic screen.

If you now, from the point of view of active inference, just think about, well, what would that sort of accuracy and complexity look like in terms of the consequences of action, you get exactly what Chris was talking about, which was the expected complexity

being the risk usually, and I mean risk in the sense of an economist or Bayesian decision theorist.

It is literally mathematically the same thing.

The expected accuracy now becomes, you know, a sort of,

expected utility or the expected log evidence, the likelihood, the expected likelihood that you would get if you committed to this kind of course grading.

So this course grading is absolutely fundamental.

It's really interesting to go back to

all the sources where the coarse graining starts to make a difference.

And I'm thinking here, coming back to Daniel's notion of resolution elements, you know, you find this in sort of Wiener filtering, you find it in the matched filtering theorem, there is an optimal level of smoothing or blurring

for any given kind of data about which you want to make an inference or you want to assimilate.

You see this in formulations of universal computation that themselves are based upon Solomoff induction that get you right back to Kolmogorov complexity and compressibility.

So you see it in the drive that underwrites all formulations of universal computation.

to maximize compression by minimizing the complexity of your message passing, getting it as efficient and as simple as you can.

And of course, the best way to make your account as simple as possible is to coarse-grain it.

And I think you also see it in the sort of the different levels of cognition in psychology and in neurophysiology in the sense that the higher level, more efficient ways in which we align our QRFs or optimize our generative models always lead you to a very coarse grade quantization of the world.

So, for example,

I represent, I am sure in my brain and some neural populations, the fact that I am in my study.

I do not represent that in terms of very fine grained X, Y, Z coordinates down to the millimeter.

I represented, no, I'm in my study.

I carved the world.

at its joints, and those joints basically demarcate the kind of core spreading I bring to the table.

There are all sorts of arguments you can pursue here to vindicate this, the very existence of receptive fields.

Tiling a sensorium in a way that is covered by discrete quantized receptive fields tells you immediately

that the way that the brain represents stuff on the inside, if you can look at it through brain imaging, is in this quantized fashion, this coarse-grained fashion.

And that coarse-grainedness and the size and the deployment and the organization of those receptive fields has been optimized at many different temporal scales.

So I'll just give you a few takes on coarse grading as something absolutely fundamental to the structure of a generative model.

or to the way that we align our QRFs to make sense of the stuff on the holographic screen, or at least when we are reading from that and sense-making in that sense.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

Thank you.

Stephen?

Does anyone want to ask a question?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, thanks.

No, this is really cool.

I was going to come back a little bit to now and the past and the idea that you mentioned about the way that we interface or the assumptions of the interface then changes how we resolve the thing and the background sort of situation, situatedness of that thing.

So it's like... So that could then also...

and this is the question in a way, is how can that also, because if the way that that thing and the assumptions are made sets up the meaningful influence, the action policy selection, and the way things are thought about, how can that itself change the way the brain or the way that organisms look at what things are?

For instance, in the modern world, we do see everything as things.

We carve things up.

We see things as separate, like an individual is separate.

Whereas if you go back to sort of indigenous approaches, time for them was cyclical or followed the river going down a hill.

So there was a complexity focus in a way.

It was almost like the mountain car problem of finding the landscape of meaning

rather than defining the thing and what it is and carving it.

So I'm curious around is this, how much is the way that the quantum reference field, you know, translated into thinking about what that thing is and how that, you know, compares to say our Western cognitive frames, which kind of,

We measure everything because we can, because basically we can control our environment so heavily.

We can make things very accurate.

Whereas in the past, it might have been the Kalahari Bushmen or the people in the middle of the Amazon that somehow go with the landscape of complexity.

So the way that that is understood is going to be different.

So I'm just curious about how you think about that ways of knowing.


SPEAKER_04:
Great question.

I wonder also if that ties into the individuality of temporal scales, like you mentioned the cyclical time and back to Franz's question maybe earlier about how

a thing over time that stays a thing over time scales with the scale of the time or with the cyclical nature of the time.

Or it reminds me back of when we had Chris and Shana here talking about like flattening time.

Maybe that was just Shana's talk, but yeah.

Anyway, I don't know.

Do you guys, anybody have any temporal comments?


SPEAKER_09:
Just that there's an analogy to the synchronization of clocks, which is a huge part of computer science and of quantum and other areas.

That question of synchronizing clocks seems to have some relationship to cognitive model, not naive congruence in terms of synchronization, but in terms of time zone coordination.

So if we're in the same time zone, then there's a comparability, but for cognitive states.

And so I think that will be something awesome to explore in

next week's session and of course in the long run about what that kind of semantic and rhetorical and narrative alignment that isn't congruence but reflects a broader frame, which actually the differences within the frame are the search through that field.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

And in the interest of temporal comments, I think maybe does everyone just want to go around and give a final thought and maybe an idea of what they would like to see in next week's discussion?

And we will start with Stephen.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, thanks.

Lots of interesting things.

I suppose I'm curious about the way the collapsing of the quantum reference frame might scale differently, or might the assumptions that lead to the collapse could inform different scales of interactions and mixing and blending of data.

behavior and Yeah, digesting a lot of stuff that's come up.


SPEAKER_03:
So yeah, thank you for for the opportunity to talk to you Awesome Daniel anything you want to see happened next week?


SPEAKER_09:
We always think of the dot zero, it's kind of like dropping into the skate park or the bathtub.

And so that was like a microcosm of all the threads that get brought together.

And then in dot one, I feel like we opened up so many

areas of possible connection.

And so I'll just look forward to the second repeated measurement of this semantic or regime of attention space and see how the continued interaction and engagement updates our generative model past the dot to even.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

Carl or Chris, do you want to give a thought about what you'd like to unpack in the next question?


SPEAKER_01:
Should I go first?

Well, Chris thinks of something very clever to say.

So following on from Daniel, to a certain extent, Steven's question as well.

I'd like to hear about the principle of unitarity, entanglement, and its relationship to this notion of synchronization and the mutual alignment of QRFs between things that are coupled.

So coming to

the regimes of attention.

I think there could be a very transparent link there in the sense that

Contextualizing your QRF, I think for a cognitive neuroscientist would be getting your attentional set right and possibly implicit coarse graining that comes along with a particular attentional set.

Taking that notion to tending to others and synchronizing and communicating and living in a universe that is also composed of things like me.

I think brings some fundamental questions about classically generalized synchronization,

quantum theoretically entanglement and enabling that entanglement in the right kind of way via aligning your QRS and getting the coarse graining right in sympathy with your partner.

So I'd like to hear about the principle of unitality, entanglement, and how it relates to classical notions of communication, mutual inference, and generalized synchrony.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, thanks for stealing what I was going to say.

I was also going to say how there's one like the final concluding part of the paper talks about how the FEP is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.

And I really would like to dive into that more and maybe any potential implications of that.

And now Chris gets the final and cleverest word.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, this won't be terribly clever.

What I was going to do was to recommend a lovely paper by Alexi Grinbaum that we refer to in this paper.

And the closing sentence of that paper is that physics is really about languages.

And I think this ties in nicely to some of the issues that Stephen was raising in his last question, which I found very interesting, about how do conceptual schemes evolve at the cultural level?

And in hearing about...

the whole issue of reference frame synchronization or reference frame alignment and how that relates to entanglement.

This really is a question about language.

And that paper by Alexi Grinbaum, I think makes this point very, very beautifully.

So that would be a nice thing to look at at some point.

Let's see, this is, that's probably a newer paper by him.

The one I was referring to is titled something like how device-free, how device-independent methods change the nature of physical theory or something like that.

It was published in Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 2017 or something like that.

Okay, anyway, thank you very much for this.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, this was very interesting and engaging and really appreciated everyone's participation and Blue's facilitation.

So we'll look forward to seeing anyone just drop in or out when works for you next week at the same time in number 40.2.

So till the next measurement.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

Take care.

## Cgo-0UU848M

SPEAKER_01:
Hello everyone.

This is ACT-INF Lab live stream number 40.2 on March 24th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work, hear about your QRF,

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome.

We may actually have to change this to all QRF are welcome.

And we'll follow video etiquette for live streams.

Check out activeinference.org to learn more about the activities in the lab.

Today in 40.2, we are continuing to learn and discuss this awesome paper, A Free Energy Principle for Generic Quantum Systems by Fields, Friston, Glazebrook and Levin.

And we're really appreciative to have several of the authors joining us today.

In this dot two, we're just going to have introductions and then jump right in to several of the notes that we left for ourself from last time and see where else it goes.

And anyone can write a comment in the live chat and we'll just say hello again.

pick up with some threads that were left unspooled in the dot one and see where we get in the dot two and how we continue going forward.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and I will pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Good morning.

My name's Dean.

I'm in Calgary in Canada.

My emphasis, I think, is on the practice part of active inference and seeing how it gets applied in different contexts and situations.

I'll pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico.

And I will be facilitating the discussion today.

But let me pass it off to Steven.

He's still here.

Steven, are you here?

Oh, you're muted, Steven.

We still don't hear you.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Thanks, Steven.

We'll continue on to Dave.


SPEAKER_05:
Dave, I don't see.


SPEAKER_01:
Also left.

Okay.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Let's continue.

Let's pass it on to the authors we go.

So let's pass it to Mike first, since you have audio this time.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, hi, yep, this is Mike Levin.

I do biology at Tufts, trying to understand what living systems are doing at all scales and how intelligence manifests in various unconventional embodiments across, and they compete and cooperate across scales to give us the amazing phenomena we see in biology.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome, thank you.

Dave, would you like to say hello, introduce yourself?

Maybe no audio also.

OK.

How about Carl?

Would you like to say hello?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, I would.

Hello.

I'm Carl.

I'm one of the co-authors on the paper.

I'm a neuroscientist from London.

I have to confess I'm a bit of a passenger and admirer of this paper.

So I'm here to learn as much as to answer questions.

So I'll pass it on to Chris, who's


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Chris Fields.

I'm also an independent researcher working sort of on the boundaries between physics and biology and information science and sort of convinced that those are all three the same actual discipline.

So this is a paper that expands on that theme a little bit.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

Thank you.

So I think where we left off last time was talking about how the FEP is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.

And maybe, Chris, would you mind leading us off here?

And if you want to point out a specific maybe formalism or place where we should start?

I think it was the very last formalism in the paper, actually.

But maybe if you would talk us through that, that would be super appreciated.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Well, let's talk first informally just about the motivation for this idea and how it might make sense intuitively.

And again, I'll go back to...

Carl's paper from 2019, Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics, which the current paper is obviously modeled after in a certain way.

And as we discussed last time, I think, what Carl was able to show in Particular Physics was that the idea, the very intuitive idea of a thing,

of something that exists and importantly maintains its identity as a single system over time.

And what that means is that it can be measured by some other system.

And it can be measured repeatedly and reliably

over time by some other system.

So thingness is associated with repeated measurability.

And what Carl was able to show in particular physics was that if we assume that something is a thing, then we're effectively assuming that it has a stable non-equilibrium steady state density, and therefore we're assuming that it has a Markov blanket.

And therefore we can treat it as implementing active inference, as constantly predicting its own future existence and behaving so as to make that prediction come true to the extent that it can.

And such behavior may be prevented or overcome by its environment

So the environment of something may cause it to cease to exist.

The thing could be a marble sitting on a table and its environment could include a sledgehammer that's about to come down on top of it and destroy its thingness.

But as long as the environment doesn't do that,

the object can continue to execute active inference and maintain its Markov blanket by so doing.

And of course its Markov blanket is what defines it as a separate entity, as a thing that's distinct from its environment.

So let's translate all of that into quantum theory.

In quantum theory, we have this notion of interaction as measurement already.

And we have a notion of interaction as information exchange already.

So it's very natural to take this whole picture and make the notion of measurement over time precise in this, using this quantum theoretic formalism

And quantum theory also gives us a very natural implementation of a Markov blanket, which in physics is called a holographic screen.

And holographic screens were introduced back in the 70s to talk about black holes.

But a holographic screen is just a reformulation of the concept of a Markov blanket.

It's a boundary that encodes information.

And specifically, it's a boundary between two systems that encodes all of the information that one system can have about the other.

It does just what a Markov blanket does.

It provides an information encoding boundary that gives the systems on the two sides of it identities for each other by distinguishing them.

And this notion of identity in quantum theory corresponds to separability.

Separability just means lack of entanglement.

So if the joint, if you have two things,

or a thing in its environment, then if they're not entangled, you can talk about their states independently.

If they are entangled, then you can't talk about their states independently.

And so the idea of thingness goes away since thingness implies having some sort of conditionally independent state, right?

A nest density that can actually be written down.

So all of this fits together rather nicely.

And so if we go back to particular physics, the idea of active inference emerges from that paper as a fundamental underlying principle of physics that

that tells us what we mean by thing or system that's identifiable over time.

So this becomes a very deep principle, deeper than Newton's laws, because Newton's laws actually talk about objects that are identifiable over time.

The free energy principle and the idea of active inference tells us what we mean when we talk about something being identifiable over time.

So if this is a fundamental principle of physics, then one would expect that it would have some relationship to the principle of unitarity.

which is the most fundamental principle of quantum theory.

And it's typically axiom one, when one writes down the axioms of quantum theory, was axiom one in von Neumann's formulation back in the 30s.

Or 40s, I can't remember which.

So what's the principle of unitarity?

The principle of unitarity is just the principle that in a closed system, information is conserved.

So information is neither created nor destroyed in a closed system.

So it's a fundamental conservation law, and it's exactly analogous to the principle of conservation of energy.

The conservation of energy says, in a closed system, energy is neither created nor destroyed.

It's conserved.

So the principle of unitarity just says this for information as well as energy.

And we know that information and energy are very closely linked by Landauer's principle or by Boltzmann's definition of entropy or all of these other connections that make physics informational.

So...

How does the principle of active inference relate to the principle of unitarity?

What does it say about the conservation of information?

Or what does the conservation of information tell us about the principle of active inference or the free energy principle?

Well, the first thing to note is that unitarity applies to closed systems.

So thing-environment pairs.

And active inference characterizes what the thing is doing in response to its environment.

And of course, it also characterizes what the environment is doing in response to the thing.

And another benefit of quantum theory is that it makes this symmetry between any system and its environment manifest, makes it very explicit.

But it's already explicit in the free energy principle.

I mean, the Markov blanket has two sides.

And the system acting on its environment is the same as the environment sensing the system.

And in the same way that the environment acting on the system is the same as the system sensing its environment.

So physical interaction is information exchange in both frameworks.

And it's perfectly symmetrical.

If the system remains identifiable over time, so does its environment.

To exist, its environment ceases to exist because its environment is defined with respect to it.

That's why we call it its environment.

So all of these symmetries are built into both frameworks.

So the free energy principle is fundamentally about prediction, right?

VFE, variational free energy, can be thought of as prediction error or potential prediction error.

So the free energy principle is about the system being able to predict

next state of its own Markov blanket.

And if it predicts the next state of its own Markov blanket perfectly, then VFE is minimized to zero.

And that's the asymptotic case.

Perfect prediction.

There was a question last time about what's asymptotic in the claim that

The free energy principle is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.

And the asymptotic state, as I think Blue pointed out last time, is perfect prediction.

So now let's translate all this to quantum theory.

And this is where the figure in the paper that shows the disk with the various triangles comes into play.

I think that's figure six, but I've actually forgotten.

Yeah, it's that one.

So let's now introduce this idea of a QRF, which is just a little package of predictive capability.

QRF means quantum reference frame.

As we discussed last time, a reference frame is implemented computation that makes a measurement comparable across time.

So a meter stick, for example, implements a computation of length, and it allows us to compare measurements of length across time because we assume that it's fixed.

And of course, we can use a meter stick because each of us has embedded in our brains a representation of length.

In fact, we have a representation of a 3D coordinate system.

without which meter sticks would be useless.

So we can use external reference frames like meter sticks because we have internal reference frames like our representation of 3D space and our intuitive understanding of length that we assume stays fixed over time and that allows our measurements of length to be comparable across time for us.

So now let's think about a QRF as a way of something that implements active inference or that enables a system to implement active inference by allowing it to compare its measurements over time.

Prediction is meaningless if you can't compare your measurements over time.

So let's ask, what would it be like for a system to be able to perfectly predict the next state of its Markov blanket?

The next state of its Markov blanket is a state that its environment has written by acting on it.

So

Our question of perfect prediction is, what would it be like for a system to be able to perfectly predict the next actions of its environment?

And notice that the system isn't predicting the next state of its environment.

It doesn't know the state of its environment.

State of its environment's on the other side of the Markov blanket.

What it's trying to predict is the next action of its environment on it, which is the only action of its environment that's relevant.

And the only action of the environment that's detectable.

So its environment, like it, is characterized by QRFs, right?

The situation is perfectly symmetrical between the system and its environment.

So the question of predicting its environment, and the system can predict its environment's actions perfectly

only if it and the environment exactly share their qrfs because the qrf not only interprets sensation it gives meaning to action so it says what your action is going to be so if i use my meter stick to cut a 2x4

My QRF, the meter stick, is guiding my action.

It's giving it meaning.

It's making it repeatable in the same way that it makes my perceptions repeatable.

And again, that's why we use these things.

We want to be able to act in repeatable ways as well as proceed in repeatable ways.

And if we can't act in repeatable ways, then again, the notion of prediction becomes meaningless.

Perfect prediction corresponds to perfect QRF alignment.

So the question becomes now, what does perfect QRF alignment correspond to?

And Jim Glazebrook and another colleague, Antonino Marciano, who's a physicist in Shanghai, showed in a previous paper that perfect QRF

Perfect QRF alignment between a system and its environment is only possible if the system and environment are entangled.

So perfect QRF alignment corresponds actually to the collapse of the Markov blanket because it corresponds to the collapse of separability, which means that the Ness is no longer well-defined.

because it's no longer a conditionally independent state.

And you can see that if you think of what perfect QRF alignment means.

It means that your actions correspond exactly to my predictions.

A conditional statement, it's an exact statement.

So if I predict that you're going to do X, then you're going to do X, period.

Which means that your state is no longer independent of my state.

Your state actually depends on my state.

And my state correspondingly actually depends on your state.

If you predict that I'm going to do X, then I will do X. That's what perfect prediction means.

when we translate it into this QRF-based concept.

So perfect prediction and the collapse of separability are the same thing.

So the asymptotic limit of the FEP, which is perfect prediction, corresponds to the collapse of separability.

Well, the collapse of separability is just entanglement.

And the principle of unitarity is the claim that any isolated system, left to its own devices, will evolve its state, which is the joint state of any two of its components, will evolve toward complete entanglement.

It will evolve toward a pure state

in quantum theoretic jargon.

So it's in this sense that the FEP is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.

It's that its asymptotic condition is the same as the condition that the principle of unitarity imposes on closed systems, i.e.

on system-environment combinations, where

Whenever I say environment, I just mean everything that exists that's not the system of interest.

So a system environment combination is always a closed system by definition.

So that's my introduction and we can start on discussion.


SPEAKER_05:
That's great.

Thank you.

Stephen, did you have a question?


SPEAKER_07:
Yes, you can hear me okay.

Excellent.

I was just going to ask, that's really helpful.

There's a lot in there, obviously.

I was going to ask, in terms of the pure unitarity, would that be what happens, say, at the electron or the kind of these normal quantum particle scales?

And as you go to scales above that, it becomes more and more approximate.

You have less of this...

isotropic, you know, this quality of knowing and entanglement?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, that's a very deep question.

And it's a very good question.

Let's think about the canonical entanglement experiment, the sort of Bell EPR experiment.

So I'll draw it with my hands here.

So in the canonical experiment, you've got a source, and it's located here in the middle of my face.

And it produces an entangled pair of something, photons or electrons or buckyballs or whatever you want.

And they travel apart at the speed of light or something very close to it.

And at some point,

they encounter two symmetrically placed detectors and the detectors are operated by observers who are always called Alice and Bob.

And these detectors measure something and in the canonical experiment they measure spin.

And what Alice and Bob each observe independently is a random distribution of spins.

And if we think of this as a two-dimensional experiment, then they either measure spin up or spin down in some coordinate systems.

So Alice and Bob each pick a z-axis that defines up, and with respect to their local z-axis, they see a random distribution of up and down.

Now, things get interesting.

when Alice and Bob later get together and compare their results.

And what they find is that whenever Alice observes up, Bob observes down and vice versa.

And so they conclude that their results are classically correlated.

But then it gets more interesting because what we allow Alice and Bob to do

is constantly alter the direction that they detect the spin in with respect to their own local z-axis.

So you can think of the spin detector as like a polarization filter, so like a pair of sunglasses.

And what Alice and Bob can do is randomly and independently change the tilt of their sunglasses

while they do this experiment.

And in real implementations of this experiment, first implemented by Alan Aspect in his lab in Paris in the early 1970s.

And it's since been repeated probably hundreds of times by different groups all over the world, including the Chinese using a satellite to generate the entangled pairs and measuring them thousands of, a thousand or so kilometers apart.

So if you remember the speed of lights, a foot per nanosecond.

So you've got a lot of nanoseconds in there if you're a thousand kilometers apart to play with.

And the

So the trick in this experiment is that Alice and Bob can change the direction of their detector within the time it takes for the entangled pair to get from the source to the detectors.

So if it takes 10 nanoseconds to get from the source to the detectors, they have to be able to change their detectors within 10 nanoseconds.

So that's why you want detectors that are far apart.

So Alice and Bob redo the experiment, randomly changing the directions that they're measuring with respect to their local z-axis.

And then they get together again to compare their results.

And what they find is that if Alice observes up, Bob will observe down.

even when they've been randomly and independently changing the directions of their detectors.

So one way to put that is if Alice decides to rotate her detector 45 degrees, then Bob's result will automatically be rotated 45 degrees.

And it's symmetrical, and vice versa.

So that's not classical correlation.

That's classical correlation that's robust against manipulation.

So I was discussing this with Carl a while back, and I used this example.

If you and I are classically correlated, then we may have the same beliefs about something.

So we might both believe that the earth is round.

That's classical correlation.

Now suppose someone convinces me that the earth is flat.

If that happens and you then believe that the earth is flat, that's entanglement.

That's classical correlation that's robust against manipulation.

So it's correlation, no kidding.

Correlation that survives the environment doing something to you.

And... So...

Now let's go back to this question.

Is this an effect that only occurs in some microscopic domain?

And the answer is it's an effect that was first described by a theory that was intended to only describe a microscopic domain.

Like quantum theory was developed to deal with nuclear and atomic and nuclear physics.

And so there's this idea of the quantum world, which is very small.

But the math, of course, applies across the board.

And trying to think of quantum, trying to think of classical physics as a limit, a mathematical limit of quantum theory always runs into problems.

And the problems are always that numbers go to infinity that shouldn't be infinity.

So it's not really accurate to think of classical physics as some sort of mathematical limit like h-bar goes to zero of quantum theory, because if h-bar goes to zero, lots of relevant energies go to infinity.

And this has been known for a long time.

Nonetheless, it's constantly taught in this classical limit kind of

framework that isn't really correct.

So one point of doing Bell EPR experiments at larger and larger distances is to demonstrate that quantum theory is not really a microscopic theory.

So if you think of an entangled state, an entangled state is one object.

It's not two electrons that happen to have some mysterious relationship.

It's one object that has one state.

Remember what entanglement means is non-separability, non-independence across any decompositional boundary.

So an entangled pair is one thing.

And what the Chinese were able to demonstrate

was you can have one quantum object that's over 1,000 kilometers long.

Now, that's not microscopic.

That's big.

A nice way to think about entanglement was introduced by Leonard Susskind quite a few years ago and Rafael Busa with their idea that an entangled pair is the same thing as an Einstein-Rosen bridge in spacetime.

And an Einstein-Rosen bridge is a black hole and a white hole connected end to end.

Or you can think of it that way.

It's a topological connection in spacetime that simply identifies two points in spacetime that would otherwise be considered distinct.

So this emphasizes that if you have an entangled pair, there's no distance inside it.

if you have two entangled electrons, for example, that are a thousand kilometers apart, as far as they're concerned, they're right next to each other.

And in fact, as far as they're concerned, they're located at exactly the same point in space time.

And that's what this ER bridge notion emphasizes to us.

There's really no separation here, that the separation is an artifact of our observational capabilities.

It's not a characteristic of the entangled state.

So entanglement actually calls into question what the idea of distance even means.

It makes it, it forces it to be relative to us.

And that's why there's all this discussion of emergent space time in quantum gravity, quantum cosmology.

Because if you think about things from a straight quantum theory point of view,

space-time is an observable.

It's just something that's relative to how an observation is made.

It's not an intrinsic property of anything.

It's not ontic, as they say.

So let's go back to this question again.

If we think about entanglement and we think about observations,

And we think about entanglement as something that's observed by comparing observations made by different observers.

Neither Alice nor Bob in that experiment can detect entanglement.

They only realize that there's an entangled state when they talk to each other after they've done the experiment.

Then this question of scale

becomes a question about how observers interact and what observers can know about each other and about each other's experimental apparatus.

So when I described the entanglement experiment, I said Alice and Bob each have their own local z-axis.

And when they get together and they discuss their results,

and they compare their results, then they make a very important assumption, which is the assumption that their z-axes are comparable.

So if during the experiment Bob's z-axis was varying at random with respect to Alice's z-axis, then comparing their results would be meaningless because they'd be measured with respect to completely different reference frames.

So we have to make this assumption that they have the same z-axis.

Now, interestingly enough, that assumption by itself tells you that Alice and Bob have to be entangled, or their z-axes have to be entangled.

So the idea of entanglement kind of

expands to take in all aspects of the experimental situation as soon as one starts unearthing these assumptions that we make to talk about comparability between experiments.

So let's reel the tape back about half an hour

And we see that quantum reference frames are what make experiments comparable for an observer.

It's similarity or comparability of quantum reference frames that make comparing experiments possible for two observers.

But if the two observers exactly share their QRFs,

in a way that's robust against environmental manipulation, then they're entangled.

So we've kind of come full circle here.

One can make this notion of entanglement as macroscopic as one likes.

And again, this is, in a sense, why quantum gravity and quantum cosmology are interesting.

It's what drives things like the black hole information paradox, which you may have read about.

So we're now getting into, in a sense, very fundamental physics.

What's the relationship between entanglement and the concept of space-time?

What's the relationship between quantum theory and general relativity?

which is the big question in physics from one point of view.

But the short answer is you can make entanglement as big as you want.


SPEAKER_05:
That's great, thank you.

That actually leads into a question that I had way back when we were talking about entanglement and quantum reference frames.

So I was just thinking like, if I cannot perfectly predict my own behavior,

Is my quantum reference frame, like, incompletely aligned with my own quantum reference frame?

Like, I mean, maybe we've all had the experience of, you know, predicting if I kick a ball in this way, I predict it'll go over there.

But, like, it doesn't actually go over there.

So, like, I mean, we predict and we're off.

Our prediction is not accurate.

So is it, like, actually a temporal separation that, like, makes that happen?

Or what do you think...

happens in those circumstances where my QRF appears unaligned with my own QRF.


SPEAKER_03:
Now, that's also a beautiful, deep question.

And it points to something that I think can and should be stated as a general theorem, which is,

No system can perfectly predict its own state.

No system can observe its own state, its own total state.

So that situation is ubiquitous.

and unavoidable.

And one could phrase it by saying a system can have a QRF or a metaprocessor, as one often uses that vocabulary, that represents itself.

So we all have a self representation.

That's, in a sense, metacognitive.

We claim to know what we believe and things like that.

But, of course, those beliefs are all, one, very coarse-grained, two, extremely incomplete, three, useful for making predictions, but they're often wrong.

And, you know, this is...

This point has had huge technological consequences.

Think back to the history of artificial intelligence.

Right?

In the 70s, there was the huge new wave was expert systems.

And AI people redefined themselves as knowledge engineers who were going to go out and

interview experts and find out how experts did things and code it up in computers and soon we'd have artificial expert systems that did anything interesting.

And that whole business failed utterly.

It was a complete disaster.

It didn't work at all.

Why?

The simple explanation for why is that experts can't tell you what they're doing.

Expertise isn't verbalizable.

And it's not just expert piano playing isn't verbalizable.

Expert systems engineering isn't verbalizable.

Expert computer programming isn't verbalizable.

And that's just an illustration of the fact that our metaprocessors don't actually have a complete model of the rest of us, much less a model of the rest of us plus the metaprocessor.

So it all comes back to this general principle that a system can't represent itself.

And so it can't predict its own behavior.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_03:
So between this work... Actually, I should ask Carl to comment on that tirade because he's also thought about this an extraordinary amount.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I'll certainly make the comment that that was marvellous.

I'm glad this has been recorded because this should certainly be transcribed.

And I know it's probably implicit in the paper, but it was so beautifully articulated and clear, taking us through the issues.

I really enjoyed that.

So I have loads of comments, but I won't waste people's time going through all of them.

That last issue is really interesting about the metaprocessor or the metacognitive aspects of a system being able to measure itself.

I mean, there's a fundamental observation there, of course,

you know, you can't measure yourself.

The whole point of the particular physics paper was to say that, you know, yes, there can be two kinds of information geometries, if you like.

And the big move is that one system can measure, i.e.

infer,

by possessing or having a movement in some sort of information geometry infer a belief update about something else.

So at no point is there any room for it to also start to infer about its own inference.

That is a mathematical impossibility from the random dynamical system perspective.

I'm not sure about the quantum perspective, but it sounds as though that's also true.

So that begs the question, how on earth do we have the illusion that we know ourselves?

And of course, you know, it's a little bit of a colloquial question because 99.9% of things don't actually think that they know themselves.

So unless there's a particular phenotype particle or species,

that boasts philosophers, I'm pretty sure that most of the things that exist don't have any pretense to thinking that they know themselves.

It's a really interesting point to get across.

Anecdotally, I spend a lot of time taking people through examples

they probably go right back to things like ideomotor theory.

The way that we develop a sense of agency and think that we have a sense of agency is a gift, an illusion that is probably unique to only a small number of us and may not even be available to people with, say, severe autism.

And the example that I've literally in the past day just written down in a didactic way

was that if you just take vanilla active inference under a Markov blanket and then you look at particular kinds of sparsity structures where the active states of the Markov blanket or the holographic screen are hidden from the internal state.

So these are special kinds of systems that have a particular sparsity

where now the active states of the Markov blanket are now become hidden from the internal states

then you can certainly license some entanglement.

And I would, I'm going to later ask about the relationship between entanglement and synchronization.

So I'll say entanglement or synchronization of the internal states, such that the internal states have beliefs about their action, but those beliefs become beliefs about action as a hidden cause.

So there's absolutely no notion

from the inside that you cause that you're just representing the cause so the example i have in mind is you're watching a little fish swimming around looking for food gobbling up little bits and particles of food and you think oh that's a very sort of artful fish with purpose and pragmatics and knows how to navigate its world um but from the point of view of the fish

All that is happening is that the water and the particles are moving around it.

in a benevolent, nurturing, and fortuitous way, such that the water is delivering food particles to the fish's mouth.

So from the fish's point of view, it has absolutely no awareness that it is the author or the agent that's causing this synchronization with the environment.

So the deeper question is, how on earth do we have the illusion that we think we know our own agency?

And when do we develop agency?

And furthermore, it's not just agency about me, it's agency about other things.

At what point in our early neonatal neurodevelopment do we have these models of the world that enable us to distinguish between mother and self?

And at what point do we align our QRS, if you like,

with not mother, but with the world, that enables us to now see mother as an independent object, that is something else, that is an agent.

And the argument would then be, well, perhaps if mother is an agent, perhaps I am an agent.

I am now the author of my agency and my actions.

But that is such a high level thing.

I imagine it only pertains to humans.

That's what I'd say.

I'd love to talk about the homologues of entanglement from the point of view of classical thinking, but perhaps I've spoken enough at this point.


SPEAKER_00:
Just a couple of things came to my mind listening to this.

One is that Josh Bongard had this amazing paper in, I think it was around 2006 or so, where he had these robots and they started out like six-legged starfish.

But the cool thing about it was that they didn't have an internal model of what they were or what their shape is or how to move.

And they basically had to flop around and make models of

their own structure based on what happened to them given various outputs that they generated.

And eventually they would build a model of what happens and they would walk around and so on.

And two interesting things followed.

One is that you could, unlike traditional robotics, you could rip off one of the legs and they would very soon revise the model and keep going in different ways.

So they weren't tied to that particular self model, right?

They would have to discover it from scratch, but it was still sort of plastic throughout their whole lifetime and they could get along.

So they had that plasticity.

And the other thing is that, and Christophe Adami wrote a nice kind of interpretation piece of this.

He described, they spent lots of time being completely inactive and basically running through, quote unquote, mentally running through all the different things that they could do and what they think was going to happen before they actually moved.

And so Chris called that dreaming, you know, that they would basically...

sort of play out before you know in between their actual motions where they would go around testing and they would actually sort of play this out internally and try to refine the model such that then when they do move they would actually make movements that uh maximally sort of distinguish the different different possible models and so on and he said you know he said that you can watch them dreaming about about their shape

And then the other thing I just wanted to briefly mention, this idea of when and how do you recognize that you're an agent and that actually you need to act for things to happen versus just having the environment do things to you.

I suspect that one of the things that drives it very early on is this notion of stress.

And I don't have a particular,

uh i don't have a theory of why stress feels stressful but but just on a purely functional level i think that what happens in in cells you know so very early long before you get to humans or anything like that i think that what you get is this um

a set of mechanisms that evolved from things like stress about protein folding and so on, but then basically scaled up to be stress about metabolics and stress about morphology and stress about behavioral issues and so on, that basically is a system-wide metric of

the delta between what's going on and what you'd like to have going on, right?

The delta between your set point and what's happening now.

And what then I think that drives a strengthening of the agency model, because what will happen is as you slowly learn that you can do things that reduce the stress level, it kind of solidifies this idea that it's actually at least some amount of it is up to you to make life better.

And so you then act.

And then of course we know that breaks down and sort of learn helplessness assays and so on.

That's, that's, that, that, that really is, is very traumatic for, for all kinds of creatures that well below human.


SPEAKER_04:
Can I speak to that?

Because there's some great points there.

Please.

Yeah.

So three really important things being brought to the table there.

So I'm bound to forget the third one if I start with the first one.

So I'm coming back to Lou's question about sort of a QRS and alignment and that and

One obvious answer that one could bring to the table is that learning is the alignment of the QRFs.

So learning at all scales, and we're talking here about developmental skills, for example, we're talking about robots that learn to repair themselves or learn their new QRFs, if you remove a limb or a child.

learning to make sense of its world, then you could look at the slow process of alignment of the QRS, the things that are invariant over the faster timescales at which there is

classic information exchange on or in a holographic screen as simply a movement from a state of disentanglement to a state of entanglement as you become better and better at predicting.

But to become better at predicting, you have to align your QRS and you have to align that.

I think the robot example is a nice illustration of that.

in the sense that these robots were equipped with the ability to learn about themselves.

And of course, the analog in developmental psychology, and indeed, I would imagine, developmental robotics, is motor babbling.

It's basically, you know,

soliciting sensory outcomes in order to start to disambiguate between what did I cause that or did you cause that?

What parts are apparently under my control?

But of course, that's a very anthropomorphic interpretation.

There's no minus or minus implicit, but certainly the learning of the world models and the body models

um is probably the first thing that any artifact has to contend with because you see that in children you're shaking their rattle to to um solicit and um actively solicit

the conjunction of visual motion, proprioceptive feedback from the muscles causing the movement of the mobile or the rattle, and the auditory.

So soliciting conjunctions or correlations that are explainable and predictable in multiple modalities.

So you may then ask, why on earth?

What is the imperative for that kind of behavior?

What drives action?

to solicit this opportunity to learn the correlations and the coincidences and the conjunctions.

And that brings us to the second point that these robots dreaming

tell you immediately that at some level they have an internal model of the consequences of action.

And that tells you immediately that you've got, if you wanted to write that down from the point of view of classical active inference, you've got a belief structure on the inside that covers both the external world

and these hidden actions, and the actions upon the world, and the consequences of those actions on the external states.

That's a very sophisticated generative model to have, and you're getting now into the world of planning as inference.

So a thermostat doesn't have that, and yet these robots do have that.

So it tells you that there are two natural kinds of particles or Markov blankets or separable systems, at least two kinds, one of which is more like a thermostat and one of which is more like a sort of, I was thinking of sort of like an Ashby homeostat or allostat, but certainly more like these sort of robots that can learn about themselves.

And the crucial distinction

I think is that the agent has now started to represent the consequences of its actions, but without realising it's its own actions.

We still haven't got to the level of the metacognitive I am aware kind of artefact.

And it instantly comes back to what I was saying before about natural kinds, where one's active states are hidden from the internal state.

So they have to become inferred.

You have to infer them.

They are opaque to the internal states.

And as soon as you say it like that, then you're naturally talking about systems that can effectively

engage in planning as inference.

So they have to have plans in their heads in order to act, which corresponds to the streaming.

From the point of view of the active inference,

Then you ask, well, what are the objective functions or what are the principles of least action that would apply to these kinds of plans?

And when you work it through, then one important component of the pathogen or the actions in question is a drive to resolve uncertainty.

So we come back to this notion of the child soliciting proprioceptive, extra receptive sensations that enable it to resolve uncertainty.

And this is exactly the same principle behind optimal Bayesian design, that we design experiments

that are going to resolve the uncertainty to the greatest extent possible under our current internal models or hypotheses about how the world works.

And that brings me to the third great point about stress and the really important

place of stress and uncertainty and angst and not knowing what to do next or not knowing what's going to work in driving behaviour.

Because if a large chunk of the imperatives or planned action is to maximise information gain or minimise expected surprise or reduce uncertainty,

then you can see easily now why it is situations of uncertainty and stress that will necessarily cause the most epistemic responses in order to drive the system or the, in this instance, the agent to resolve that uncertainty.

The final point now, and this is basically paraphrasing what Mike just said, if the system sees itself behaving more

in times of greater uncertainty, it may now learn that.

and now have the idea, oh, I am the kind of system, or I am behaving as if I am the kind of system that responds more when under stress.

And then you'll become aware of that, and then you can get into the psychiatric or psychological aspects of stress.

You may not, if you're just a protein, you may just show a sort of selection for selectability-like response.

But I think the two fundamental mechanisms, the imperatives that are being

fulfilled here, in accord with basic conservation laws or principles of least action from the classical perspective, account for exactly the same kind of behaviour.

I think the interesting thing about stressful uncertainty, though, is that we're not talking about the content of implicit belief structures, but the second order statistics, the uncertainty.

And that, I think, brings a whole level of analysis to the table, because once you talk about uncertainty and representations of uncertainty in, say, internal states, then from a psychological perspective, you can start to talk about tension and consciousness.

From the point of view of an engineer, we're talking about things like Kalman gain and getting the estimates of noise levels, if you like.

correct.

And I'm not sure where the, if you like, the, well, let me ask, from a quantum theoretic point of view, is uncertainty baked into that?

Can you have a stressed quantum formulation?

I'll put that out there.

I'll stop talking now.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just to answer that question, if one thinks about quantum theory with a Bayesian view of probability, with a kind of subjectivist notion of probability, which, I mean, that

point of view was really pioneered by Chris Fuchs and now David Merman, for example, has taken it up and written some very good things about it.

Then this notion of uncertainty reduction becomes the explanation for why you do experiments and build theories and it all becomes very well aligned, I think, with

the idea of active inference.

In fact, we wrote into that paper at the very end some remark about this cubist perspective about quantum theory becoming a result, not an interpretation, when we think of quantum theory as in a sense a way of reformulating the idea of active inference.

So I think they're very consistent.

A stressed quantum system is just a system that gets observational outcomes that it doesn't expect.

So we have to think of such systems as having generative models and thinking about

the generative model of an electron is a bit of a stretch, right?

Because the electron is only characterized by mass, charge, and angular momentum.

So it can't really have expectations about much, right?

An electron can have no expectations about the external electric field, for example.

It can detect that, it can respond to it, but it can't predict it.

And if we think about something like an electron, then we can focus in on this idea that having a generative model requires having enough memory

to keep a record of the most recent observation, at least the most recent one.

And if you want to have a good generative model, then you better have enough memory to keep a record of quite a number of observations.

And it's this memory resource that really simple things like electrons don't have.

So they're not great tools

predictors because they don't have the memory to allow being a great predictor.

And as both Carl and Mike were saying, in a sense, you have to have memory to be able to feel stress.

You have to know that your predictions were wrong.

So you have to remember what your predictions were.

So memory becomes a really key component of the theory once you put it into this language, because the language in a sense forces you to lay out assumptions about what the computational resources that are being required are.


SPEAKER_04:
wasn't very coherent but anyway i i just wanted to stress the role of memory here perfect thank you carl yeah just to um reinforce and endorse that last point um and uh just tell exactly the same story in a much more pragmatic way from the point of view a statistician so i heard chris say that basically

that if I want to go beyond being a little electron or a thermostat, and I want to now infer the quality of how noisy are my sensors, for example, my thermal sensors, if I'm a thermostat, that will require me becoming a little statistician.

And what does that mean?

Well, basically, I'm going to be estimating the standard error or the experimental variance.

There's something quite important about that, which comes back exactly to the computational resources and memory.

If you do a simple t-test as a statistician on some experimental data, you necessarily have to acquire lots of data points and store them.

And of course, that is just the degrees of freedom associated with your t-test or your f-test.

So the degrees of freedom

score the number of data points that you'll be able to remember and you need a sufficient number in order to get a precise estimate of the uncertainty so literally the degrees of freedom in classical statistics is literally

a statistic that scores your confidence in the estimation of the standard error which is pooled over multiple observations which is an attempt to estimate on average if I observe with this kind of

or I asked my questions, or I wrote to my holographic screen, or I solicited these sensory states, what would, on average, what would the uncertainty be associated with it?

So I think it's a really important point about the computational resources, the degrees of freedom, literally in the sense of the degrees of freedom associated with your F test, or the degrees of freedom you have available for the computing power.

to actually get up to these second order inference machines or takes on on second order inference so and i think that is particularly important when it comes back to mike's observation about stress and uncertainty and these higher order ways of making sense of the world but in this instance making a sense of sensations that are accrued over time not about the content but about the reliability of the or the precision of that content so this is a really important point


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

So that kind of... Oh, Chris, go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
If I could just pick up on this and take it in yet another highly related direction, it's just to point out that all of these resources are energetically expensive.

So if I'm going to devote space...

in my state space to recording memories then that's only useful if I can defend those memories against entropy if I can keep them from decaying so I've got to consume energy to write the memories I've got to consume energy to maintain the memories and then I have to consume energy to read the memories and consume energy to compare

what I've read with what I see with my current event sensors.

So as we start adding these computational resources to systems, the energy budget goes way up.

And it's another kind of thing to keep in mind as we think about these in terms of embodied forms, whether they're robots or organisms, that

these these entities are extracting this free energy that they have to have to run their computations and maintain their memories and all that from the environment so here's this is another input that in a sense is not sensory but it's still having to flow through the markov blanket it's still having to flow through the boundary between the system and its environment and

A lot of the system's actions on its environment, its expenditures of its own internal energy, are to acquire this free energy.

So, you know, we go out and shop for groceries, make breakfast or whatever.

That's stuff that we have to do to keep all these processes running.

So it ties metabolism and cognition together in a way that they aren't often tied, but that they have to be to make sense of what's going on.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

So just on that point, something that we had written down as a question from last time, and in terms of

an electron having a generative model and discussing agency.

We had talked about free choice and it was brought up in the paper several times, both in terms of like any physical system having free choice.

If one physical system has free choice, they all have free choice.

They generate like their noise generating

things like free choice generates noise in both classical and quantum systems.

And so I just was wondering if you could maybe say a few words about the difference in free choice in an electron and the difference in between an electron and like a human or an animal or even a cell.

What is that difference?

And is that also related to memory?


SPEAKER_03:
Is that a question for me?


SPEAKER_05:
A general question for anyone.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I'll make a couple of comments.

One is, remember in talking about the canonical entanglement experiment, part of the description is that Alice and Bob can alter

the directions of their detectors, however they want to, at random, independently, whatever you want to call it, during the experiment.

So that's the free choice assumption, or that's called in physics the free choice assumption.

And what that assumption means, it's effectively an assumption of independence.

it means that there's not some common cause in the past that determines what they're going to do as they operate their detectors.

And one can reformulate quantum theory in terms of what's called superdeterminism,

And super determinism is the idea that there is some common cause in the past that determines how experimenters are going to do their experiments.

And in particular, determines how Alice and Bob are going to rotate their detectors in this EPR experiment.

And superdeterminism is kind of the ultimate non-local hidden variable.

So it allows you to predict exactly what entangled pairs are going to do.

And in fact, it renders entanglement a classical effect, right?

It just says,

these kind of super classical correlations are present because there was no independence to begin with.

Everything was determined from the very beginning.

And if you think about, as mentioned last time, Newtonian physics is formulated by Laplace.

It's a super deterministic system.

So anything that happens anywhere in the universe instantly affects what's going on everywhere else in the universe.

And the most current formulation of that is Bohmian quantum mechanics, where the motion of any particle depends instantaneously on the motion of every other particle in the universe.

And that's how Newtonian gravity worked, right, before Einstein imposed locality by making the speed of light finite.

So all of these things are interconnected.

Assumptions about space-time, assumptions about the speed of communication, assumptions about superdeterminism, and assumptions about free choice.

It's that cluster of assumptions that the so-called free will theorem in physics is about, or theorems, there are now a couple of them due to Conway and Koken.

And what those theorems show is that from a formal perspective,

In physics, if you assume that some system has free choice, so if you assume that some system is not subject to superdeterminism, then you have to assume that all systems have free choice in the sense that all systems are not subject to superdeterminism.

So you can't limit superdeterminism to some little piece of the universe and say it only applies here.

It doesn't apply anywhere else.

And in particular, it doesn't apply to me.

I have free choice, even though nothing else does.

That's mathematically inconsistent.

So that's what the free choice assumption means in a strict physical context.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Very cool.

Nathan, did you have a question?


SPEAKER_07:
I was just going to ask a little bit more about the degrees of entanglement and whether that's different in terms of the observer's degrees versus the mechanical nature of quantum mechanics degrees.

I think you've answered that to some extent, but just the way that that varying degrees of entanglement can be thought about and whether that maybe ties into how the Hilbert space is thought about at the same time.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, this assumption...

This question touches on why we do everything in the paper from the point of view of bipartite decomposition.

So we always decompose into a system in its environment in the paper.

And there are two reasons for that.

One is to keep it simple.

And the other one is to enforce the Markov blanket condition.

So

it's entirely commonplace to do physics in an open systems framework where we talk about two systems, we can call them Alice and Bob again, that are embedded in a common environment.

And in that case, whenever you have

a tripartite or greater, some sort of multiparticle kind of decomposition of the state space, you can talk about degrees of entanglement between different systems.

And you can, you know, cut up the state space any way you want to and ask about the entanglement entropy of some component of it.

And you get these ideas of partial

or they call it non-monogamous entanglement.

And that's all well and good.

It's mathematically complicated.

It's conceptually complicated.

But in a sense, it deeply violates the Markov blanket condition.

Because in point of fact, each of us is an observer.

And our goal is to

to say, what does the world look like to an observer?

And from Alice's point of view, Bob is a decomposition of her Markov blanket.

Right?

Alice has to actively disambiguate her incoming signals

into signals that she attributes to Bob as an entity and signals that she attributes to the rest of the environment as an entity.

So that's an active cognitive process on Alice's part.

That's what the Markov blanket condition, that's how the Markov blanket condition in a sense forces us to think.

So

The Markov blanket condition itself makes us take this idea of bipartite decomposition seriously.

And again, you can think of this in terms of implicit assumptions about resources.

If you think in open systems terms, and so you think of Alice and Bob as ontic entities that are separate from each other by a priori assumption and separate from their environments by a priori assumption, then you systematically underestimate the amount of cognition that Alice and Bob have to be doing.

And so you systematically underestimate their energy consumption

And so you systematically underestimate their uncontrolled effect on the environment, i.e.

generation of waste heat, acquisition of free energy resources, and all of that.

So it's not just a philosophical difference.

It's a difference that leads you to make genuinely alternate predictions about things like metabolic load.

so that's why we do things in this bipartite framework to respect the markov blanket condition and to keep our assumptions about energy flow explicit can we take that to the latter sections in the paper about biological cognition


SPEAKER_01:
what are the implications for this for biological systems yeah carl well um


SPEAKER_04:
Just to pursue that sort of thought experiment where you're trying to now say you wanted to use active inference to simulate Alice and Bob observing a pair of electrons and remembering that the pair of electrons are one thing.

So you now got a tripartite with three Markov blankets in play and many of the issues, for example, the super determinism that allows some assumptions about the

QRF alignments between Bob and Alice to be in play and also the discussion of how Alice has to contextualize

sensations from Bob under a belief or an internal model that Bob is indeed another Markov blanket and possibly a Markov blanket very much like Alice.

What you are saying is that two of these particles, Bob and Alice, have aligned QRS that could have been aligned historically under the super, which I never heard of before, but I like the word, at the super determinism.

And that may be a prerequisite to understand the experiments that we were taken through previously when looking at the third Markov blanket, which would be the electron or the two electrons, but for simplicity.

So that from a biological perspective tells you something quite interesting in the sense that it starts to get to

If it's the case that you can basically carve up a bunch of states, not in a bipartite way, but in a multipartite way, and that carving is by inserting Markov blankets to define the partition,

and that every subset of that space now becomes internal to its own Markov blanket, so there are now no external states.

All we have in play now are a set of internal states, each equipped with a holographic screen or Markov blanket states that are exchanging with other internal states.

Then there's some really interesting questions about how that system will evolve.

From the point of view of the discussion we've been having,

it's going to evolve under the principle of unitarity to entanglement.

So it's going to, from a classical perspective, if you allow me, it's going to tend to a state of generalized synchronization, where everything collapses onto the same synchronization manifold and everything is indistinguishable, there's perfect mutual predictability, there's a communication of an elemental and fundamental saw, so everything has basically

everything is singing from exactly the same hymn sheet.

That's the natural way of things.

The free energy principle is just one way of describing that natural tendency.

What would that look like cognitively?

Well, it would look as if the Markov blankets were trying to learn about each other, and to the extent that they can act on each other, they're going to

try and solicit the kinds of outcomes that would enable them to learn about each other.

So we're now going to get a situation that is driven by the imperative towards mutual predictability and entanglement.

That's an illusion.

All that is actually happening is that the system is becoming entangled, but it will look as if all of these separate Markov blankets or sets of internal states are aligning

in a mutually compatible way, their QRS, so that they can exchange and predict each other.

And if there's, if you like, an odd man out, namely the pair of electrons, then there will be an asymmetry and there will be greater degrees of entanglement

at multiple levels.

For example, if they're both observing a thermostat, then the thermostat's not going to be very good at learning how to align its QRS with Bob and Alice, but they're all going to make the best job of it.

Ultimately, of course, with good cultural eco-niche construction, they'll build better thermostats and become little robots, and then they can all live happily and communicate.

So I think that sort of the cognitive thing here comes again back to learning to live in your world,

as an apparent expression of the inevitable progression to entanglement whereby we try to learn about each other under the plausible hypothesis that you are like me.

It's not necessarily true, but it's one hypothesis you can bring to the table.

You never know whether it's true or not.

But that's certainly one hypothesis that would work very nicely for Alice and Bob if they can develop a common language.

So this notion of aligning QRFs between two blanketed systems, particles that are sufficiently similar

then just simply translates into learning to share the same narrative, to share the same language in order to render everything mutually predictable.

So I know exactly what you're going to say next and you know exactly what I'm going to say next.

And we come now to this asymptotic limit of zero prediction error, zero free energy and complete entanglement.

And that would be the objective.

We'd have no Ukrainians or Brexits or anything, if we could get there.

But that would be the direction of travel from a biological perspective.

There are simulations of this from a purely classical perspective.

And what you normally do is start off with two systems that think they have strange attractors, usually a Lorentz attractor.

So they think that their dynamics are generated by their autonomous or their active states create stuff out there that has a chaotic aspect.

And I say that explicitly just because this sort of the notion of free will and choice in the classical domain usually reduces to sensitivity to initial conditions, which strikes me as a homologue of the super determinism game

Can you go right back to the beginning and explain everything?

And in sort of classical dynamical systems, there are certain situations where you can't because you get a sensitivity to initial conditions.

So that would leave space or free will and choice certainly at one level.

But sorry, I digress.

So what you do is you basically put sort of two chaotic systems with sensitivity to initial conditions

together but they're not identical in the first instance but if they can exchange sensory and active states or they can exchange across a shared holographic screen so we're now back to the bipartite situation then they will naturally in fact if you think about they can't do anything else

they will naturally come to a state of entanglement, i.e.

generalized synchrony.

And if you allow the parameters of the equations of motion that underwrite these chaotic dynamics to also maximize mutual predictability or minimize free energy, then they will actually come to show an identical synchronization because they will learn to become like each other, just like Mike's robots.

But in this instance, they're learning about the other person simply to make things predictable.

So then you will have a shared narrative.

And in principle, you should be able to evince a kind of language.

I mentioned that because I know Chris wanted to talk about language.

We wanted to talk about, you know, quantum physics is just basically a description of communication and language.

I don't think we're going to have time to do that, but I thought I'd slip that in anyway.


SPEAKER_05:
Chris, did you want to say a few words, quantum and language?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, that was lovely, Carl, and I like the idea of this kind of simulation leading to generalized synchrony.

I think it's interesting from this perspective that we always divide

our environment into entities like us and then at least one entity that's radically unlike us, which we call the shared environment or the open environment or the general environment or something like that.

And so we have this sense of a social grouping of similar entities

that are commonly exposed to this vastly dissimilar entity with which we don't share a common language.

And we're not very good at predicting and so on.

And so we always have this kind of open systems point of view.

And

One of the functions of this vastly different system with which we don't share a common language is it's our free energy source and sink.

So it's where we put our waste heat and it's where we get our free energy for doing computation.

So I think it's interesting to think of this situation of

kind of local synchrony or local entanglement or a local language community local shared predictability embedded in this unpredictable chaotic and in a sense in principle chaotic because it's the waste heat dump right

We've assumed a priori that we can't understand it because it's where we're putting all of the thermodynamic entropy that we're creating.

We've put ourselves in a conceptual bind almost automatically by being systems that have to generate this entropy and put it somewhere.

So I like this classical to quantum correspondence very much, and I think it works very nicely.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Mike?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I want to float an idea which is literally just a few days old, so it may be complete nonsense, but I'll float it anyway because I think it's relevant, and I've been thinking about it this way.

It occurs to me that

You know, this binary distinction between there are agents, some of them like me, some of them different, maybe competitors, whatever, but there are some agents that I can communicate with or can I receive influencer signals from.

And then there's this environment, which is, you know, something that we assume, or I mean, some cultures, of course, don't assume that, but we can assume that it has very low or zero agency, meaning that it just is this sort of

dumb, purposeless universe, and it's on us to sort of figure out what it's doing, right?

So it occurs to me that that distinction maybe shouldn't be binary.

And maybe what we want to be thinking about is as an agent, when you are

receiving something from what you think is the outside, you might want to estimate what is the agency on the other end.

And you might wanna do this for the following reason, right?

And I started thinking about this by imagining what it would be like to be in an internal,

partition or a chunk of a giant neural net being trained, you know, you, you live, if, if that's you, you live in a very mindful universe, you know, you could catch on to the fact that, you know what, I'm being, I'm being trained for something, you know, the world, like there are bigger patterns here.

And of course it moves in inscrutable ways and everything, because I can't, you know, I can't sort of, I can't understand the whole pattern of what's going on, but I can definitely tell that it's rewarding me and punishing me for specific behaviors.

Right.

And of course, some people do feel that way about the universe and let large that there are patterns that, um,

that are not just, you know, not quote-unquote just physics.

And so the reason I think, and this extends to, you know, we have supervised learning and unsupervised learning, and again, we think of those as kind of binary things, right?

Is there some sort of intelligence on the other end telling you what's right and wrong, or is it just on you to abstract patterns from the environment?

And the reason I think this matters is that if you are trying to learn from the environment, meaning there's only one agent involved, that's you, there's one agent, and then there's this sort of unthinking universe around you, then you are pretty much guaranteed that whatever you can manage to infer, it will be to your utility.

It's on you to figure out, to learn whatever you can.

If there's another agent on the other side and you are being trained, then what are the odds that that agent has your best interests at heart?

I mean, maybe, but maybe not.

And so if this is some sort of supervised learning, you have to ask yourself, what is it that I'm being trained and is it really what I want?

It's kind of a whole thing.

that you can imagine evolutionarily that maybe to avoid, uh, being hijacked by, um, by, by, by, by parasites, by, by, you know, uh, competitors, by whoever you don't really want to be trainable too much.

You, you want to learn, but you don't really want to be trained.

And so maybe the idea then is that, uh, what if, what if, and this is okay, this is where, you know, I really haven't, haven't, uh, talked to anybody about this yet.

So this is, this again could be a,

very amateurish stuff but but what if uh something like back propagation or whatever what if that literally hurts what if as a as a right as an early creature having some sort of error function forced back through your channels as opposed to whatever you were trying to generate yourself what if that's evolutionarily designed to be unpleasant and what if uh what you're trying to do is avoid that happening you don't want to be trained you want to learn on your own terms

And you could sort of imagine the different layers of a feed forward artificial neural network where the like the initial input layer

That sort of creature gets to see the world, quote unquote, as it is.

It gets the raw inputs.

The next layer, and certainly the layers past that, the ones on the right that are abstracting, they're getting all kinds of propaganda filtered to them by the early layers.

They don't get to see the real inputs.

They get to see whatever the prior layers think they should be seeing.

And so maybe if you don't have a flat network like this, but maybe what you have is a, you know, more biologically, you have a kind of a nested multi-scale kind of system.

Maybe there's some sort of incentive for the middle layers to try to sort of crawl leftward so that they have more raw access to the real world.

and not be trapped uh being being fed by these other agents right so again you know this is all very qualitative stuff but you get the idea that's that's kind of what uh what what i was thinking about nice dean and then daniel mike if you want to chat about this this is what i was doing for about 10 years unleashing and getting out of the lab and


SPEAKER_02:
getting past the toy model.

So perhaps we should chat about this for a bit.

Can I just, a couple of things.

Chris, first of all, thank you for, I feel like I've come away with a Munich Stein volume worth of coolness for the last two weeks just listening to you explain these really, well, complicated things to me in ways that I can actually understand.

One of the things that I'm still kind of curious about is once we let things out of the lab and we keep them in that variability retained space, and we don't want to be in conflict with sort of the basic rules of what quantum information tells us, I want to kind of go back for one second to what Stephen was kind of closing the 40.1 with, and that is what do we do when we look at things in that sort of relational realm that a lot of

indigenous cultures sort of take up and try to find themselves within.

And I'm kind of leading to this idea that there's a sort of a subject matter generalist that leads to a prediction matter expert down the road.

And I talked to Carl, it was my question to Carl back in June when he was

talking to us in the Active Inference Lab.

And so without getting into any kind of conflict with the quantum aspects of this, what do we take out with us when we go on a bike ride with Chris Fields that's quantum related, that isn't in conflict with everything we've talked about today, but gives us a better confidence around the things that we might encounter and predict?


SPEAKER_01:
What do you take on your bike, Chris?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, what's in your quiver?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, good question.

Once again, these theoretical frameworks are languages and they

their role is to shape our concepts, or they are ways of shaping our concepts.

And I think the fundamental kind of lesson of quantum theory for us is to

not take the boundaries we see as literally as we're encouraged to do in the classical worldview.

I'll try to distinguish the classical worldview from classical physics because classical physics by itself

again, going back to someone like Laplace, is a physics of atoms, which are sort of elemental.

It's not a physics of bounded macroscopic objects.

The boundaries, even in classical physics, are sort of arbitrary.

And I think that's what quantum theory is trying to tell us to do.

is trying to tell us that these are boundaries that we draw on our blankets.

And I think this is, in a sense, what our thinking about the FEP is trying to tell us, that we have to take this notion that we're blanketed entities seriously when we think about what we're interacting with, which is everything but us.


SPEAKER_01:
daniel in our closing minutes um if we could just each give a thought this is really just a special and very powerful uh conversation uh mike with a back propaganda

Amazing thought experiment there.

And no boundary and quantum questions touching on the work of like Ken Wilber.

And I think it's just so powerful about does someone have the whole world in their hands?

Is that a good person?

Is it a bad person or thing?

What kind of thing is that?

Who's on the other side of this video call?

Who's on the other side of that other side?

What's the bigger picture.

And it really brings it home that no, it's not just about electrons.

This is something that is across scales and systems.

So really just wanted to appreciate the paper and hope that we continue on this line of development and I'll pass it to Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
thanks daniel yeah i was going to tie this a little bit some of the threads with um this challenge of having this false sense of certainty in our culture and how it does feel uncomfortable to be trained um but we do it in the west because we're confident that we've got this expert knowledge but then we suddenly find out we don't know as much as we do know or we think we know

So that may be why bottom-up sort of organic indigenous kind of ways of being or ways of sensing can feel more holistic.

So I think there might be something quite powerful in that.

So I like that thread, and I think that ties together with the challenges in practice when we try to train up communities, especially if we're working, say, if I've worked in rural Africa,

And communities there, if they don't feel connected to the colonizing narrative, it feels very oppressive.

So there's a lot of good points there around where is there coherence, where is there decoherence, and also where is there certainty and where there's uncertainty.

So thanks.

This is really helpful.

And I'll pass it over to Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I've said enough.

I think I'd like to hear from Mike or Carl or Chris about where you're going or what you're taking away or what are your final thoughts about the discussion we've had over the last couple of weeks?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, I guess the only thing I'll say is that to me, I really like this idea that it turns on its head, this notion that you have this massive amount of mindless stuff and then somehow a little bit of mind shows up at the end that kind of turns that upside down.

And if that's the case, then the scaling problem is really, really interesting, right?

It's how you scale, how biology manages to scale these things so that they become,

synergistic and bigger and bigger, as opposed to, you know, just merely a bigger pile of rocks than the previous pile of rocks.

And so that, right, so those mechanisms, and in particular in biology, and so, you know, I look at it from cells getting together to be organisms and solving problems in the

anatomical space.

But but I think there, we actually have some pretty good alternative, although very, very, very similar in many ways, isomorphic, but alternative stories to what happens in neuroscience to try to understand how that scaling actually works.

So I'm super, I'm just super, super excited about that.

And also the role of the observer and all of this, and the idea that all of this is based on various observers observing each other.

And I think that makes it makes for a lot of progress and fewer pseudo problems when you when you look at it that way.


SPEAKER_05:
Carl or Chris, any final thoughts?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I'll just thank you guys again for putting this together.

I thought this was a fascinating conversation.

And if I could throw one more thing into it, I think conversations like this are evidence for

the kind of disciplinary siloization that's been forced onto us by academic tradition being an artifact and not necessarily being all that useful.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks so much.

Carl, we're going to leave you with the final word.


SPEAKER_04:
Good.

Well, it has to be a thank you, doesn't it?

For you lot for putting this together and for the brilliant didactic and also challenging didactic unpacking of some really challenging but I think revealing issues and also the brilliant questions.

My final word will be future pointing.

Just taking up this lead of Chris's, you know, having unsiloed conversations is useful.

Just thinking about Mike having the balls to come up with his brand new hypothesis that's two years old.

Sorry, two days old, my apologies.

So I thought it was really interesting.

Just a nice example of putting things into this kind of discussion, which we're all going to go in and think about.

So my immediate thought was, how on earth does the second layer in a variational autoencoder or something doing bat prop act?

And of course, it can act if it's a recurrent neural network and it can select which of the lowest level neurons or hidden layer, sorry, a non-hidden layer,

units to listen to.

And of course, we come back again exactly to attention and selecting those sources of precise information where you've got a kind of internal action.

So an interesting and silly thought, but just a nice example of how talking together can excite interesting and potentially useful or possibly silly thoughts.

But again, thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
Wonderful.

I had a great time observing all of you and hope to get to do more of it in the future.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

We can have a dot three anytime.

Consider 40 in the intermeasurement interval while our igus is digesting.

And talk to you all soon.

Thanks again.

Thanks very much, everyone.

Thank you.

Bye.

Bye-bye.

It was great.
