## nuUWmwrz6cI

SPEAKER_00:
all right hello and welcome everyone it is october 24th 2023 and we're an active live stream number 55.0 on realizing synthetic active inference agents okay welcome to the active inference institute we're a participatory online institute that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at some of the links on this page

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org if you want to learn more about participating in livestreams or other activities.

All right, well, we're in Livestream 55 series with a goal to learn and discuss these two very interesting papers on realizing synthetic active inference agents, part one on epistemic objectives and graphical specification, part two on the variational message updates.

As with all videos, it's an introduction for some of the ideas, not a review or a final word.

We're going to introduce ourselves, then jump into a fairly lengthy background section that will prepare us to ask the questions and get to a place where the paper's contributions can be figured out.

So let us begin with introducing ourselves and saying hi and saying maybe something that was exciting to us or made us want to participate in this series.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I was interested to go a little deeper on message passing.

It's something that's brought up a lot in the textbook and implicitly in other papers, but this was an opportunity to tackle it head on.

And I'll pass to Bert.


SPEAKER_02:
So I'm Bert, I study civil engineering in the Netherlands and I struggle with the math of active inference, but recently I picked up reinforcement learning and together with this paper, I think it really helps.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Jakob.

I'm also a researcher in California and I'm

really excited about this paper from a number of different angles.

I guess the graphical notation and the notation that the paper introduces, I think, can have really profound impact on the field from both a computational and a theoretical viewpoint.

And I'm interested to learn more about the implications of


SPEAKER_00:
the new notation for further research yep new notation just dropped okay there's a pair of papers as mentioned and the information is here so

of us can phrase the big question that brought us to the paper but i wrote it this way which is right there in the title there's at least a triple play a triple pun tendre and there's a dyad of papers so what is this realizing in the context of the title well in one sense we're realizing something

terms of implementing it or manifesting it they're deploying something that is being realized so there's a accomplishment sense of realizing also the work calls attention to our own realizing process our relevance realization how we come to appreciate and interact with synthetic intelligence ours

And then we're also talking about building agents that do some kind of realizing in themselves, like realizing agents in that sense.

So what kind of ending starts off with a triple play?

I don't know.

Bert or Jakob, what big questions brought you to the paper?

What do you think the paper takes on?


SPEAKER_01:
I think in terms of creating scalable active inference models that are reproducible across a variety of settings is quite exciting.

So maybe realizing in that sense across a number of different domains is part of the meaning here.

And of course, the triple play that we were exploring with our own work from going from just a simple graphical representation to a mathematical description of the generative model and the algorithm for message passing and updating the generative model through time to then a code implementation that can be deployed in various dynamic setting.

That is also what I think is an important part of this paper.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, yeah.

And for me, especially as not an expert on active inference, but someone who is more interested in applying it, their work on working towards a PyTorch of active inference is really valuable.

and i think their way of deconstructing the mechanisms of expected and variational energy and to combine them into one function makes it simplifies it a lot i think cool so we're gonna look deeper at the papers of course soon but just a few of the aims of the paper


SPEAKER_00:
Part one, they construct a purely synthetic approach to the active inference framework, motivated from the point of view of engineering rather than neurobiology.

And we're going to talk about what synthetic is.

And in part two, they use a variety of technical phenomena, variational calculus, message passing, and reactive programming to simulate a perception action cycle on the teammates.

Okay.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
one of you would you like to read the first abstract and then the other can read the other abstract whoever wants to go first um I can read the the first one so the free energy principle FEP is a theoretical framework for describing how intelligent systems self-organize into coherent stable structures by minimizing a free energy functional

Active inference is a corollary of the FEP that specifically details how systems that are able to plan for the future

function by minimizing particular free energy functionals that incorporate information seeking components.

This paper is the first in a series of two where we derive a synthetic version of active inference on free form factor graphs.

The present paper focuses on deriving a local version of the free energy functionals used for active inference.

This enables us to construct a version of active inference which applies to arbitrary graphical models and interfaces with prior work on message passing algorithms.

The resulting messages are derived in our companion paper.

We also identify a gap in the graphical notation used for factor graphs.

While factor graphs are great at expressing a generative model, they have so far been unable to specify the full optimization problem, including constraints.

To solve this problem, we developed constrained Forney-style factor graph.

cffg notation which permits a fully graphical description of variational inference objectives we then proceed to show how cffgs can be used to reconstruct prior algorithms for active inference as well as derive new ones the latter is demonstrated by deriving an algorithm that permits direct policy inference for active inference agents circumventing a long-standing scaling issue that has so far hindered the application of active inference in industrial setting

We demonstrate our algorithm on the classic team-based task, ensure that it reproduces the information-seeking behavior that is a hallmark feature of active inference.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
And the second paper.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

The free energy principle describes biological agents as minimizing variation of free energy with respect to a generative model of the environment.

Active inference is a corollary of the FEP that describes how agents explore and exploit the environment by minimizing an expected free energy objective.

In two related papers, we describe a scalable epistemic approach to synthetic active inference agents.

By message passing on free-form Forney-style factor graphs, FFGs, a companion paper, part 1, introduces a constrained FFG notation that visually represents free energy objectives for active inference.

The current paper derives message passing algorithms that minimize generalized free energy objectives on a constrained Forney factor graph by variational calculus.

A comparison between simulated BAT and generalized free energy agents illustrates that synthetic active inference influences the behavior on a team-based navigation task.

With full message-passing accounts of synthetic active inference agents, it becomes possible to derive and reuse message updates across models and move closer to industrial applications of synthetic active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Great, thank you.

Here's the roadmap section titles of the first paper.

Here are the section headers of the second paper.

So before we jump into the background and then the papers,

let's just have one last train stop what is synthetic and what's synthetic about active inference so as it being 2023 we went to the language model and we asked for some adjectives that are in the semantic neighborhood of synthetic and you can see them here artificial lab created synthetic counterfeit phony deceptive inauthentic unnatural

A lot of these are somewhat negative associations semantically.

So how does synthetic come to be meaning something negative or deceitful?

And then in what ways is that a similar or a different sense of synthetic than referring to the unified compositionality of something that's blended?

And similarly, we could talk about artificial, like artificial intelligence.

Is that artifice, like crafted?

Or is it artificial, like phony, bogus, false?

So...

the context of the paper there's probably a bunch of different ways that we can draw with the authors and a little bit here too what is being synthesized if you have any thoughts on this but what else might be synthetic it might refer to something that's not just a hypothetical like a real synthesis a realized synthesis it might refer to information risk and synthetic intelligence

might refer to synthetic judgments those whose predicates are wholly distinct from their subjects and then recently at the topos institute there was a great talk by jonathan sterling synthetic domains in the 21st century

So there's a lot of very interesting references and ways that synthetic is used.


SPEAKER_04:
Do you have any preliminary thoughts on what you think about these papers?

I think


SPEAKER_01:
I guess building on what you already said, part of the synthesis could be decreasing the gap between the mathematical description of a model and its graphical representation and its subsequent code implementation.

So the focus on graphical models, on constrained Forney style factor graphs,

combines the aspects of generalized free energy or betty free energy which is motivated by a forney style graph structure with the actual implementation

of a synthetic agent or an artificial agent in code or in synthetic settings, which themselves are trying to model some part of reality.


SPEAKER_00:
cool we'll explore okay so to Bert for background part one and thank you for all the work leading up to this dot zero Bert so take it away with the background just let me know when to switch slides yeah all right uh so for the background of part one uh it will delve into what are base crafts and how do you do an inference over these crafts


SPEAKER_02:
and then the authors use make extensive use of arcangeln to optimize over the graph at a foreign factor graph and then some miscellaneous stuff that will be relevant to the play smaller parts in the paper all right next slide

So first off, base graphs, working up eventually to 4D graphs, but starting with the simplest one, which is just a Bayesian network.

And then the classical example is the earthquake network.

So each circle is a random variable, and they represent a particular state.

So whether, for example, the alarm goes off, yes or no.

and these variables can be continuous or discrete and so the total generative model is the joint probability of all these random variables and you can factorize them so they only relate to one or two or several others at least a limited set of other variables and then moving on from that is the hidden Markov model where you add time so you have multiple time steps so in this case x1

X0, X1, X2.

And this works under the Markov assumption, which is that all the relevant information of the past is in the current time step.

So you only need to consider the current.

And on top of that, you cannot observe hidden states directly, so you need an observation error.

So that's the E.

And then the next step, building on top of the hidden Markov model, is the partially observable Markov decision process, which is a lot of words.

But really it's the same, where you have a hidden state, S, with an observable state, and you transition from states.

But now you add an action, and the action acts the policy, and that acts on the B, the transition.

So an example would be I expect S1 to have a certain value given my action, and this observation O2 should be in line with that.

And the policy is selected using the expected free energy.

All right, next slide.

And then how do you actually figure out the values of a base graph?

And that requires inference.

And there are multiple ways.

So the first one is exact inference, which is what you would do if you calculated by pen and paper, which is really only practical for small discrete models, like the example model on the last slide.

And if you want to go to bigger models, more complex models, you need approximate inference.

And within that Monte Carlo sampling is a key pillar, and there are a bunch of algorithms that apply it, that use it.

but the core idea is the same you sample many times from an idealist distribution to approximate another distribution of interest another method is method which you may be familiar with this variation of the energy which yeah active inference uses a lot and then you indirectly minimize the difference between two distributions using the KL divergent

You try to minimize the KL divergence, but you cannot do that directly.

So instead, you maximize the elbow.

And this works with a family of distributions.

And a family is, for example, gaussians or exponentials, but you have to pick one.

An embedded free energy works on this.

It's also a free energy, but it has the assumption that only local interactions matter.

So instead of going over the entire generative model, you only look at one factorized part at a time.

And optimization, which is also used in the paper to find some parameters.

And it's Newton's method, but you have a function and you want to know where this function goes through the x-axis.

So you can take the slope and iteratively take more slopes until you get at approximately the point where it goes through the x-axis.

Next slide.

And then I'll just use a paper.

And so to quickly introduce this, it is a method to describe an objective function with constraints.

So in the first derivative of the Lagrangian, if you set it equal to zero, those are the optimal points.

So that would be where the blue and red curve intersect in this picture.

And the Lagrangian multiplier lambda is the rate of change the objective function will change if you relax a constraint.

So in this example, it will be the same as changing the constant b of the red function.

So concretely, if the lambda was positive here,

then increasing B would result in objective function also increasing.

So you have some leeway to work to improve the function even further.

So you can optimize more.

That's what it's saying.

Alrighty, next slide.

And that's some miscellaneous stuff.

So the term entropy is used a lot, especially in terms of epistemic foraging.

But for now, it's just a measure of how uncertain a distribution is.

And in general, sampling an uncertain distribution gives you more information than sampling a certain one.

For example, if it rains every day, seeing rain again doesn't tell you much because it rains every day anyway.

A direct delta function is a probability distribution that is one for a single point and zero elsewhere.

And then a statistical moment

In mathematics, the moments of a function are certain quantitative measures related to the shape of a function's graph.

If a function is a probability distribution, then the first moment is the expected value, so the average, the second is the central moment of variance, the standard deviation, the third is the skewness, and the fourth is the kurtosis.

And finally, the Kullback-Leibnag control, which is a term from control theory, which basically attempts to make a system converge to a set prior and adjust it by minimizing the KL divergence.

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Great background.

So that kind of speed runs Bayesian stats first layer.

Now we're going to head into a second layer of background that's going to bring us into the Forney graph space.

And after the second background part, we'll be in a position to understand two papers a little better.

So here's the big picture on background part two.

Even with all of background part one in hand, there's also some more modern, important act-inf as well as non-act-inf related advances that are going to get us up to speed.

So for a lot of the concepts here, we're just overviewing it first, and then we'll be talking more to the authors about them.

And so I'll take a more narrative overview of recent updates and then we'll steer towards the technical.

So first, graphical models, active inference, and belief propagation.

Over the last years, Carl Friston et al.

have been collaborating with the lab and collaborators of Bert de Vrij.

And around 2017, they released several very important papers.

One was a factor graph description of deep temporal active inference, and another was the graphical brain belief propagation and active inference.

So as Bert alluded to earlier, many of the operations or formalisms of active inference can be understood as manipulations of parameters or variables that might reflect data, observations, priors, precisions, different kinds of variables.

And that is given exact form in the graphical model, specifically the Bayesian graph.

And here we see the familiar figure 4.3 from the 2022 textbook.

Now, the nodes on that graphical model are variables, and edges are their causal or their informational relationship.

And so especially after Pearl et al.

and the causal modeling developments in the 1980s and 90s,

This was adapted into a probabilistic or cybernetic setting where certain nodes on this graph were associated with action, with perception, with cognitive phenomena.

And so this is a causal model, a Bayesian graphical model.

It's the kind of thing that we see in very many active inference papers.

Now, the Bayesian graph is awesome.

It allows us to tackle some really challenging compute problems, get a lot of semantic interpretability, and so on.

However, there's also a few limitations or challenges in execution.

So first, just epistemically.

there's some side information that is needed to provide in order to get to a fully reproducible Bayesian graphical simulation.

And Livestream 54 shows how that information is provided formally by category theory.

But more to the pragmatic point for this discussion, in actual computational execution, whether you're running that Bayes graph on a single core, single thread, or whether you're using multiple computing elements,

a given or a particular generative model must be implemented in a certain way or order.

If we were doing a single agent or a multi-agent simulation, we might wonder, so should we update the perception of everybody and then let everybody make action?

Or should we do action and perception of number one, then number two, then number three?

But then isn't that unfair?

Because then isn't one of them always getting to see and act first and so on.

So just drawing the graph

doesn't give you the actual order of operations to carry it out reproducibly.

So that underspecification of the Bayesian graphical logistics or scheduling leads to a lot of degrees and freedom in model deployment.

Now this might be an issue or not be an issue for any given task.

However, whether you use an off-the-shelf or a custom solution to address this challenge, these different approaches might take time, they might not transfer, they might not be general, and so on.

Also, there might be different simulation outcomes or different computational costs that happen when you implement the same graphical model differently.

So that limits high reliability use and also transfer.

And then lastly, kind of related to computational complexity, estimations are difficult to understand just by looking at the base graph.

It'd be really nice if there was a way to have the model and then know how much it's going to cost or take to run.

so enter the forney factor graphs in 2001 forney wrote a technical paper called codes on graphs normal realizations just like normal 2001 stuff and this introduced some fundamental components let's ask the authors and find out what exactly those fundamental moves were

But what was introduced led to the development of what is now called a Forney factor graph, FFG, or a normal graph.

Again, another interesting question.

How is normal being used here?

The Forney factor graph representation is dual or informationally equivalent to any given Bayesian graph.

Importantly, though, FFGs enable message passing.

Message passing provides node, local, and whole graph scheduling logistics for messages in a way that allows for more tractability in execution.

Importantly, these messages are being passed amongst variables at a very granular level.

This is not referring to two bounded agents sending each other a postcard simply.

The network or the graph, it's a very general data structure.

So it's not surprising that we're going to be encountering multiple kinds of graphs, but it is relevant to know which kinds of graphs we're talking about.

And because this FFG representation can be applied to anywhere a Bayesian graph is used, people have applied both Bayesian graphs and, to a lesser or more recent extent, 40-factor graphs to a bunch of different statistical problems like filtering, smoothing, prediction, MDP, POMDP, and so on.

So to kind of lock this in...

here we see on the right figure 7.3 from par pazulo and friston's textbook so this is the standard discrete time partially observable markov decision process and on the left here is a figure from the graphical brain paper of 2017. so across the top these two bayesian graphs are actually identical they're the same exact type of graph and they're both the same base graph

And then the 2017 figure shows that that base graph has this one-to-one relationship with a Forney factor graph.

What is the difference with a Forney factor graph?

Why do we need to have a different format to describe what might at first glance appear to be the same information?

Let's go to Graphical Brain 2017.

We use graphical representations to characterize message passing under deep generative models that might be used by the brain.

We use three sorts of graphs to emphasize the form of generative models.

One, the nature of Bayesian belief updating.

Two, and how this might be accomplished in neuronal circuits.

Three.

So here's the three sorts of graphs that they're going to talk about.

First, Bayesian networks or dependency graphs.

That's the one that we see the most commonly.

Nodes correspond to unknown variables.

Edges denote dependencies amongst variables.

40-factor graphs have nodes that represent local functions or factors of a probability distribution over random variables, while edges come to represent variables per se, or more exactly, a probability distribution over those variables.

And finally, neural networks have nodes that are constituted by the sufficient statistics of unknown variables and other auxiliary variables like prediction errors, while the edges in those graphs denote an exchange of the functions of sufficient statistics.

Crucially, these graphical representations are formally equivalent in the sense that any Bayesian network can be expressed as a factor graph, and any message passing on a factor graph can be depicted as a neural network.

However, as we will see later, the various graphical formulations offer different perspectives on belief updating or propagation.

So this is a very rich topic.

This background section was to say that Forney graphs have a different style or format than Bayesian graphs.

However, they exist in this dual relationship.

So there's things like algorithms and procedures that you can do on FFG that you can't do on Bayes graphs, but it's all good because you can go from the Bayes graph to the FFG representation and then implement some procedure on the FFG.

So let's get to the papers.

The background one and background two sections have got us to perhaps the point where we're very excited to see how the authors implemented fully synthetic active inference agents using message passing, logistical and operational scheduling algorithms on 40-factor graphs representing Bayesian graphical models crafted to calculate a constrained beta-free energy

as a generalized or unified free energy imperative, unifying the variational and the expected free energy, for sense-making and decision-making in active inference agents.

So now we're heading into another double movement of the coming two papers.

The first paper is itself going to be like a background and a notational paper, but also one that adds to the literature.

And then the second paper will make the addition on top of the advance of the first paper.

So a lot of material.

Let's go into the first paper, Bert.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, so for the first paper, we'll be going over it chapter by chapter.

To start with, setting up the Lagrangian, then defining

the epistemic objective and how to include it in a synthetic agent.

Then in chapter 4 they lay out what Lagrangian active inference means.

In chapter 5 they describe the notation for the constraint for an effector graph.

In six, they highlight why the original generalized classical active inference and the original generalized free energy algorithm are special cases of the Lagrangian active inference, so of that definition of the four-unit factor graph.

And then in seven, they do an experiment for policy inference.

Yeah.

And for chapter two, the Lagrangian approach to message passing.

So as Daniel described, phony vector graphs represent a factorized function over variables, which you can see in equation one and figure one.

So on the left, you see equation one that shows per node where V is.

So A is a node in the set of all nodes V.

And so on the height, you can see the image which says that each node is a factor of all the variables and the variables are on edges.

And that's really important.

And as mentioned in the background, approximate inference is used, in this case variational inference.

And so we start with a free energy function, an equation 3 on the left, which is used to approximate variational distribution Q star.

And Q star is the optimal distribution that we want to get to.

And we achieved it by minimizing it.

And so Beth free energy is distinct from variation of free energy by factorizing the calculation of free energy.

So instead of computing it all at once, you compute it per node and edge, and then aggregate the results, which you can see on the right.

Each local free energy will include entropy terms from all connected edges.

And since edges can be connected to two nodes, the entropy of these variables would be counted twice.

So one edge is a variable, and if you connect it to two nodes, you would be counting the same variable twice.

And so to cancel that out, they add the one minus degree of the edge.

And at the bottom, I've added that normally an edge has always a degree of two, which might sound weird because how can an edge have a degree?

Because normally nodes have degrees.

But in chapter five, we will show that it's possible to have dangling edges that are not connected, that are not factorized on one end.

So it is possible to have edges with degree one.

And last, three constraints ensure that the sum of probabilities for each node and edge equals one, and it's normalization.

And also that it is possible to retrieve edge and node probabilities from the joint distribution, so that the edge says something about the nodes, and the nodes say something about the edges.

Yes, next slide.

Cool.

Yeah, I've just got something to say.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just that we have the variables on the edges of this graph, and the Fs are like functions or operations or little factories where variables can come in, potentially multiple variables can come in and some activity happens, but we're putting the variable that would be in the node of the base graph, and we're having it on an edge connecting functions.

So again, the information is identical or congruent, but everything that we're going to see now is flipped into this space where the edges are the variables, and that's what is going to enable the node local computations.


SPEAKER_02:
And then in chapter 3, defining epistemic objectives, the authors write that ages interact with the world they inhabit and entail a generative model of the environment.

Achieving future goals can be cast as free energy minimization.

And then they ask the question, what should this free energy functional look like and why?

And that sets up the rest of the paper, basically.

Only optimizing bad free energy or variation of free energy does not lead to exploration, but KL control, which means that only prior values are satisfied.

A hallmark of active inference is alternative functionals specifically made for inferring policies like expected free energy, which includes information collection.

And so epistemics arise from the optimization of approximate mutual information.

mutual information uh on the bottom height is a metric like the r squared if you make a linear and that it tells you it tells you how much one variable relates to another one

And to go back, mutual information between X and Z in equation 10 on the left.

To work on it, the uncertainty entropy of X. Yeah, that's in the height equation.

So it's how much you know about the one given that you know the other.

And so say X is an observation and Z is an eternal state.


SPEAKER_04:
then an agent can choose X to see information about set.

are related to each other.

And then how do you, how to define a functional that combines battery energy and .

So to have .


SPEAKER_02:
the energy and add negative mutual information and minimizing the free energy functional the elbow with a negative mutual information means maximizing the mutual information so you're trying to get as much information about internal and observation states


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just one comment there, Bert, and then Jakob, feel free to add anything.

That's a great comparison you made with the r-squared for linear regression.

So in a linear regression, r-squared summarizes how much the two axes, the x and the y-axis, resemble each other.

r-squared of 1 means they're exactly collinear.

They're on a manifold.

r-squared of 0 is there's no linear relationship, and r-squared of negative 1 would be a negative association.

Mutual information is kind of like that, but two characteristics that are importantly different.

First off, you can't have information on something.

The worst thing that two things could be, or the least that they could be, is just noise to each other.

So you can take the negative of the mutual information, but you can't have negative information on something.

And then secondly, it's not a linear relationship.

You could have something that is an inverted U, and the linear regression might find that that had a low R squared because the best regression line might go through the middle of the U.

But then if you just think about that a little bit more generally, of course one of those variables has information on the other variable.

And so it's kind of like moving a lot of our intuition and also some of the epistemic status of linear regressions into more of a pure information geometric space.

And it's a really important point too that the VFE doesn't

endogenously have an epistemic drive.

It's just about the real-time surprise level of beliefs and incoming data.

And so a hallmark of active inference is the construction of these functionals such as expected free energy or free energy of the expected future or generalized free energy.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
And so expected free energy only works for future time steps, whereas variational and bad free energy work for past and the current time step.

And instead, the authors posted generalized free energy works for both at the same time, and it includes a part that tracks

time in equation 14.

But that's on the end, you have P with a curvy stripe, xk.

And that basically keeps count of which time step we have at this moment.

And also note that the policy or control is fixed.

So that's you with a roof on it.

So past time steps have observed data and are locked using the direct delta function.

which was the function with a probability of 1 at a specific value and 0 at the rest, whereas future timesteps are still open to be optimized using generalized free energy.

And so below that, you can see this free energy, how you lock some values and keep them open at other moments.

And so for a sneak peek on the figure in the right from paper two, you can see that as time goes on and time steps are observed, data constraints are added.

And that's the little black circle with a delta in it.

And committing to a full mode of specification up your limits what a generalize that you think you can do instead of making it fully local is synthetic active inference as the artist right.

Okay.

And then in chapter four, they discussed the Lagrangian active inference, which is the key of the paper.

And so with node-local generalized free energy, we can construct a Lagrangian for active inference.

And the goal is to have a distributed inference procedure solving for each node individually and constraining the solution as shown in equation 13.

So on the right.

And we need to assume that actual and approximate probabilities are about equal to each other.

We had to make that assumption.

So I guess we can ask that next week.

And now with this, messages can be derived as done in part two, which is the next paper.

However, in this paper, they attempt another way to arrive at the node-local generalized free energy.

And this is done in two steps.

So first, they apply a mean field factorization.

that ensures edges are independent for each node, which you can see on the right, where you have the factor of the node, sr, has a product for all edges, so they are independent.

And then the second move they make is that you can partition the connecting variables edges into two sets, one that is adjusted and the other that is left alone.

And to the adjusted set, they apply p substitution, which is very important.

And this basically replaces a local free energy with a local generalized free energy.

And on the bottom is the formula for applying p-substitution, which I also don't fully understand.

So maybe you guys know a little more about that.


SPEAKER_00:
Definitely will ask.

I'll just note here that the slash is used to mean except for.

I hope this is correct.

So here we're able to take something that contains all and we're able to kind of pull out one.

with this more intractable integral and then still do the simpler log but we'll ask


SPEAKER_02:
The second paper will show how p-substituted nodes are gradually removed from the Forney factor graph over time, as these nodes are now in the past and do not need to consider the future anymore.

Again, for a sneak peek, see on the right, everywhere you add the delta in the black circle, you remove the square.

And the square is the notation for p-substitutions.

And then to construct the active inference Lagrangian, it is important that p-substituted nodes work with different messages, generalized free energy instead of path-free energy.

And in this way, add epistemics.

The optimal points of the Lagrangian, where the first derivative is 0, are the stationary point of the message passing process, which means that nodes do not change anymore if you keep updating.

And so there's a very long formula for the Lagrangian.

And as I said, you split the nodes into two, one set that you p-substitute and the other that you don't.

And on top of that, you add three constraints, which have a lambda in front of them.

And that is the marginalization, the normalization of both nodes and edges.


SPEAKER_00:
That's very important about the stationary point of message passing being kind of, like, settled.

Where everybody can pass all the messages they want and nothing is changing.

And that's gonna be, um...

probably leveraged in the reactive message passing programming environment, where rather than needing to send all messages once to the calculate and send all messages again, it opens up the ability for different regions of the graph to be sending and receiving messages at different frequencies.

So if one sensor was sampling a thousand times a second, one was sampling one time per second,

No longer do you have to decide, should we coarse-grain to one second, or should we waste 999 cycles on the slower cycle sensor?

Now, with reactive message passing, because there's no local descriptions, it's possible to open up that implementational space.


SPEAKER_02:
And now we'll get into defining the notation for the constrained Forney factor graphs.

And so Forney factor graphs are useful for describing generative models, but it is important to know the exact functional to be minimized.

And the authors develop a new notation for writing constraints directly as part of the Forney factor graph.

because normal phony vector graphs do not show that.

Figure 4 on the right builds upon representing vectors with squares, nodes, and edges as variables that can be vectorized.

They add circular beads, which indicate constraints that define our family Q. That has to do with the variation of distribution.

A bead on an edge denotes that of the edge QSI, while a bead in the center of a node is QSA.

And then they build, they introduce four constraints that are needed as notation for the Forney factor graph.

So the first one is a factorization constraint, and it can either be a naive mean field or a structured mean field.

When a naive mean field is a stronger constraint, which means that every factor is independent, which is figure five, it's in the middle on the right.

and structured is less strong because you can factorize multiple variables together and i added some example formats many edges like needed for

If you want to have many edges, many variables into a factor, they introduce the notation with dots in between.

And this is useful when you have, for example, a Gaussian mixture model, which has a bunch of components.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll see if this is accurate, but let's imagine these four variables are coming in and meeting in the factory, four prerequisite components of the car assembly process.

The fully factorized way to represent that is shown here.

That's the mean field assumption that we can just treat those components separately.

Like if what we were doing was just multiplying, or I mean, adding the numbers together, maybe we could treat them separately.

But then also there are these intermediate structural factorizations where you can take four joint coming in

and then you could separate it into these two are separate and these two are connected or two pairs so it gives you the expressivity to do the continuum from fully joint to fully factorized mean field and everything between all the combinations in between in a per node fashion

rather than at the whole graph level, whereas that is often how it's discussed elsewhere.

Somebody constructs a big generative model and says, and then we took a mean field approach to the graph.

So here we have that kind of expressivity in a given node.


SPEAKER_04:
unmute, then continue, Bert.


SPEAKER_02:
Good call.

So the second is a form constraint, which enforces a particular function or distribution, really, on a local marginal of an edge or a node.

Figure 8 shows what enforcing a Gaussian constraint on an edge looks like.

And figure nine shows two different constraints on the nodes.

And the authors explicitly note that a constraint on an edge is independent of the nodes and that it factorizes into and vice versa.

So the messages pass.

And then after everything is done, it's like squeezing clay into a box.

It just has to fit.

But it's only after the fact.

And then they note dangling edges, which do not terminate on a node on one side.

So they wouldn't require a bead, but you need it to be able to do a form constraint.

So they still hide them in.

And that's why they add a sort of dummy factor node on one end.

And then the third constraint is a delta constraint.

The delta constraints and data points allow us to incorporate measurements into a model.

Equation 30 and figure 10 show this for data constraints.

These are special since they denote observations and block the flow of messages.

So these points are now fixed.

Nothing goes through it because it is already set.

And then another option is that when you don't know which value to fix it to, so the S I had,

Then you can optimize the value, and then it is called a delta constraint.

And the optimization of this is don't use an expectation maximization.


SPEAKER_00:
What I saw in this section was, let's just say that we were drawing height observations from

forest so one way to think about that is the the gaussian distribution that we're drawing from okay but now you get the data point and you could think about that data point as just an entry and a value you could also think of it as a dirac delta distribution parameterized exactly by the value of the data point and so thinking about data as being a dirac constrained

variable where here the variables are on edges brings unification between empirical uh data coming in from the outside or passed around internally and broader distributional perspectives


SPEAKER_02:
And then the fourth constraint is moment matching, which replaces the hard marginalization constraint used to include the entropy of edges.

And so this loosens the marginalization as now only the moments need to align.

And equation eight contains both node and edge terms since the moment matching constraint applies to both at the same time.

And they apply to both at the same time because of the top formula.

And the middle one, the middle formula shows the sufficient statistics described by T, capital T. And so basically what this means is that you pick a distribution and you only pick the moments.

So the first one would be the mean of the distribution and the second would be the standard deviation.

And so only those need to fit.

You don't care about the rest.

And P-substitution is the final piece needed to represent the active inference Lagrangian on a C-constraint for any vector graph.

Constructing the local generalized free energy using mean field vectorization and P-substitution was only done to represent the Lagrangian active inference on a constraint for any vector graph.

and recall that p-substitution involves substituting part of the model p for q in the expectation only.

And that is the formula on the bottom.

And it's represented with a square in the Forney factor graph.

And it shows the substitution on figure 13, replacing the local variation of free energy with a local generalized free energy.


SPEAKER_00:
rule replacing Q on the data or on Y with P that conditions on X and Z. This red piece is being called attention to, and we'll unpack that more with the authors.


SPEAKER_02:
And on top of that, lastly, the authors compressed the constraint for an effect to make it easier to read.

And only deviations relative to the default bed-free energy are shown.

And the bead chain is introduced as a series of beads connected by edges and is summarized if it contains no extra information.

And the others go really into depth, but I will just keep it to this, where they go from the left image to the right.

So the right is the cleaned up phony factor graph.

And then you can more easily compress it and make it smaller for very large diagrams.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, allow us to kind of compress or skip through the uninformative parts and just call attention to the new information that's being intersected.


SPEAKER_02:
And then in chapter six, they highlight how classical active inference and original generalized free energy algorithm are special cases of the developed Lagrangian active inference.

So an integral part of message-passing algorithms is the choice of a schedule, which Daniel already explained, which is the order of messages in which they are passed.

Iterative methods are sensitive to the order, and Lagrangian active inference is an iterative method and might be sensitive to the choice of schedule.

Choosing the schedule carefully allows us to recover classical active inference planning algorithms as a special case.

Figure 20 on the left shows the constraint for an effect graph of a composite node for Lagrangian active inference on discrete state spaces.

The equations on the right show the corresponding factors.

where HA is defined as a function of the transition matrix required for the order equation.

Figure 21 shows the message updates.

Some cannot be solved in closed form and instead require multi-color estimates.

U is the average free energy of the composite node and corresponds exactly to expected free energy issues in standard active inference.

where the composite notes the block with a striped block around it.

M of Z and M of A are solved differently than the rest.

They require Z-bar results using Newton's method, as it tends to fluctuate between multiple extremes.

And M of A is estimated using a sampling procedure.

And so below shows the generative model of a discrete prompt, and the equations

to below that show the factors.

And note again the hat on U, so the x's are fixed.

And calculating the generalized free energy is done using a forward sweep, which you can see with the arrows on the bottom right going from left to right, and summing the free energy terms over all the substituted composite nodes.

And these should then be equal to the result from the shown equation.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

These images are just so interesting, even without knowing what they are.


SPEAKER_02:
And reconstructing original generalized free energy method is then a matter of including past observations.

For past time steps, adding data constraints.

While for future time steps, adding piece substitution.

And a naive min field is applied to all the nodes.

The schedule, the order of messages is shown below.

The update equations of the generalized free energy using this model are the same as of the expected free energy.

And then the authors work on an example, which is the classic T-Maze task.

So the tools in this paper are not limited to restating prior work.

It offers more advantages, one of which is the ability to directly infer a policy instead of relying on post hoc selection, choosing actions which have the best energy terms.

Instead, you can do it immediately.

So the optimal action to take is therefore to visit... Well, the optimal action that he makes is to first visit 4 because you can get information about 2 and 3, rather than immediately try to go to 2 and 3.

And that is the hallmark of an active inference agent.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, a lot to explore here.

But instead of relying on the post-hoc comparison of energy terms, this is in reference to the way that usually expected free energy is used by taking in habit, the policy prior, and then iterating over every element in pi, the policy prior, and sharpening or updating them

according to the expected free energy with a pragmatic value in the epistemic value component.

So you get some policy posterior, and then you might select simply the best one, or you might take some temperature-guided sampling across the policy posterior.

So that's a post hoc comparison of expected free energy terms.


SPEAKER_04:
And with the...


SPEAKER_00:
that the generative models now have the ability to directly infer policy potentially without explicit consideration of counterfactuals or at the very least without this kind of a post hoc comparison.


SPEAKER_02:
And so they build on that and create another full model.

And note that in equation 47, they use a mixture model of candidate transition matrices indexed by UK.

So each action has a different transition matrix.

And yeah, a bunch of illustrations.

And figure 28 shows an agent that initially prefers the epistemic action, and so moves down to state 4, and subsequently exhibits a preference for either of the potentially rewarding arms, so of course left or right.

And this shows that the Lagrangian active inference is able to infer the optimal policy, and that approach can reproduce prior results of the teammates.

And then the authors do it again, but now by adding a data constraint.

And this is similar to using a maximum a posteriori estimate, which basically means that the action is yes or no.

So it's 100% or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, by pushing through the point mass constraint, kind of like that Dirac delta constraint, all that can be shared is the first moment, which is just the data points value.

So here it's like, you might have a 70% chance of doing thing 1, 20%, 2%, 1%, but then...

the action selected is decisive and so you have this decisive passing of action and the the decisive realization of location even if also there's like a location distribution that includes support over the entire maze or a policy distribution that includes support overall policies


SPEAKER_02:
And then to conclude, in this paper, we have proposed a novel approach to active inference based on Lagrangian optimization, which we have named Lagrangian active inference.

We demonstrated Lagrangian active inference on a classic benchmark problem for the literature and found that it enhanced epistemic drive to this hallmark feature.

It presents three main advantages over previous algorithms.

First, an advantage is the computational efficiency afforded by being able to pass backwards messages instead of needing to perform forward rollouts for every policy, like a tree search, so it scales linearly over time.

A second advantage is that it allows for directly inferring posteriors over control signals instead of relying on model comparison, like Daniel just explained.

And thirdly, it is inherently modular and consequently works for freely definable constraints for any factor crash, while prior work has focused mostly on specific generative models.

And they have also introduced a notation for hiding down constraints and piece substitutions on a Forney graph.

The constraint factor Forney graphs are useful not only for active inference, but for specifying free energy functionals in general.

And the authors hope that this can become a standard tool similar to Forney factor graphs when it is desirable not just to write the model, but also a family of distributions.

In the future, we plan to extend the work to more node constructions to further open the scope that can be attacked with active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome work, Bert.

Great job preparing it.

Jakob, anything you want to add on part one?

No, at the moment.

Okay.

Scaling linearly in time is really fascinating.

Like, if you planned 10 time steps, should the 11th step be a 10% bump in difficulty?

Or should it be another combinatoric explosion every little kilometer deeper into the future?

So, second paper.

Okay, first just going in deeply to the first sentences before accelerating across.

So they begin the paper saying, free energy principle postulates that the behavior of biological agents can be modeled as minimizing a variational free energy.

And this is commonly brought up, that we can model biological agents as or through or with minimizing variational free energy.

Just like saying we can model this regression by fitting an L2 norm, we can model this biological agent by fitting the ELBO or the VFE.

Active inference, which is AIF in this paper, is a corollary of the FEP that describes how agents propose effective agents by minimizing an expected free energy objective that internalizes a generative model, GM, of the agent's environment and prior beliefs about desired outcomes.

So,

VFE is the real-time behavior minimization.

EFE brings it into the prospective setting by introducing epistemic imperative and also talking about observations that haven't happened yet.

Variational objectives for active inference can be minimized by message passing on a Forney style factor graph representation.

So everything we know about Bayesian graphical models transposes into the FFG space.

The FFG is not a kind of Bayes graph.

It is a dual, a different kind of graph conveying the same information in a restructured format that we can then optimize or implement differently.

Several authors have attempted to scale active inference under message passing framework.

However, agents based on these approaches lack crucial epistemic characteristics.

So, one question, why was that?

Was it that previous authors only modeled VFE but not EFE?

Or was there some failure of the EFE loading on epistemic value?

I think the answer is the first one.

In part one, they identified this hiatus in the specification space, and they introduced the CFFG, and then...

In part two, which is the current paper, we use the CFFG notation as introduced in part one to define locally constrained variational objectives and derive variational message updates for GFE, generalized free energy, base control using variational calculus.

The resulting control algorithms introduce epistemic behavior in synthetic active inference agents.

We reason purely from an engineering point of view and do not concern ourselves with biological plausibility.

What a sentence.

In this paper, our contributions are threefold.

They use variational calculus to derive message update expressions for GFE control.

They derive specialized messages for discrete variable model.

And they implement the results in a reactive programming framework simulating a perception action cycle on the T maze.

With a full message passing account and reactive implementation of GFE optimization, it becomes possible to derive and reuse custom message updates across models and get a step closer to realizing scalable synthetic active inference agents for industrial applications.

So what is it about their contributions that makes the industrial and the engineering work more transferable or scalable?

Then they summarize the coming sections.

Section 2 reviews variational base.

Section 3 reviews active inference, perception, learning, and control in terms of message passing on the CFFG.

Section 4 focuses on the constraint definitions around a submodel of two facing nodes, hashtag Alice and Bob, and derives stationary solutions and messages for GFE-based control.

Section 5 applies the results to a specific discrete variable goal observation submodel that is often used in AIF practice.

They then work towards implementation in a simulated setting and describe a perception action cycle in terms of time-dependent constraints, section six.

The team A's task is described in section seven and simulated in a reactive programming framework in section eight.

Section nine has a summary of related work and the conclusions are in section 10.

It's also useful to put table one and table two up here.

Table one is an overview of notational conventions.

nice list of letters would be awesome to connect to the active inference ontology.

And then table two has a bunch of acronyms

Okay, section two, review of variational message passing.

So this section briefly reviews variational message passing as a distributed approach to minimizing variational free energy.

So first, they review variational base, 2.1.

Then 2.2, they review Forney-style factor graphs.

2.3, they move to the Beth-Lagrangian optimization.

Using Lagrange multipliers, we can convert the optimization on Q to a free-form optimization problem of the Lagrangian, where the Lagrangian multipliers enforce local constraints.

The fully local optimization then becomes this expression.

Again, more to say, they're using the Lagrangian constraint framework.

and the Bethe flavor of free energy, which is already node-local, to provide a very constrained, which is to say, possibly more solvable and tractable node-local computation.

And now they get to the constrained Forney-style factor graphs.

As we heard in part one, an FFG alone does not unambiguously define a constrained VFE objective.

Interesting question.

What is needed for that unambiguous identification of the VFE?

And so here they review their CFFG notation.

Here's figure one.

And we can again see that they go from the initial factor graph on the top left with an explicit CFFG on the top right,

Then they compress it down to the bottom left.

And then that uniquely identifies a logistical or an operational schedule.

Section 3, review of active inference by variational message passing.

In this section, we work towards a message passing formulation of synthetic active inference.

We start by reviewing active inference and the CFFG representation for a GFE objective for control.

So 3.1, they define active inference.

3.2, they define generative model.

Now they go to message passing.

In this section, we formulate a synthetic active inference as a message passing procedure on a model of past and future states.

Inference on a model of past states relates to perception and learning, while inference on a model of future states relates to control.

What is control, if not just perception and learning we haven't had yet?

Figure 3.

Constraint 40 style factor graph representations for variational objectives on models for past, left, and future states right.

I don't know if one has to cross their eyes or do some other magic visual experience here.

There are some small differences, like here there's a dashed box that's not here.

There's a data constraint clamp dangling edge here.

whereas that constraint is open here.

However, the rest of the figure looks pretty similar, and that tantalizingly points to some similarities between learning and memory in the past where we can clamp down part of the model to be data

and consideration of the future which is to say action and control where the observations are distributional beyond the dirac and they haven't happened yet and we have agency over them happening any thoughts on that either of you

It's kind of cool, and it's kind of forsaged in some of the other graphical models, but we'll ask the authors.

331 talks about past states, and then 332 goes into the model of future states.

So, a lot to read in the paper, but that key idea.

Because future outcomes are by definition unobserved, we include goal priors on the future observation variables.

Those are preferences.

We expect there to be observations, and we know that they will become constraints to a Dirac-like form, but in anticipation, we take a distributional approach to observations that haven't happened.

Now, what if we had uncertainties about the past, and we were doing kind of a policy-like search in our fuzzy memory?

Then where would time be?

section four they get to general gfe based message updates in the model for future states the goal prior and observation model impose simultaneous constraints on the observation variable in the corresponding cffg this configuration is modeled by two facing nodes so i i believe those nodes might be the two in the dash box tier

In this section, we derive the general GFE-based message updates for pair-facing notes.

We express the local optimization problem as Lagrangian.

Using variational calculus, we then derive local stationary solutions from which we obtain general update expressions for GFE-based messages.

So they describe the goal and the observation model.

4.2, local Lagrangian.

after the substitution of the factorization and applying P substitution to the local variational free energy objective, they get the local GFE.

The GFE is all set up to construct this Lagrangian and to do a variational optimization on that Lagrangian to get Q star.

4.3, local stationary solutions.

We are now prepared to derive the stationary points of the node-local Lagrangian.

We start by considering the node-local Lagrangian as a functional of the variational factor q sub x. Lemma 1.

Stationary points of L as a functional of q. What does lemma 1 do or show?

Lemma 2.

We derive stationary points of equation 4 as a functional of q sub z.

Note that by symmetry, a similar result applies to Q sub theta.

What does lemma 2 do or show?

In this section, we show that the stationary solutions of section 4.3 correspond to the fixed points of a fixed point iteration scheme.

Theorem 1, theorem 2.

What do these theorems do and show?

4.5, convergence considerations.

some further considerations and a corollary one what does it do or show now we get to five application to a discrete variable model in this section we apply the general message update rules of section 4-4 to a specific discrete variable model that is often used in aif practice using the general results we derive messages on this specific model and so here we see figure five with

It's been taken all the way to the point of the logistics of the messages for those two facing nodes.

Five three, data-constrained message updates.

The message updates for a data-constrained VFE objective, figure six on the left, reduced to standard variational message passing updates as derived by citation 28 and appendix A. So here we have those two nodes with a DROC

intervening.

Here we had X intervening in figure five.

So we had a distributional bandwidth.

Now we're dealing with a Dirac distributional bandwidth or channel, which is to say a data point being passed.

Now we get to section six, perception action cycle.

In this section, we formulate a perception action cycle that extends upon the GFE formulation.

Specifically, we illustrate how CFFG notation allows us to be explicit about local constraints.

As a result, the perception action cycle can now be visualized as a process that modifies constraints over time.

Pretty cool.

At the initial time, t equals one, no observations are available, and we initialize the perception action cycle with the CFFG of figure seven on the top.

We got a sneak peek earlier.

Now it's real figure seven.

As actions are executed and observations become available, data constraints replace the P substitution on the observation variables.

So it's almost like the P substitution prepared us to flip it out with data in some way.

Like data constraints are a secondary or a further constraint that is enabled through the P substitution.

When the time horizon is reached and all observations are available on the bottom, data constraints replace the p-substitution on the observation variables.

So it's kind of like we'll know when we'll know, and then it'll all be inferenced like memory.

But before we know what we later found out, it's more like control.

So whether we're in a retrospective memory setting,

a real-time sense-making setting or a prospective control-theoretic setting, it would be pretty cool to have like a mega-unified imperative and a tractable local procedure to do it, which in a sense is what they do.

So the perception action cycle with time-dependent constraints thus unifies the tasks of perception, control, and learning under a single generative model

and schedule.

This is the huge piece.

It's only through the FFG and then the constrained FFG can we get to not just making a base graph of perception, cognition, and action, cool enough, but bringing in an explicit node-local scheduling and logistics approach.

Wow.

The experimental protocol is summarized in algorithm one.

All it requires is a generative model and a variational distribution with associated constraints.

And then it's kind of like a dance.

Do, infer, act, execute, observe, slide.

We then get to section 7 with the experimental setting.

In this section, we describe a team-based task that serves as a classical setting for investigating epistemic behavior, citation 10.

The setup closely follows the definition in 30.

Citation 10 is Friston et al., 2015, Active Inference and Epistemic Value.

And citation 30 is from Fis Vandelaar et al., same authors.

in 2022, active inference and epistemic value in graphical models.

So here we have the T maze that was shown earlier with a smiley face.

No smiley face here.

And it's laid out and labeled starting position O, Q, C. That's where the epistemic value is.

And then L and R, the two reward arms.

And just for those seeking continuity, here's figure 7.4.

from the 2022 textbook.

Here we have the 2022 active inference mouse in a TMAs.

And, from 2021, here's our active InferAnts simulation, where it's actually appropriate, the nestmate is, like, much smaller.

So, for the nestmate, they can wander around a lot inside the teammates that, for the mouse, it only has one location it can be in.

So...

It's not as closely allied as 7.4 is with figure 8 here, but it's like the same... You could do it in the same lap.

They further specify the teammates and the probabilities of different things happening.

They further specify the teammates and the probabilities of things happening, and then

In Figure 9, they get to a CFFG describing the TMAs.

Let's go through it with the authors and annotate what it means.

We execute the same experimental protocol as before and plot the minimal free energies in Figure 10, top right.

The BFE-based reference agent fails to identify epistemic modes of behavior.

The specific choice of prior for the observation matrix prevents any extrinsic information, at least initially, from influencing policy selection.

By the lack of an epistemic drive, the BFE-based agent sticks to policies that confirm its prior belief without exploring possibilities to exploit available information in the TMA's environment.

A histogram of the number of wins per run is plotted in Figure 11 on the left.

The histogram suggests a bimodal distribution with a large mass group to the right and a smaller mass in the middle.

For reference, dashed curves indicate ideal performance for agents that already know A from the start.

For agents that first must learn A, deviations from ideal performance are expected.

The smaller middle mass then indicates that GFE optimization offers no silver bullet for simulating fully successful epistemic agents.

Namely, for some choices of initialization, the GFE agent may still become stuck in local optima.

Section 9.

I won't read it.

They describe a wide swath of related work, ranging from early work on the introduction of fornigraphs on through expected free energy and active inference.

and in section 10 they conclude they took a constraint-centric approach to synthetic active inference they simulated a perception action cycle through message passing derived from a single generalized free energy objective and dot dot in this paper we have adopted a purely engineering point of view and we have not concerned ourselves with biological plausibility

Specifically, the derived message updates come with considerations about stability and non-standard expressions.

Although we have engineered solutions to overcome these complications, it seems unlikely to us that the brain resorts to such strategies.

Interesting mic drop, but very humble.

And so now, as we give our last thoughts...

We've always held up the side-by-side at the Institute with a minimum of two.

And we've talked about that before in the textbook figure 4.3 setting with continuous and discrete time.

But there have been many other Min 2 experiences that we've all shared together.

And not just with this dyad of papers, but with this new intelligibility

of the relationship between Bayes graphs and different styles and constrained forms of Forney graphs were in yet another min-2 setting.


SPEAKER_04:
So that's what I would like to say in closing as we conclude the .0.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I look forward to the point one and point two.

I have a bunch of questions about, for example, what piece substitution really means and for example, the time window, how many time steps you need to give your model already or whether it can unfold automatically and just in general to hear what they have to say because it is a very interesting topic.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah um same here also interested to um hear what the authors have just have to say and um i think yeah whenever there's um um

Whenever there's a generalization that, at least in the semantic space, affords a wider connection to different methods, and especially in the context of models represented on the graph, I'd be interested to

learn more about how we can represent agents in different kinds of graphs or how these constrained Forney style factor graphs afford different types of optimization methods to be performed on them.

and how this work can help Active Inference to interface with other domains which try to solve similar problems or perhaps different problems from a different angle.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

My last thought is like, we planned to learn

at least to try here.

So I commend you both for that policy selection.

And now looking back, it's like data or a memory.

And then in science, it's like, oh, it's 1994.

This new genome is available, or like this new thing is exciting.

And here's the next step.

And it's like,

one must be as excited as can be in making the right measured decision then which later becomes an observation

at a different time point, yeah, and a different perspective.

So there are probably many exciting and important syntheses that this work is going to build our skills and our expressivity around, and the computational element is just excellent.

So thank you again, Bert and Jakob.

See you fellows in the dot one.


SPEAKER_04:
All right.

## YNsUMgOQYpk

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome it is november 1st 2023 and we're here in actin live stream 55.1 discussing realizing synthetic active inference agents really excited and honored to have magnus here for this first

discussion, session.

We're going to have an interactive presentation and then looking towards the .2, have a bit more open-endedness and maybe some code execution, maybe some message passing live.

So thank you for joining, Magnus.

Very excited for your presentation and for this discussion.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

Very, very happy to be here.

Been looking forward to this for quite a while now.

So should I just get into it?

Yes.

Right.

Amazing.

So hi, everybody.

I'm Magnus.

I'm a machine learning research engineer at Versus.

And in a couple of months, also a PhD graduate from BIOS Lab in Eindhoven.

I'm here to talk about these two papers, Realizing Synthetic Active Inference Agents, parts one and two, that we did together with me and the ever-brilliant Thijs van der Laar and Bert de Vries.

One thing ahead of time, if you have questions in the chat or anything, I can't see them, but I encourage people to interrupt me as much as possible because it's more fun for everybody.

If we can sort of have a bit of a dialogue going, have our own action perception loop.

All right.

And with that out of the way, I clicked on my slides and they changed.

So I think that part is working.

Excellent.

So this is like the battle plan for what I want to go through today.

I want to start by covering the problem state and what are we trying to do with these two papers?

What is sort of the whole idea and sort of serve you up the point as it were right at the offset.

Then we're going to cover a bit of background material, and then we start to get into the meat of the actual papers, which are mainly two things.

It is what we call CFFG notation, so constrained foreign-style factor graph notation, and deriving messages based on local generalized free energy functional so that we can do this efficiently and scalably at all these nice things that we want.

And then at the end, we're going to look at some experiments that are in the two papers to see whether this is all just a nice theoretical exercise or whether we actually have something that works.

All right, let's get into it.

So the main thing that I want to do is we want to figure out, how do we put active inference on graphs?

It's sort of the big question that we're trying to get at with these two papers.

because active inference is awesome.

I think I can say that in this crowd.

And graphs are really, really nice and have some nice properties that we would like for active inference.

So let's go a little bit deeper into what this actually means.

So I sort of put up two things side by side here, one being the

The active inference book and the other being like a foreign style factor graph of a state space model.

we're going to try and compare sort of what we want out of each formalism.

So active inference great does a lot of things.

But one thing that it doesn't in the very, very classical 2015 original formulations what i'm mostly going to be referring to.

If we go really by the books, usually this is tied to a POMDP model structure.

So that means we have these discrete state space models, and we define them with A, B, C, D matrices.

And everything is sort of as we all know and love.

And this is great.

We can do a lot of stuff with it.

But it is still a choice that we make a priori most of the time.

The other thing is if we go strictly by the original planning algorithm

There's a scaling problem in the planning horizon that follows from us having to do these large search trees.

There's excellent work trying to address this, either branching time active inference, parts of the sophisticated inference program, and all these really, really interesting developments using Monte Carlo tree search.

But this isn't really a solved problem yet.

On the plus side, what we do get that we really, really want

is that if we design an active inference agent and we go by all the nice things that we know and love, we get agents that are curious.

We get agents that have this epistemic drive to go and explore their world, which is a really, really handy thing to have because if our agent can gather its own information, it'll learn efficiently, it'll sort of figure out how to navigate and do things.

And it's much easier to have the agent do that rather than have us as engineers, designers at the agent do that.

All right, so if we compare that to building an agent using box standards, rational free energy minimization on a graph, we end up with an agent that doesn't have exploration.

If I take this type of formalism and I minimize free energy and I use that to construct a controller, I end up with a KL control objective.

And this is something that doesn't give us this exploratory drive.

We can get all sorts of other nice things, but we don't get this information-seeking behavior that is like a hallmark of active inference that we really want.

The upside what we get is a lot more flexibility.

I can write factor graphs for free-form models, and by using message-passing tools, we can also do inference in these models really, really efficiently.

That means we scale better.

Again, we have more flexibility in our model.

We can do a lot of things.

But what we don't get is this epistemic drive.

So ideally, what we would like is we want to take the best of both worlds, right?

We want to take all the good parts of active inference and all the good parts of sort of factor graph, message passing-based, free-energy minimization, and squash them together to get one unified framework for doing all the stuff that we want so that we get to get all the thumbs up and none of the thumbs down.

Everybody still with me?

Excellent.

OK, so to set this up, because these papers can get a little bit heavy, I'm going to try to walk through all the different parts.

But to set up the whole thing of how this is going to work, I'm going to start by reviewing a little bit of background material.

It's not going to be too heavy, I promise.

And we're going to start with...

our favorite functional, the variational free energy.

Again, I think in this crowd, most of you will have seen something that looks like this before.

And this is a fine way of writing it.

We have some observations, x, and we have some latents, z. I'm going to use x for observations and z for latents throughout.

And we're interested in minimizing this type of divergence.

This is great.

However,

If we're in a position where we have, say, multiple latents combined in different ways and some parameters and maybe a couple of different states and things going on, this particular way of writing things doesn't really sort of intuitively capture all of that.

This doesn't represent the underlying graph structure of our model.

So if we go up a little bit and look at this guy here, for instance,

There's a lot of structure in this way of writing a generative model.

You see some things are not connected to each other, some things are.

There's a lot of things going on here that we can't really capture if we just stick with this way of writing our free energy.

The first thing we're going to do is we're going to try and figure out how do we write free energy in graphs?

And to do that, we're going to need to have some graphs.

And I like this particular way of writing my probabilistic graphical models.

There are others.

This particular way is called a Forney-style factor graph.

And basically, we have three building blocks.

We have squares, which can represent factors in a generative model.

So this is going to be, say, p of x given z.

We have edges that we stick between squares, and they're going to represent variables.

This is a bit different to what you would see if you do something like a Bayesian network, where a node would be a variable, and you connect it to all the variables that depend on it.

Here, the nodes are the factors, and the edges are the variables.

It's a little bit of mental gymnastics if you're not used to thinking in this way.

And then once we get into inference with message parsing, I'll use these little arrows to denote messages as they are flowing around on a graph.

And all of these three building blocks is really most of what I'm going to use until we get into the meat of the two papers.

So let's look at an example of what this could look like.

So I have a pretty simple model here.

This has three variables, x, y, and z. And they factorize like this.

So we have P of y gets its own factor.

Variable y, z given y, this factor, variable z. And x given z, this factor, variable x. So far, so good.

All right.

So again, this is just a simple graph.

Now we're going to try and see if we can figure out how to distribute our free energy in this graph.

How can we turn this general formulation that we had of just some latents and some correlations into something that we can put all over this graph?

And this is the hairiest slide, I promise.

We're going to do that by simply saying, well, I have my free energy, and I'm going to basically pick a term associated with each node.

So I'm going to have a q for each node, and I'm going to have this f for just a generic factor.

You can also think of it as like the p argument in a normal free energy.

And then we have this sum.

So this sum here sums over all the nodes in our model.

So if you look here, we have one, two, three nodes.

So that's going to be one term for each node.

And that's really all that's happening here.

OK, so far, so good.

This is not quite there yet, because we're going to need another term, which is going to be this guy.

And what this basically says is, subtract the entropy of each edge that is connected to more than two nodes back in.

So why would we do this?

I promise you there's a reason.

This term, if you haven't gone through the ideas, seems a little ad hoc, because now we have a free energy for each node, and we have this extra entropy term for each edge.

So what's going on there?

I want to sort of illustrate how that comes about, and we get to this form of the free energy, which is a Bethe approximation to the free energy.

We can look at this graph.

You say, well, look at this node here.

z given y, you can have a free energy term.

And that free energy term includes two variables.

This node is connected to two edges, so the free energy around this node will involve the variables that are connected to that node.

That means we get terms for y and get terms for z. But if we look at the other node here, this x given z, that's also connected to two variables.

It's connected to x on the one side and z on the other.

So if we do this summing up, do a free energy term for each node, this z is going to get counted twice.

It appears once in the blue circle and once in the red circle.

So how do we get around counting our variables twice?

That's easy.

We just subtract it again.

So that's why we get this extra entropy term coming in.

That's why we get this guy.

Because for each variable that is connected to two nodes, we're going to have this situation.

Z is connected to two nodes.

And therefore, it gets counted twice.

So we simply get rid of one of them.

Does this make sense?

Beautiful.

It's the same thing as saying that when we define

q in our free energy functional we have this q log q over p we have a q that looks like this we say q of x y and z is going to be equal to all these terms one for each node there's one here for x and z there's one here for y and z that's one here for y matching the three nodes over these terms for the edges

And one for z, because it's connected to two variables, and one for y, because it's connected to two factors, and one for y, because it's connected to two factors.

So that's really all that's going on here.

But if we do this and take this Bethe approximation to the free energy, now we can put the whole thing on a graph.

Because we have free energy terms for every node, and we have entropy terms for every edge.

that means now i can take my free energy functional and i can distribute it all over my graph and i can work with everything locally because if i'm interested in updating z here for instance check down here z appears here q of x and z it appears here q of y and z and then has its own marginal so basically like if the graph were longer i can

Throw away everything else.

Imagine we have an L variable here, for instance, connected to Y. That doesn't influence Z in the slightest.

They're completely separate on the graph.

They've got a Y in between, sort of Markov blanketing everything off.

So I can take what would be large, unwieldy problems involving lots of variables and just turn them into lots of small, little, local free-energy minimization problems.

It's really nice because we can solve them locally and we don't have to deal with the whole thing.

We can just worry about all our little problems and we can string them together and get back reasonably good solutions to the thing we started with.

Right.

So that is sort of the main procedure for how we would put free energy on graphs.

I take the free energy, split it into terms for each node and each edge, and then subtract whatever's double counted.

It gives a betty-free energy, really, really nice.

The other thing this allows us to do, which is something that we go into more in depth in part two of the papers, is that we can do some variational calculus tricks to derive algorithms that minimize this constrained betty-free energy.

And that allows us to say, set up the functional formal Lagrangian and get, excuse me, belief propagation or variational message parsing or large propagation, all these different algorithms that we know and love just as like from a general method.

And the spoiler is that when we get to part two and we start to derive messages based on local generalized free energy,

We're just going to use the same trick, because as an engineer, I'm kind of a lazy person.

I don't want to remember 80 different algorithms.

I want to have one trick.

I want to do free anti-minimization.

And I want to do it by message passing.

And I want to have this method on lockdown because then my task is just to set up the right generative model and make sure that the inference problems are right.

And then I can use that to do my smoothing or control my robots or do my regression or classification or whatever kind of thing that I'm interested in.

Again, I only have to learn one tool, which is really nice.

All right.

So you are the only person on this call, Daniel, so I'm going to be asking you, what's missing from this picture here of this graph?

If you think about your free energy functional, what's missing?


SPEAKER_00:
Art, hands, full, the list goes on and on, doesn't it?


SPEAKER_01:
There's not a lot of humanity in these graphs.

This is pure engineering.

The thing that this graph represents really well is the generative model.

You can write your p really, really well.

You can't really write your q. No q here.

This guy here.

Exactly.

This guy here.

which is the other sort of half of the picture.

Think about your free energy functional Q over P. You have a Q and you have a P, but we can only write one of them down.

The other half of the picture, the thing that actually specifies our inference problem, isn't really on this graph.

So if I want to write this on my graph, I want to make sure that my graph is accurate representation

inference problem.

I don't have to go and work out some equations or read through a paragraph of text to figure out what's going on.

How do I do that?

And this is where we start in part one of the two papers.

So one way you can think of defining your Q is that you can think of putting constraints on it.

It has to factorize in this way, and it has to have this functional form, and these things have to normalize.

There's a whole set of mechanics that we can get into, but I haven't planned to, for how these can work.

Adding this to your factor graph effectively allows you to specify the inference problem because

write out the full functional with all the constraints and everything, and minimizing that is going to give you the solution to the problem that you're interested in.

Okay, so have a generic graph, and we don't really have a way to put q on it.

Write p, write a model, everything's great, but I can't really write q.

I only have arrows, I have squares, and I have lines.

Those are the only things that I'm allowed to work with.

So to write Q, we need to introduce another piece of notation.

And the piece that we've chosen is this little guy, this little bead, a little circle.

And so I'll put variational marginal here in air quotes just to say this represents some entry in Q.

So there's going to be one of these for every node because we're using this best-thee approximation where everything gets distributed over the graph.

One for every node and one for every edge.

Because if you remember, we had terms that involved marginals around nodes.

In the model with x, y, and z, we had one for x and z and for y and z. And we're going to have little beads

for every edge marginal, one for x, one for y, and one for z, because these are the things that we need to compute these double counting terms.

So if we take this generic graph from here, and let's just add in beads that denote all the little parts of Q that we want, we're going to be left with something that looks like this.

So again, what this is saying is I have a marginal here around this node, this little guy, one on this edge, this little guy, and so on and so forth.

And this just repeats for every node and edge on my graph.

I want to be really explicit about it.

Towards the end of part two, we do a compression step because this gets unwieldy for large graphs.

But this is sort of the idea.


SPEAKER_00:
Clarifying question here, Magnus.

What values do the beads and or nodes and edges take on?

Like we see the structural topological layout and then is each bead going to be like taking on a number or is each bead taking on a variable that doesn't have to be simply a number?


SPEAKER_01:
So each bead here is going to represent a posterior belief.

So these are ways to think about it.

There's going to be an entry in Q. So if you go back to this model here, for instance, we would have a B that represents QZ that sits here.

So that would be this term, which could, for instance, be like a categorical or a Gaussian or a gamma or what have you, dependent on what falls out of inference procedure.

We have the same thing here.

We would have the same thing around here again.

joint of x and z, for instance, could be like a joint Gaussian.

But these are going to be probability distributions most of the time.


SPEAKER_00:
OK.

So beads take on the semantics of the node or the edge that they're overlaid on.

And the beads give us a little bit of a space between p and q, quite literally, because it allows us to have this parallel

Q bead construction that inherits the structure and the relationships of the generative model drawn as a factor graph.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

And that's because we start by factorizing our Q over the graph.

We split it into these nodes and edge-specific posterior marginal beliefs.

That follows from the approximation, like the Betty thing we did initially.

So that's where the structure sort of follows from.

That's why we can put this across the graphs, because we started by saying, well, I'm going to distribute my free energy over my graph, and that's going to be my starting point.

So then once we get into actually writing out the free energy, it would only consist of terms that are local to bits and pieces on the graph.

I don't know who asked that question, but that's a good one.

And again, I encourage people to interrupt me.

If there are any more questions, let's just hit me now.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll be watching the live chat, but yeah, thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, excellent.

Right, so the cool things about having these beads explicitly represented is that now we can start to do stuff to them.

Like, for instance, we can start to factorize things in different ways.

We can start to talk about, well, should Q be forced to have a particular form?

Like, should we force it to be a Gaussian, for instance?

And that's sort of a lot of the meat of the Part 1 paper is just showing different ways you can do this if you want to write out, again, Q as well in your graph.

Because if you have P and you have Q with the constraints,

That tells you everything you need to know about the inference problem that you're trying to solve.

That's the important part.

Because now, instead of having to write out stuff, text and equations, you can literally draw your inference problem as a picture.

And to me, one of the most intuitive and sort of most practical set of moves we do to queue is that we mean field factorize things.

That mean field just means we say, well, I have my,

joint Q, or we'll say here, X, Y, Z, and V. And I'm just going to set it to be equal to the product of all the individual margins.

So I turn this thing, joined to our four variables, into this thing, the product of four individual margins.

That's literally all it is.

And I want to represent that graphically.

That means I take one bead for one Q, just a single one here.

And I just split it into four bits, one for each queue.

Because now it's really, to me at least, it's really easy to see that I have four different things going on.

Otherwise, all the same rules apply.

We stay inside the node because this is the node marginal, four connected variables.

So these stay inside the node.

And yeah, that's one thing we could do.

But a full mean field in this way is also a bit aggressive sometimes.

Maybe you don't want to factorize everything independently.

Maybe you want to retain some joint structure in your marginals, which you can do.

If you do that, then you end up doing structured mean field, which I have two examples of here.

So this is the same node that we had earlier.

one giant Q joined over all the variables, then I can, for instance, split it into two sets of two.

I have a joint of X and Y, and I have a joint of Z and V. So that would be a joint of X and Y, and a joint over Z and V. The trick is that the edges that represent the variables, they protrude through the node border, and on that edge, we put the Q inside the node.

Does this make sense?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'll just restate it because I think it's one of the key contributions of the graphical notation.

So let's just say we were going to be drawing four variables, like rolling for die.

one way to analyze that statistically is treat all of them as being drawn like all at once from a four-dimensional distribution that's unfactorized and another extreme approach aggressive approach would be treat them as statistically independent or fully factorized and so that was what was shown on the previous slide and now also there's nuance where you can say actually i think two of the die have a a loose

tether so i want to infer the joint distribution of these two but leave these two independent so now we can see

and clarify articulate all of the space between unfactorized and mean field factorized and then we can generate different graphs and asks like well which structural partitioning has what kind of computational or runtime complexity what kind of accuracy so then you can engage in model selection across these different partitionings

However, seeing them all visually, as opposed to analytically, usually people are forced to just represent either the unfactorized or the fully factorized, because if you try to represent things analytically with all these partial factorizations on a large graph, it gets very unwieldy.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's beautifully put.

The idea is that we can treat some things as being joint and some things as being independent.

in Q. So the underlying generative model here is going to be the same.

It's just how do we factorize our belief we want to do inference.

That was beautiful, Bud.

Right.

That is one thing we can do once we have an explicit representation for Q. We can draw the beads that correspond to the structure in our

But we can also put stuff inside the beads.

I have an empty circle.

Same way I can write something inside a node on my factor graph, I can write something inside my bead.

So what happens when we do that is that we enforce different form constraints on Q. Here, I just picked one.

where I'm saying, well, the Q on this edge has to be a delta distribution.

That basically means that when I do inference, I'm doing the map estimate, the arc max of the variable on this edge.

And again, if you go through a bunch of derivations, you'll find out that that's what falls out from here.

So that means that now if I want to say,

map estimate over my actions, if I have an agent, I can put that into my graph.

I don't have to write somewhere in my paragraph text, oh, and then we do this kind of thing, and we factor this way, and then we take the map estimate.

You'll know at a glance, just from looking at the graph, that this particular variable on this particular edge has this functional form, and therefore it has to be a map estimate.

You could do this with other things as well.

You could say for it to be Gaussian or Wishyard or something else if you wanted.

But this idea of using deltas is probably the most common that I know of.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is also very nice and very consolidating.

The delta distribution is just a spike at one location.

And so it's basically a single data point or a value.

So it's like a distribution that's kind of like a distribution as a handle on a data point.

So the delta constraint is basically passing one data point rather than a full distribution through.


SPEAKER_01:
It's actually a little, there's a little subtlety here.

Because you're completely right that if you have a delta distributed variable centered at some point, that's a way you can enter data.

But that also means you need to fix the position of the delta distributed variable, which we do by calling it black.

This is how we represent data.

Otherwise, the position of a delta spike becomes a thing you can optimize.

And that's why it becomes a map estimate, because it is still a point, but you can put the point in the best possible place, which ends up being the map.

So you're completely right.

The form of the data point will also be a delta.

But then you also have to fix where this delta is positioned.

To distinguish between the two, we do data points, data constraints as filled black nodes, and delta constraints, i.e.

map estimates, as these unfilled nodes.

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Free delta versus a fixed delta.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, exactly.

It's like saying you have to be only here.

Or you have to be a point, but you can put the point wherever you want.


SPEAKER_02:
All right.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry about that.

Okay, so question.

And once again, it's going to be on you, Daniel.

Now we can put free energy on graphs, and we can write out Q, we can write out the entire inference problem, including constraints.

So we're almost there.

What is the thing that we're still missing if we want to do active inference on graphs?

We want to go back to the original question, put the whole thing on a graph.

What are we missing?


SPEAKER_00:
The environment?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's one thing.

Usually we would blanket that off from our model, so that would live somewhere on the outside of our graph.

But you're right, there would be somewhere that we would have to interface with an environment.

But just in terms of the functionals that we want to optimize, there's still something missing.


SPEAKER_00:
Expected free energy or anything prospective.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

That's the whole deal.

We've only been talking about variational free energy so far, and you can get really, really far with that.

But one of the core things that we want out of active inference is we want to do planning.

We want this information-seeking, all this good stuff that we started with, the curiosity and the interest in the world around you.

So how do we put that on a graph?

And that's the next thing.

Now we're going to look at how do we put this type of planning epistemic functional on a graph.

And to do that, we're going to look a little bit at how the EFE actually works.

So usually we denote an EFE by g, right?

That's like the common notation.

And we write that as a function of a policy.

So we write pi, or in this case, I use u for my control variables.

So I have u from some time step t up until some planning horizon capital T. So that means if I want to plan two steps in the future, capital T would be 2, and I would have actions at either time step.

Does that make sense?

Awesome.

All right.

So the first thing we're going to say is, well, we compute that by taking a sum of the free energy at every time step.

That's the standard way to do it.

If we expand that a little bit, we get a sum over risk term and an ambiguity term, just like we all know and love.

But the key part, the one that usually doesn't get as much attention,

this part here.

Usually we like to start here.

Again, the sum.

Because the sum tells us something important about the expected free energy.

It tells us that this is the sum of a bunch of independent terms.

So this function actually factorizes.

If you think about it, it means we have one term for each time step.

Or if you write out the full graph, it would be one, you know,

node on our graph.

And to compute the whole thing that we're interested in, we just sum them up.

So the actual objective factorizes over the graph.

And that's kind of neat.

Because it means that when we look at the way this is constructed, like from the get go, there's already sort of a hint of how we can go about putting it on a graph.

And what we would need to do

is figure out, well, if I want to do this around one node on my graph, how do I do it?

And do it in a way that everything is consistent and we recover all these nice objectives and everything that we have already seen before.

So how do we do that?

How do we make a functional that's local to a node that inherits all the nice properties that we want out of an expected or, spoiler alert, a generalized free energy?

And we're just going to go through and construct it.

So we're going to start, because we're working under the free energy principle, with a variation of free energy.

It's going to be our first term here.

And it's going to be for some node that's connected to two variables, x and z. And then we also know that a lot of the nice epistemic

drive that we see in active inference agents, it follows from some information gain term.

So we're simply going to bolt on an information gain term that's local to our node.

And if we do that, we can do something quite interesting then.

So are you up for going through the derivation?

Yeah.

Second.

All right.

So the first thing we're going to do is we're just going to pull everything into the same integral.

So both of these guys integrating over Q of X and Z, Q of X and Z. That means we can put them together.

Just do it once.

Then we look inside these brackets and go, wait a minute.

We've got two logs.

We can pull all this inside the log.

I think nothing fancy here.

But then we look at this guy and we go, wait, I have a Q either side of my line.

These two guys are going to cancel.

Divide something by itself doesn't really give you much.

And if we do that, then we're actually left with the generalized free energy local to a node similar to what Thomas Parr and Friston introduced in this 2019 paper.

So that means if we take our free energy around a node, which we can do because we've already gone through all the rationale for why that's a good idea, and we bolt on a negative information gain term, we actually end up with the same functional that was already proposed in this amazing paper like four years ago.

That's kind of nice.


SPEAKER_00:
Could you maybe express what is it about the negative information gain that's doing the epistemic work?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

So the way I like to think of it, first of all, it's negative because we're minimizing.

We really want to maximize information gain, but we're minimizing our free energy or EFE or whatever.

So we flip the sign.

The other thing is you can rewrite this into, say,

a marginal entropy over your states, your z, minus a conditional entropy over z after you've seen x. So what does this mean?

It means one of these terms is going to encode how much uncertainty is in your latent variable, your latent state z, before you do anything.

How uncertain are you right now about something?

And what you subtract from that is the uncertainty after you've seen some observation peaks.

And the bigger that difference, the larger your uncertainty before getting an observation and the lower it is after, the higher the information gain.

So that's how I like to think of why information gain sort of gives us this exploration thing.

Because when we allow our agents to pick out observations, we allow them to pick what we should condition on when we calculate the information gain.

And we tell them this is what you're supposed to optimize.

They're going to go look for the places in the world where they are most uncertain about what's happening and where they predict that if they observe something, they're going to be the most certain.


SPEAKER_00:
And how would you contrast this expression with the decomposition of expected free energy as pragmatic value plus epistemic value?


SPEAKER_01:
So that's the beauty of it, right?

I don't actually have to, because what Par and Friston also showed in this paper is that if I do this functional on the same POMDP model that we use for everything else, it actually evaluates to the exact same thing as the expected free energy.

So for all intents and purposes, it is exactly the same.

So all the iterations about EFE are going to map.


SPEAKER_00:
Maybe this is looking a little ahead, but do you foresee that generalized free energy will come to rule them all and that we won't talk so much about VFE and EFE?

Or do you see those as still holding down important semantic space?


SPEAKER_01:
I think it's an open question.

I'm not confident enough in...

any of this, and especially not about the future, to know how things are going to turn out.

But I do know that if I take this maneuver, if I have a variational free energy, which I can use to recover something like KL control, and I bolt on an information gain term that gives me this exploration that I like, I can end up with a generalized free energy.

And if you go through the proofs in part two,

We also see that this makes it easier to derive messages compared to unexpected free energy, because we tried the expected free energy as well, and it didn't really work.

So for this particular application, the generalized free energy works better.

As for any sort of ontological status, I'm just going to be an engineer.


SPEAKER_00:
what about explicitly pragmatic aspects of future time steps so if we have the vfe embodying the real-time pragmatism and then we have an explicit future-oriented epistemic component where would we find that kind of classical efe flavor of pragmatic value of future states as well


SPEAKER_01:
Can I come back to that in a few slides?

Oh, of course.

Because I actually have an example of what this construction gives you if you want to add in, say, a goal prior.

So you want to add C vector in the standard nomenclature, or basically a prior over future desired observations.

And that's the thing that's going to power the whole goal-directed behavior in the experiments as well.

The spoiler version is that this ends up

If you work through it and you take this node construction that we came up with, and you work out the corresponding energy term that you would use to calculate, say, a battery-free energy, you end up with the exact expression that you usually get for expected free energy.

So you can actually recover one-to-one the standard 2015 algorithm by writing this in your graph and doing these manipulations, and then doing it in a particular way.

you will get the exact same thing back.

But yeah, hold on to that thought, because in a minute or two, we'll get back to it.

OK, yeah, this is another thing.

So there are a couple of ways to go through this.

And to make it exactly like the thing we find in

say, classical active inference papers, we need to do this kind of substitution here.

So here, I've basically gotten to the same results, but in a different way, where I mean field factorize.

And then we exchange this Q for this P. That's important.

Usually, if you read an active inference paper, you see this P of O and S and Q of S

this joint here denoted with something like Q with a tilde above it.

And it just means we substitute in this particular part of our generative model.

If you go through the standard tutorial type things, this would be substituting in your A matrix, for instance.

But we call this move a P substitution because we're literally substituting a P for a Q. And we do this not because we need to in order to derive all the messages that we need to be able to do this in a nice distributed way and get to our end goal of putting active inference on graphs.

So I just want to introduce this move here because it's the last bit of notation that we're going to need.

to cover basically everything that's in part one.

And the way we write this is literally, if q's are circles and p's are squares, we are going to swap a circle for a square.

So we take the little bead here that represents a q, and we swap it for a square.

And this square means

In the expectation of your node-local free energy, substitute p of this variable conditioned on everything else that's connected.

So you can see if we have a mean field factorization here, qx, qc, qx, qc, and then we do a p substitution, we are left with the same generalized free energy function, just a different way of getting there.

Does this make sense?

Awesome.

And that is the main meat of what we introduced in part one.

So to recap everything we've done so far, because we're moving at quite a high pace, we've taken our free energy and we put it on graphs.

We did that by using a Bethy approximation, so we have a Bethy free energy.

Then we realized that we can't write down everything that we need to.

in order to specify everything in our inference problem.

We can't write down Q, and we can't write down our constraints on Q. So we came up with CFFG constraint for any style factor graph notation to write down the entire inference problem graphically.

Then we figured out that the EFE factorizes, which is great, because that means we can also treat it as something that's local on our graph.

And if we take node-local free energy, the kind of thing that would give us KL control if we did it everywhere, and we bolt on an information gain term, we recover something that looks an awful lot like generalized free energy that Friston and Parr derived in 2019, which numerically ends up evaluating to the same thing as the expected free energy.

So we have a version of expect...

for these pump-DP models, I should say.

So we have a version of the expected free energy that is also distributed over our graph.


SPEAKER_00:
Is there anything that is relevant to mention about discrete versus continuous time models?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So we haven't done any of this work on continuous time models, like these large generalized coordinate filters with Laplace approximations.

We haven't done that here.

because the base representation we're using is a graph.

So when we want to do planning, we literally have to write out explicit time steps for the future.

You could probably do something like this for the whole continuous time active inference as well.

But that's a whole other can of worms that we haven't dug into.

Yeah.

So far, this is only something that's been worked out for the discrete time case.

It doesn't have to be discrete state spaces.

You could work this out because we get the general form of all the messages.

You could work this out for continuous variables if you want.

But yeah, continuous time is not something we've done yet.

I mean, if there are any other questions, I think this is a good time to pause because we're going to get into the next sort of meaty section in a minute.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll ask one question from live chat.

Upcycle Club wrote, how can synthetic active inference agents be integrated with other intelligence paradigms, such as deep learning or evolutionary algorithms?


SPEAKER_01:
So beauty of how this ends up working is this becomes another message-passing algorithm.

Not even another message, but it becomes literally one local message out of the nodes that we do these operations to.

Everything else is going to function like box standard, VMP, or belief propagation, some product, sort of classical machine learning tools.

And so anyway, you can usually combine your probabilistic graphical model with a deep neural net.

You could have a deep neural net powering your transition dynamics, for instance, if you wanted.

And that wouldn't change anything here, because we're still only doing stuff locally on a graph.

So if we still actually have a graph here that shows something.

I'm just going to go back to one of the early graphs, because this is probably the easiest way to illustrate.

Yeah, this guy here.

Let's say that we wanted to do all these operations around this node here, where we have a latent z, and we connect to some outside world that we call x, where we get all observations.

All the operations are going to happen inside the blue circle.

Everything that we do is actually only going to affect the variables that are connected to this node and around this node.

So everything else, everything that's over here is going to work exactly the same way as with any other message passing algorithm.

So you could hook this up to, say, a deep neural network if you've trained it right and use that to, say, be a node function somewhere.

Or I suppose you could also use it with evolutionary optimizers.

It's not something I've seen done a lot, but it's a cool idea.

And I don't see any reason in principle why it shouldn't work.

Because what we're doing really is just changing the objective functional around one of our nodes a little bit.

Does that answer your question, Upcycle?


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Continue.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Let me get back to where we were.

Whoops.

Yeah, right.

OK.

So this is where we're going to look at how we add in something like a goal prior, because we had this a little while ago.

How do you get your goals and your constraints and your objectives, your desires and your agent's desires in life, as it were, into the model?

How do we do that?

And the way we came up with doing it is that we defined this composite node.

So this is going to be, again, hold onto your butts.

This looks nastier than it is.

Really what we're saying is we have a box on our factor graph.

Because again, all we're allowed to do are lines and boxes and arrows and beads.

But we have a box on our factor graph.

And inside this box, there's going to be two other boxes.

We're going to have this guy here called p, which could, for instance, represent a likelihood model.

And we're going to have this guy here called p tilde, which is going to represent our goal.

And that means when we go through the motions of defining Q around this composite node with all our modifications and everything, we end up with a model like a p that is not normalized.

It's going to be p of x and z.

p of x given z is going to be this node, times p tilde of x given w, in this case, if it has any parameters.

What it basically means is that we can add in a goal prior to our model at the cost of it being not normalized.

It turns out that this is not really a problem that's not normalized.

But the basic idea is that if we want to add in goals,

What we do is simply we wrap our goals and our likelihood into one box on our graph, and we just go through the motions.

You just sit down, you calculate, and you work through all the little bits and pieces, and you push all your symbols around.

And at the end, the result you're going to get is going to be something useful.

So this is the way to adding goals.

You simply just bolt on an extra factor to your model that encodes your goals.


SPEAKER_00:
i don't i don't know if this is helpful but but check me on this it's almost in like a racing game when the high score has the ghost that is leading the pack so we have like the goal prior it's kind of like the ghost in the midst and then there's all the actual p but then there's the shadow and perfect alignment

or perfect fulfillment is when the actual, there's no space between the actual and the preference.

So in the textbook analytical representation, that would be like P of O conditioned on C. Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
So we have the same, it's just P of X conditioned on W. Yeah.

But it, it works exactly the same.

Like if you, I think that's also what we called in the experiments.

If you go through it, it ends up just being the normal C vector.

But you're right.

You're completely right.

If you're doing a racing game and you have, say, an idealized perfect run as your ghost, that would be going in here.

And you would sort of map out the whole trajectory of where the ghost is at all the time points that you want to plan over.

And then from here, from the top, from the Zs, is going to be your attempt to recreate the perfect run.

Yeah, which is actually an interesting idea.

You could have some kind of expert trajectory, define your goals, and then use that to learn the parameters of your model that do your planning from that.

That would actually be a cool thing to try and do.

But yeah, I think so far the intuitions are on point.

All right, so I'm just going to keep going, I think.

Because one of the questions that came up during the .zero live stream was pull up a lemma and be like, what does this mean?

Pull up a lemma and be like, what does this mean?

And so on and so forth.

So taking the liberty of just putting on this graph what all the lemmas mean, because then we can talk about what they mean.

And if you want to go through the nitty-gritty derivations, they're there in the paper.

Because, again, as I mentioned earlier, I'm a lazy engineer.

I really only have one trick.

That is, I can write out my free energy, and I can solve for stationary points, and that gives me message passing algorithms.

And that's all I do.

So if you look at this graph here, this node, there's basically three things that we need to solve for.

We need to solve for x.

What's the stationary point here, we need to solve for Z and by symmetry that also applies to Theta if this likelihood node has any parameters, for instance.

So you could think of this as being like a latent state and an A matrix with Dirichlet prior.

And we need to solve for W, which is the parameters of our expert run, like our C vector in the standard nomenclature.

And if this node has any parameters, like whatever they may be.

Usually, the standard form, it doesn't.

But you could.

So really, there's three things we need to solve for.

This guy in the middle, stuff going out of this node, and stuff going out of this node.

And it just so happens that there's three lemmas in the paper.

There's one that solves for this guy.

How do we update our predicted observation?

which ends up coinciding with how we would usually do it if we're computing EFE, which is nice.

There's another lemma that says, what should the backwards message towards our state be?

And this is going to be the important one.

This is what allows us to do a lot of the really cool stuff.

Because this basically says, if I'm optimizing GFE, EFE, and I want to reason backwards from the best possible

sort of outcome in terms of balancing all epistemics and everything.

What should that be?

That's basically what comes out here.

And we have a third lemma that deals with the stuff coming out the other way.

Let's say you want to update your goals.

Let's say when you drive your run, the ghost sort of reacts to what you do.

That's kind of the thing that would be coming out here.

And then we have two theorems that show that the messages coming out here and here, if you iterate them, the stationary points can actually be found by fixed point iteration schemes, i.e.

you can solve this by message parsing.

So to recap, the lemmas are what should these guys look like, and that's where you find the messages.

And the theorem states that if you do this,

you can actually solve your problem and find these stationary points by fixed point iterations.

And this is a little technical.

And if you want to get into it, I encourage you to go and read the paper.

But the point being, I'm still a laser engineer.

I still only have one tool.

I can only solve for stationary points of my free energy on my graph.

And if I do that, I have three things to solve for.

And I have to make sure that if I iterate it, I also get something sensible out.

And that's what the three lemmas and the two theorems are about.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.

So factor graph, not just as telecommunications, message passing, infrastructure, but as research agenda and conveyance heuristic.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, because once you're in the space in this way of writing things graphically, you can write your problem graphically, and it's easy to see how two things are different.

And you can also write something where you don't know the solution yet.

If you don't know the solution, that's a research problem.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and the dashed lines, and then it's a great palette.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

I hope it's also going to end up being useful.

Because again, what I'm doing really here is that we're presenting tools.

We're building stuff for other people to hopefully use.

And the litmus test as to whether this is going to be actually practical for people who are interested in building active inference systems and reasoning about active inference systems

is whether the people that are interested in this actually end up using it.

Otherwise, it's a neat idea that just ends up living in a drawer.

So I have an open invitation to everyone.

If you're interested in using this kind of notation, I'll be happy to help you with your graphs because I think it would be a benefit if we can all agree on a unified way of specifying our problem.

And it should be one that is not just geared towards experts.

I should be able to write out all the equations and everything.

That should also be something for us.

But if you are interested in applying active inference, you should also have an easy sort of intuitive syntax for how to write down exactly what it is you're doing.

Because if you do that, then everyone knows, and then communication becomes easy, and writing out your algorithm becomes easy, and sort of making sure that everyone knows at all times what's going on.

become straightforward because you can literally read it all from the picture.

So again, an open invitation to anyone who's interested in this, hit me up.

I'll be happy to take a look at your stuff.


SPEAKER_00:
that's awesome i think one more piece i'll add that's a very prospective very pragmatic point to make and also i believe that there's a great opportunity for meta-analysis of literature and re-derivation of these kinds of graphs for the figures that we've seen over the last 15 years

and then that will make a lot of continuity because we can then bring the factor graph motifs from models that are widely discussed and kind of bring those into the next generation that's that's the hope and it's funny that you say that out of all things because if you look at what goes on the next slide that's actually what we do okay so this is a way of drawing um a standard


SPEAKER_01:
you know, annual 2015 active inference EFE evaluation as a constraint for a style factor graph.

So let's break this down and see what it does.

Because I've been talking for like an hour already, and I've been talking about nothing.

Most of what I've been talking about is what all these boxes and little bits and pieces mean.

So if we start at

very end, and I hope I'm pointing in the right direction.

I don't know how I'm mirrored in the screen, but otherwise it's that end.

One of the things we would use to define is a prior over where our agent starts, which we denote by a D vector.

That's the standard way of doing it.

So we want to add in a D vector.

We put this little square because there's a variable that's clamped in P. There's a parameter that we don't mess with.

You could update it, and you could indicate that in the graph.

But here we don't.

And we have this little guy.

That's because these two are going to be different.

We don't have a joint of D and Z. We just have a Z. We move on.

Now we have this node, which I've labeled with T. And T is for transition.

This indicates a discrete state transition, i.e.

a multiplication by a B matrix.

B matrix is what we find here.

So what this is saying is we have fixed an action at time t in order to move from z at time t to z at t plus 1.

It's just like a multiplication by a transition matrix.

Then we have this thing.

This is an equality node.

Why do we have an equality in the middle of everything?

And that's because we're using edges to represent variables.

And an edge is a line.

I can only connect an edge to two things.

So if I need my variable to connect to more than two things, I need to create copies of my variable.

If I want to create copies, that's the same as saying I have two things, three things, and they're all going to be the same.

They're all going to be equal.

So this equality node says this edge here

And this edge here and this edge here are all going to be the same.

That's all it does.

And we can keep going here from z at t plus 1 with a new action, new transition, z at t plus 2, and so on and so forth.

That basically just applies these transition matrices.

But the really interesting part is happening down here around what would be a likelihood node.

Again, we have this multiplication by a matrix.

In this case, it's going to be a likelihood, our A matrix.

We have this composite node construction where we have a goal prior, which is categorical, parameterized by Z. And we have our observations here.

So this construction here is what, oh yeah, we have this P substitution.

We have these two guys factorizing separately.

So we have all the constructions necessary to do our local GFE, which in this case equals the EFE.

We have our goal prior.

We have all the little ingredients and bits and pieces.

So how do we write, given that we have all this, the exact same algorithm as people were using in 2015?

We do that by adding in arrows.

Remember, I had arrows as the last thing way back when we started.

And errors, in this case, describe the schedule, i.e., which messages do you pass.

And you can follow these along and see that you're rolling forwards through time.

So this is like creating a rollout and saying, well, what would happen if I did that at this time?

Well, go here.

Then what would happen if I did that?

Go here, and so on and so forth.

So you get this forward roll.

as a function of a policy, i.e.

the series of matrices you fix up here.

And this composite node, the energy term of that node, ends up being exactly equal to one term of the EFE, GFE, in this model that we already established factorizes over time.

So you roll this thing out, do your forge rollout, take all the energy terms of these composite nodes and sum them up.

And that gives you back the exact algorithm that's used to evaluate EFE in like the very original first types of peoples.


SPEAKER_00:
big so just to make a clarifying point and then a question so for comparison to the base graph and the 2022 textbook people might want to check out figure 4.3 or figure 7.3 so here we have already clamped b so here we're just evaluating one policy because we see b as a black square


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Because if we go by the standard version, we need to evaluate the EFE as a function of a policy.

So we put in a policy, we do this rollout, and we read off our EFE number.

And then we take the softmax of all EFEs, and it gives us a distribution over policies that we can select from.

And it's this rollout thing that makes the scaling hard, because every time you add a new step, you have to go through all your

possible actions and the search tree branches and you get into all these things that people are trying to solve in a whole host of different interesting ways.

But you're right.

We're treating policy as something that's fixed because we're evaluating EFE as a function of a policy.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And then, of course, you iterate over your affordances or your policies to calculate EFE for each and then you get policy posterior and then you can do what you will with the posterior.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So then it basically becomes like a model comparison problem.

Given this policy, this rollout, and I get this energy terms, which one is the best?

But it's funny that you say that because one of the things that we also do now that we have backwards messages is that we don't have to fix the policy.

Think about it.

All the stuff we're doing happens down here.

in the little sort of dashed box.

But the policy lives up here.

We've already established that if everything is local in the graph, I can do whatever I want down here.

It's not really going to impact anything up here.

So if I now turn these black squares into random variables, I can still do inference.

And I can still do inference in a way that gives me back a policy.

However, now this policy is going to be one that optimizes GFE or EFE locally on these nodes.

Otherwise, everything is going to work as if you were doing a forwards-backwards KL control type thing.

And what we need to do then is we need to take all our candidate matrices and we need to put them into this mixture model.

And that basically says,

If I have my indicator variable, the indicator variable picks out one of the transitions.

And then you want to infer the posterior of your indicator variable such that it becomes a good approximation for the probability of selecting each particular matrix at this point in time.

That did not come out clear.


SPEAKER_00:
Did that make sense at all?

Yeah, maybe explain that in the context of why it's called TM.


SPEAKER_01:
It's TM for transition mixture.

So it's like you have, instead of saying I do either action one, action two, or action three, I sort of do a mixture of all of them, and then I weigh them according to where I should be going, which is going to be informed by these composite nodes down here.

The composite nodes tell you where should you be going if you're looking for the stationary points of your generalized free energy.

And these nodes are going to say, all right, if this is where I'm going, this is the transitions I should take with this and this and this probability.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, maybe just to clarify and emphasize that, what is the policy selection mechanism in direct policy inference?


SPEAKER_01:
So that's actually one of the things that I really like about this way of doing it.

You can pick whatever you want.

So we do two here in the paper.

One, which is this one, the one that I have on screen here, where you just get a posterior out over your policy.

And you can read off the posterior reactions at every time step.

And then it's up to you whether you want to sample, what you want to do with it.

But what we also show is that you can add these Delta constraints on these edges here that are labeled U. And if you do, what you get back is a series of map estimates over your policy.

The trick being that is now something you write as part of your inference problem.

So as for the policy selection mechanism, what I'm going to say is we should, in my opinion, we should be patient about it.

So if we get a distribution over possible policies, that's the way it should be.

And then you can do what you think is right with your distribution.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is a very nice point that the outcome of the EFE iterated across policies is a distribution on policy.

And so then you can simply choose

the best one you could choose the worst one you could cut the deck in the middle you could do any number of then secondary policy selection policies and one that feels natural and makes sense is just to take the first order interpretation of the distribution and then sample directly from that distribution you could do that or i think a very common thing to do is just say the ocmax are you the best policy


SPEAKER_01:
at all time steps.

But yeah, either one works.

The point being really that, as you said, instead of doing this compute EFE and then construct a distribution over policies, you just infer the distribution over policies directly as part of your inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and this actually allows us to do something we don't really explore too much in the paper, but which I'm hoping to explore in the future, which is that we get rid of this combinatorial explosion.

Because if you look at the kind of things you would have to do, there's a lot of messages going on here.

But basically, what you should take away is that everything goes back and forth on every edge.

And when these two guys collide, they give you the posterior distribution over your policy.

Or over the action of that timestamp is what it's to say.

But because we're reasoning backwards and we don't have to do this for every policy, we scale linearly in time rather than getting this large explosion.

Like with the caveat that there's some iterations going on and there's some root finding to get these red messages flowing the right way.

There's some extra computation here and there, but

This whole procedure pretty much scales linearly in the planning horizon rather than this giant exponential explosion, which to me is really nice because it hints at us being able to do something that's quite a lot bigger than what we have done so far.


SPEAKER_00:
Right here on this slide, I'll ask a question from Ryan, who wrote, are we guaranteed convergence after a single forwards-backwards sweep of the messages?


SPEAKER_01:
No.

So this is an iterative procedure.

This function is closer to what you would get with a variational message parsing thing, where you have to iterate it a couple of times.

So no, we're not guaranteeing conversions after a single forward-backward pass.

Usually, that probably wouldn't be enough.

You would have to do two or three or something.


SPEAKER_00:
And those iterations, you use some other heuristic, like how much improvement you're getting?

And is that a monotonic iteration?

Or do you ever?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
So there's some work still to be done on this.

So I can't claim 100% mathematical assurity.

But this seems to function a lot like a variational message passing algorithm, where things just nicely decrease as you do more iterations.

So therefore, more iterations is always better.

But it's going to hit a convergence thing at some point, where the gain of running more iterations is going to be marginal.

That's how I'm confident this actually works.

But because we changed the functional, I'm not sure whether all the convergence proofs applies.

I can't be 100%.

I'm going to put it at like 98.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

You'll never iterate worse.

You ratchet and improve.

But I guess my question is, could there be drop-offs where you're monotonically improving and then you enter a new regime of another improvement phase?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I don't see why not.

I haven't seen it, but the models we've tested this on have been variations of the T-Maze.

They've been quite small.

So there's still work to be doing, actually exploring exactly how this algorithm behaves.

Not from a theoretical, also from a theoretical standpoint, but also just from the practical.

What actually happens if you start running things and you build out models and getting a feel for how these things work.

Because doing it in this way is not something that has been done before, at least to my knowledge.

Again, I'm going to hedge my bets a little bit here.

All right.

Are there any more questions?


SPEAKER_00:
No.

Good to carry on.


SPEAKER_01:
Keep going, right?

Because this is what you actually get out if you run this for a couple of iterations on the T maze.

So the teammates environment is the classic one that we all know and love, where we have a mouse, our agent that starts in this position in the middle here.

And it's looking for a piece of cheese.

Piece of cheese is going to be either in this left arm or in this right arm.

However, at the back here is a queue.

And the queue tells the mouse whether the cheese is to the left or to the right.

So the optimal thing to do

is to go and visit the queue first and then go check out the correct arm.

And that's sort of the hello world of this epistemic drive that we like with active inference.

Because an active inference agent is going to go and collect information and then go either left or right.

Whereas if you just do some greedy, fully goal-directed agent, it's just kind of gambling going either left or right and hoping for the best.

So if we do this sort of direct policy inference with this form Lagrangian derived station in point Lagrangian active inference type thing, these are the posteriors we're going to get out.

And you see that the agent does actually, in planning only, replicate this nice policy that we want, where it first goes and samples the queue.

And afterwards, it's indifferent as to which side to go to, but it knows it's going to go to either of the two sides.

And this is something that's done only using planning.

So the agent doesn't actually get to execute anything and go and actually sample the queue and update its beliefs.

In the absence of all that, it can still figure out that, hey, maybe I should go and check the queue first before I go find my snack.


SPEAKER_00:
My Q is telling me to find the Q. Yeah, I mean, pretty much.


SPEAKER_01:
So again, when I saw these results, I was very, very happy because this shows that all the sort of heavy duty theoretical work actually paid off and yields something that replicates the standard experiments

sort of is the baseline that we should be able to do all right what are the next thing we got right yeah um so in part two we also extend this to do parameter learning um and what that means is we want to learn the the a matrix the likelihood matrix and we do that by replicating the standards uh sort of ev type um

algorithm where we inference all of this model, then we compare free energy of the model, which includes these EFE terms for each policy.

So we can sort of get the same type of thing with the policy evaluation and evaluating expected free energy and all the things that we like.

And the task is whether we can figure out, like we can solve the task and we can learn a matrix, what is the actual mapping, the likelihood mapping that we want.

And that's interesting because the first experiment relied mainly on this message, the one flowing out back towards the state, whereas this one also has a component of this message flowing towards a likelihood matrix.

Ideally, this should correspond to something like a novelty term in the classical or Schartenbeck formulation, which should drive our agent to go and explore its environment and figure out what's up.

And then as we iterate,

yeah, as we iterate this back and forth a couple of times, we should learn the mapping.

And we see very nicely that free energy decreases the minimum as we learn.

It gets lower and lower and lower, except for these spikes here.

This is when the agent actually gets its observation when it

get its rewards, its piece of cheese.

That's because there is some noise in the reward probabilities.

It's not 100%.

So you can see every time it predicts a win but it gets a loss, the free energy spikes, which is consistent.

If your model predicts something and you get something else, your free energy is going to be off.

And if we compare to an agent that does just box-standard bethe-free energy, a variational free energy under the bethe approximation, we can see that nothing really happens and it loses all the trials because it's greedy.

It doesn't go and gather the information at the queue.

Furthermore, if we look at the actual matrices that gets learned, these are the different

The location is the origin, the left arm, the right arm, and the Q location.

And this row here indicates whether the Q says go left, Q says go right.

And this is whether the reward is on the left or the right.

And this is whether you get a reward or whether you get no reward.

So basically what we can see is that if the Q is on the right, we also predict that we're going to get the reward on the right.

get a reward on the right, we predict the reward is on the right, and so on and so forth.

We get a reward on the left, it's on the left.

Basically, what this shows is that we are able to accurately learn the mapping in the environment, which is kind of nice because, again, this means that our agent will go and figure things out and actually learn how to navigate an environment that it doesn't know.

Okay, so this is the final slide that I have, and I've been talking forever now.

And the main sort of take-home message that I like to leave everyone with is we can put active inference on graphs.

We can do that, and that is awesome.

And once we do, we are left with sort of this Lego block approach to constructing our active inference agents.

Because everything is local on the graph, I can do my local manipulation to get my EFE and my GFE down here.

And then I can build out whatever graph I want in all other directions.

I can have hierarchies.

I can have temporal depth.

I can do smoothing, filtering.

I can do control.

I can do any combinations of variables that I like.

As long as I can figure out the inference, it all works.

And we can get the classical things that we all know and love as special cases.

And we can solve inference on these using standard tools from belief propagation or variational message parsing, combined with these new messages that flow out of Nosed Adoptionized GFE.

So this gives us, at least in my mind,

a flexible way to construct these large, sprawling, freeform models, which in the end gets us the best of both worlds as we started with.

Got the epistemics, we get freeform models, and we have a recipe for doing efficient inference.

And that is everything I got.


SPEAKER_00:
Excellent.

Well, let's

have a little bit more conversation and kind of ask a few questions as we land the plane on the dot one.

And then next time in the dot two, we'll return with maybe a little code, a little bit of drawing and some, hopefully some more people on the stream.

Okay.

So what does synthetic mean to you?


SPEAKER_01:
In this case, it was sort of to underline that this is from an engineering point of

They notice I didn't really talk anything about brains or Bayesian mechanics or individuation and niche construction, all these other really, really interesting things that people are doing with active inference.

This is purely like, how do you build a system that does this?

So the synthetic came out of trying to say, well, this is us trying to build engineering tools for active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
very fascinating just in how you framed it there it made me think about the engineer of a bridge and on one hand they have colleagues in physics and metallurgy and gravity and the basic physical phenomena and then on the other hand they have colleagues who have bodies may care about the ergonomics the cultural components of the architecture and so it's like engineering

actually intermediates between, in this case, the Bayesian mechanics, and on the other hand, biological systems of interest for active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, you could say that, right?

Because this is just a way of doing active inference on graphs.

If you want to come along and be like, okay, I think I can use this to model something about the brain, or I think I can use this to model something about interpersonal relationships or whatever,

That's amazing.

That is awesome.

All the power to you.

But what you choose to do with the tools is different to the tools itself.

If you have a hammer, you can use it to carve out a beautiful sculpture.

You can use it to build a bridge.

But a good hammer is still going to be a good hammer.

And all we're doing here is building hammers.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Okay, another question.

You mentioned these sprawling graphs.

So how could you connect what is enabled with this work to ecosystems of shared intelligence and maybe even like the Internet of Things like IoT?

So that's one of the things that...


SPEAKER_01:
that I would like to see happen at some point.

Because if you have the representation of the inference problem as being distributed over a graph, and you can do things asynchronously when you pass messages, you can run these nodes anywhere.

This is just an abstract thing.

So I can have, say, a drone flying around that runs its own generative model and sends messages back to some other thing.

that then sends messages back to some other thing that communicates with my phone and my fridge and my pacemaker.

But as long as all the messages are taken care of and all the local computations work, then effectively, it's going to be like just doing inference on a really, really big model.

So one of the things that we wanted to do with the designing ecosystems of intelligence paper

is also trying to push this idea that intelligence is something that does inference and reacts probably to its environment.

In nature, it's a distributed thing.

The whole of humanity is way more intelligent than I will ever be.

Many, many people are.

And we're trying to, as scientists, put stuff into this shared pool of knowledge.

But even the intelligence that I claim is inside my head is really made up of a network of neurons that are interacting and doing things together.

And each neuron is made up of a whole bunch of component parts and so on and so forth, or like ants doing interesting things when they swarm around to coordinate.

Most of the types of intelligence that we see in nature is actually distributed already.

And moving to this idea of distributed inference and distributed message passing on very, very large graphs that do things asynchronously is sort of our attempt at saying, well, if intelligence is inherently distributed and we can cast intelligence as this type of inference problem, we should build our architecture, we should build our intelligences in a way that matches this.

We should build them as big distributed systems.

And once they are big distributed systems, we should get all the, I mean, then we can use all these tools to figure out what all the local parts do and make sure that you don't have to write out a schematic for the whole system.

Just take care of everything locally around your little bit and all the communications.

And everybody does that, and we're good.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I heartily concur with the distributed intelligence.

And when I see this kind of engineering work, it's like,

idea that all intelligence is distributed it's not the end point it's not a hot take it's not where the discussion ends it's like the first rays of light of the discussion beginning and so that's why there's so much to do on on the formal side but obviously on the application side okay next questions from the chat walter asks

How straightforward is it to develop algorithms along this perspective?

Can I build an agent within a day?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, you can, because we put this in Rx and Fur so far.

It's not in the mainline branch, but the constructions, like the nodes that we used to do our experiments, are publicly available.

There's a repo at github.com slash bioslab slash live, L-A-I-F.

Jan Bogaert.

: Where you can find these things and the interface with rx infer the toolbox that's developed by his lab.

Jan Bogaert.

: And so yeah the tools are there, they need to be polished a little bit but they're there, you can build an agent in a day, if you know how to to work with rx infer otherwise it might take you to because it's been one work through the demos.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I mean, could you maybe go into a little more about what Bias Lab is doing with Julia and reactive message passing, Rx and Fur?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, of course.

So, caveat, there are people who are better at Rx and Fur than I am.

Dmitry Bagayev is the main architect behind it and is a beast of a programmer.

So the majority of the grunt work has been done by other really, really talented people in Bayer's lab.

So RxInfer is a toolbox for doing message passing-based inference, minimizing constraint, battery-free energy, and factor graphs.

And it does so by marrying message passing and reactive programming.

Reactive programming is the idea that instead of you

Actually, we can do this a little bit here.

So doing something like this, where I pre-specify a schedule, I write out all the messages that flow on my graph.

I can say, well, any node is just going to listen to all the incoming edges.

So if I can send a message, I will send a message.

If I can't send a message, I'll just wait for all the information to be available until I say something.

And if you do that, and you can do that in sort of a reactive way, that basically gives you a way to specify a problem as your inference problem with your constraints and your factor graph and everything, hook it up to a sensor in the ideal world, hook it up to a sensor.

And then whenever you get observations coming in, that will trigger your inference just when it happens.

And the sort of way that things flow on the graph will be data-driven rather than something that I as an engineer specify.

But again, it's something that I like because the less work I have to do, the easier it is for me to get stuff done.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, even as a non-Julia expert, I believe this is a massive step for active inference, even with message passing.

you're going to be in a situation if you can't use reactive message passing, where if you have two sensors of different frequency, you either choose to basically have to waste clock cycles calculating updates at a faster rate than the slower sensor or coarse grain or throw away samples from the faster sensor.

So having this kind of like just-in-time logistical information supply chain has very, very large

performance improvements with some or all of the same formal guarantees and it's going to be especially important if there's an ecosystem of shared intelligence where components are active at different times or have asynchronous or that kind of concurrency yeah in effect which is just basically real systems yeah exactly because you and i don't have like a set schedule and a set you know


SPEAKER_01:
way that inference is done.

We react to what comes in, and then we plan, and then we do things sort of in real time.

And the beauty of doing it in this way, and when everything is local, is that even as you go to larger graphs for things happening asynchronously, you inherit a lot of the same convergence guarantees.

So basically, as you run more messages, your inference or your free energy is never going to get worse.

Something might happen, like we saw these spikes, if you get information, data that's not predicted.

But as you run more inference, it's never going to get any worse.

So you can run this part a little faster and this part a little slower.

And it's still going to end up having this nice, smooth curve.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's kind of like a net that ratchets everywhere.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's a large distributed system that reacts to data and reacts to the world as things happen.

And RxInfer is just being an engineering tool for building that.

If you have that as your vision, you need something that does it.

And that's what RxInfer is attempting to be.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So maybe one more question and then we'll, we'll close for dot one.

Okay.

Upcycle Club writes, simulated annealing, including quantum simulated annealing is considered a meta heuristic.

Do you use any types of meta heuristics in synthetic active inference agents?


SPEAKER_01:
Not yet.

I'm not familiar with quantum simulated annealing, so I can't really speak to what it does.

But the thing that's different about this approach to active inference as opposed to many other approaches is basically that we can do things locally on the graph and we have these backwards messages.

I'm sure you can combine that with a quantum simulated annealing approach somehow.

And if you find a nice way of doing it, I would love to see it.

But it's not something we've done yet now.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, this was awesome.

It was very relaxing and even-handed.

even though it builds on so much.

So it was an epic presentation and I think sets us up really well for dot two.

When we talk about what happens next now that the dot one is in the books.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I had a great time and I'm glad you found it relaxing because, uh,

I think it was a bit more stressful over here.


SPEAKER_00:
Maybe receiving the messages is easier than sending them, maybe.

Yeah, but I think this was great.

I thoroughly enjoyed this.

Cool.

So thank you, everybody, for watching and leave a comment if you have a question or if you're around in time, then maybe get in touch and join 55.2.

So thank you, Magnus.

Farewell.

Bye.

## N7QSuazEEhE

SPEAKER_01:
hello and welcome everyone it's november 16 2023 we're in active live stream 55.2 and it's our second discussion with magnus here on the message passing papers in this dot 2 we're gonna begin with some code explorations

see where it goes, and then in the last section, have more open discussion and see where that goes.

So thank you for joining again, Magnus, and looking forward to seeing this code.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks for having me.

So one of the things we talked about last time was that it would be nice to go through what all of this theory actually looks like in code.

So I brought along something that I prepared

earlier, which is basically the experiments that go with the papers.

And I think the one that makes the most sense to look at is the one where we do direct policy inference, because that's one of the really novel things, where we don't encapsulate prior algorithms.

We actually get something new.

So that is what we hopefully have on screen right now.

All of this is implemented in Julia, and it is all publicly available.

For anyone who's interested, you can go and mess around with this on your own if you want.

But basically, the model we're going to be looking at is the same discrete POMDP that we all know and love, but instead of computing expected free integers and comparing them to find a policy, we're just going to infer the policy in one go as part of optimization.

Would it make sense if I just go through it cell by cell?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Maybe make the font a little bigger and then go cell by cell.

Yeah.

Perfect.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

This better?

Yeah.

Sweet.

So all this is in Julia and runs in the notebooks.

There's instructions for how to do it in the repo.

So the first thing we do is we just load a bunch of things that we need.

These here are all message passing rules for the transition mixture model.

The transition mixture model is what allows us to do policy inference.

It's basically saying, instead of having one transition matrix, one B matrix, we have a number of candidate ones, and then we have a variable that just picks one.

So let's say I have either one transition matrix, another transition matrix.

If my indicator variable is one, zero, I pick this one.

If it is zero, one, I pick this one.

That's sort of the logic here.

Then we have this goal observation node, which is a goal-constrained observation node.

And this is where we do the GV-based message parsing.

So this is where we have the p-substitutions going on that we talked about last time and where we get to get all our epistemics.

And then we have a bunch of helpful functions to set up priors for stuff, whatever.

So what this code implements is the T-Maze experiment.

And again, I think we all know how the Team Maze works.

But just for completeness sake, actually, I think I might be able to pull up the paper and show the graphic for the Team Maze, because then we can see exactly what it is we're modeling.

We can see how that corresponds to the graph and everything.

Just give me two seconds.

I'll do that.


SPEAKER_02:
Here we go.


SPEAKER_00:
So this is the TeamMaze environment.

And this is the repo where you can find the code.

In the TeamMaze environment, the agent starts in one of four positions, which we like at one.

And it's designed to simulate a rat looking for cheese in a maze.

There's a reward at either positions two or three, so either one of these arms.

The main point is the agent doesn't know which arm has the reward at.

To learn that, it needs to go to position four, and position four has a queue that tells it whether the rod is likely to be to the left or to the right.

This means we need four transitions, one to go to states one, two, three, and four, and then we need a...

a likelihood matrix that sort of maps through different observations that we can get, i.e., where are we at, location, do we get a reward, that kind of thing, from all these four different locations.

So I think I actually have, yeah, so I can actually show the constraint FFG of the model that we're building, and it looks like this.

So what's going on here is that we have a vector d that parameterizes where we start, this is this prior.

Then we have this transition mixture node that transitions from a latent state at time t to time t plus 1.

It has four candidate transition matrices, again, because we need to move to either 1, 2, 3, or 4.

And then we have this indicator variable that we call u. And that just picks whether we go to 1, 2, 3, or 4.

Down here is where we have, to me, the really interesting bit, because this is where we perform this p-substitution that you can see here.

We have a mean field factorization and a p-substitution.

And we have this composite node, this goal observation node, with a goal prior.

So what this says is, do GFE-based optimization around this node.

And the goal is given by this categorical down here.

So it's going to have some c vector that parameterizes it.

This is the same kind of notation you're going to find in most of the tables.

And we're going to infer a two-step policy.

So we need to go from initial point, zt, to t plus 1, to t plus 2.

I think I actually need to put t plus 2 in here, but no matter.

Does this model and this graph make sense?

Perfect.

The thing that I want to sort of point out is that we can see all these things, where we do the EFV-based things, the kind of messages that we need to pass, effecturizations.

All of this is something that we can see from the graph because this is a constrained FFG instead of a normal FFG.

So let's look at what this little guy looks like in code.

And it looks like this.

So we have our categorical with a D vector that starts.

We have C, which is going to be our goal priors.

We have our latent states, and we have our indicator variables.

Each indicator variable gets a flat prior.

That's what this does.

Yeah, so for all time steps, for all future time steps you want to plan over,

We need an indicator variable with a flat prior.

So we are a priori indifferent as to which state we want to go to.

We have a transition mixture that maps from z at the previous time step to z at the current time step, t. And it takes us input the indicator variable, or switch, and our candidate transition matrices.

We have the same thing.

Now we have the next node, which is this goal-constrained observation node.

It has a likelihood matrix, i.e.

this A here, and a goal prior, which is the C here.

See?

See?

Input from the state and the likelihood matrix.

This here is some plumbing that we need to get the messages to work out.

So don't worry too much about this.

And this is actually the model specification.

This is all there is to it, which to me is kind of nice.

Because if we do inference in the back end, then if I want to build models and want to design agents, all I really should have to worry about

is to set up my model specification correctly.

All right.

This is another little bit of plumbing.

And these are optional constraints that we are going to introduce later.

What this basically says is that we want to point mask constrain the switch variables, the indicators.

So instead of saying,

I'm sort of indifferent between going to two and three.

I put equal probability on them.

We're forcing the agent to make a choice.

We're saying you can only pick one.

And this is identical to having a point mass constraint or a delta constraint as described in part one.

That's what this thing does.

So then let's set up everything we need.

We have a planning horizon of two.

We want to run 10 inference iterations because this optimization procedure is an iterative thing.

Then we also need to set some initial marginals, like a VMP thing.

And we need to construct our A, B, C, and D matrices, which for those of you that worked with PyMDP or SPM or similar, these work the exact same way.

And then all we need to do is call the inference function with the model, with all our parameters.

So the team image model we just defined with our A, B matrices, our D vectors to start with, and our time horizon C. We set our goal prior as data inputs, which is just a convenience thing we did to make life a little easier, sort of programmatically.

And then we're off to the races.

So let's actually see what happens when we run this.

So if you just load everything, should be up to date in a minute here.

Yeah, so let's create a model, create our constraints, configure our experiment.

And now we are here, so we can run inference.

So do you have any guess as to how long this is going to take?

11 millifristons.

It's pretty accurate.

So it actually takes a little bit the first time because the model needs to be compiled.

Now you can see we have new posteriors available for our switch variable, our state variables, and our initial state variable.

Let's see what we got.

What we're printing here is just the distribution, the posterior marginal over the indicator variable, i.e.

the probability of choosing go to one, go to two, go to three, or go to four.

What we get is this long number that we could round to about 25% chance of going to four, about 20% chance of going to either two or three,

and 35% chance of going to four.

That means quarter of the time, i.e.

just as much as we put in our prior, we're staying put.

About 20% of the time, the agent wants to go and explore either arm because there's still reward there.

And the most likely option with a grand 35% probability is that we should go and investigate the cube.

So go to position four.

If we then compare what that looks like at t equals two, that is, what does the agent believe it should do after the first time step?

So if it goes and visits the queue, what should it do next?

Here we see that it is quite unlikely to stay put, sorry, to go to the starting position.

It doesn't probability there, it's coming from the prior.

It is indifferent between going to either two or three, because even though we know that we're going to get information at the queue, we still don't know whether it is going to be right or left.

And that's represented here by these two being equally valuable.

However, combined, it means we have about a 60% chance of going to n arm, which is probably going to be the right one.

And then with about, again, the quarters, about what we put into the prior probability, we're going to go and look at the Q again.

And this is the same result.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah?

Yeah.

So as you pointed out, one of the big contributions here is this direct policy inference.

So let's just say that we have the probabilities of different state occupancies at time one and time two.

But how do we really retain the fullness of a path?

For example, time one and time two might not be jointly independent.

So for example, yeah, the probability of being at the queue in the, at time one and time two might not be just 0.35 times 0.26.

No, no.


SPEAKER_00:
So what this is, actually, I think we can take a look at this.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's see if this is actually a washer.

Just to clarify the question while you're typing it,

if we're not explicitly tracing the branching paths of specific sequences of states and rather we're getting over each time step, then how do we know that just because something is 10% likely on here and 10% likely there, but then that doesn't mean it's one in a hundred together that those both happen.

It might be more or less depending on how the paths actually flow.


SPEAKER_00:
Right, so the thing is here, we're inferring a distribution over possible futures.

So we don't have any observations available.

We don't actually have a full action perception loop.

We're just doing planning.

And since we don't have any observations available, the best we can do is get a distribution over all the different possible futures that we have.

Now, we could do that, but get that by an exhaustive search.

Say, yeah, I want this, and I cite this probability.

Or we could just infer it.

So what this tells us is it's not a sophisticated scheme.

It doesn't have this counterfactual thing going on.

What it tells us is that if we want to optimize this combination of Bethy and generalized free energy, expected free energy,

Before we get any observations, what is the optimal distribution over paths that we could take?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so the T2 distribution is basically T2 distribution as viewed from T0.

Yes.

And then when we get to T1, we'll update, but we're basically taking...

something like a mean field or an aggregate over all possible paths to T2, and those may radically shift.

Obviously, once we go to the queue and find out some information, then we're going to update from 0.3 to 0.3.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so this is at T equals zero.

This is the agent saying, well, if I have to make a decision right now,

for the whole game, for all my timestamps, for my whole plan, what is sort of the most likely thing that I should do and how should that distribute itself?

Once we actually start to get observations in there, then yeah, these are obviously going to shift.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, then it's very notable that the two arms do have this...

high quantity taken together, but absolutely equal.

And that's that kind of like being precise about uncertainty that we would want such a planner to have.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

What this is saying is the agent is really confident that it needs to go to one of the arms, but because it hasn't got an observation, because it hasn't actually seen the queue yet, it doesn't know which ones it assigns them equal probability.

But it is pretty damn sure that it needs to go to one of them.

Which, again, makes sense if we think of this as doing planning at t equals zero.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's really cool, especially after so much expected free energy, branching time active inference, exhaustive tree searches, just to see this kind of non-path-based direct policy inference.

That's the contribution of the paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, I would say this is closer to a path-based formulation.

What you don't get is a search tree.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Yes.

Consistent with the path-based formulation of Bayesian mechanics, but not necessarily resulting in an exhaustive search tree.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

So what we can actually do here is we can look at the schedule.

What's going on here?

This actually shows us the exact way that messages are flowing under the hood in the code.

The main thing that's different to most other approaches is that we have things flowing backwards.

We have these red guys here, and we have these here flowing in the opposite direction.

This is information flowing from what we think the future is going to be towards what the present is.

What this is telling us is, given that I want to end up here,

And I reason backwards.

What should I do?

And that is why we don't need a side street, because instead of having to run forwards, we can do a forward sweep here.

Say, well, this is my distribution over things that I'm going to do if I don't know anything.

And in the other direction, we have, well, this is distribution over what you should do, where you expect to end up.

And if you have where you expect to be and where you expect to end up, figuring out what to do.

is what happens here.

And that's how you do the policy inference.

It's because you have an idea of where you're going to be, and you have an idea of where you want to end up.

If you know those, then inferring what you should do is, at least in these simple cases, quite straightforward.

And again, one of the contributions here is that because we do this backwards smoothing sweep, we don't have to do a forward search tree.

Because around each of these nodes, all we have to do is care about a message flowing in here, we get a message flowing in here, and then we can do our inference.

It also means that every time we add a time step, if I were to take this guy here and extend it once more to the right, I wouldn't have an exponential explosion.

I would have to evaluate the messages flowing around inside one of these slices once more.

So we need another backwards message, another backwards message, another forwards message.

And that's sort of where one of the things I want to do, that we didn't get around to doing for these papers, is investigate how this behaves when we scale to longer horizons and larger models.

Because this should scale much nicer than having to do an exhaustive search tree, because every time we add another slice, we just add the same number of computations again.

All right, so let's go back here.

So what we do here in the last experiment is that we add these point mass constraints to the switch variables.

So what does this mean?

So on a graph, it looks like this.

This is the exact same graph, but now we add these little constraints here, these little delta form constraints in the beads.

And this means that when we compute our posterior here, it has to be a delta.

So we need to pick one of the options.

We can't say indifferent between going right or left.

You have to pick one because you have to be a delta spike.

So in practice, this ends up being the same mistake in the argmax of the distribution over actions.

So you're effectively, as part of your inference procedure, picking the best policy and doing inference only with the most likely thing.

So let's run that.

And again, this gives us a much sort of clearer picture where we are now 100% certain that we're going to go to the Q at t equals 1 before we observe anything.

And then in this case, it picks 2.

But if you change the random seed a little bit, it picks 3 because it's indifferent between these two guys.

It just has to pick one because we're enforcing that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's still a T0 speculating it.

And so it's kind of like a bifurcation where depending on its random seed at T0, it might symmetry break to imagine it going left or imagine going right in that implementation.

But either way, after T1, it's going to have the empirical decision.


SPEAKER_00:
I might actually be able to show this as well.

do this so part two actually has an example of the kind of protocol where we have these this thing i want to show we have these updates going on this this one reminded me this one reminded me of the fire escape plan of a hotel i didn't think of that but i can actually see it

So effectively, what's different between these experiments and the ones we just looked at is that these u's here are clamped.

So they're little black squares in P. That means we are picking a transition matrix.

So we are fixing whatever our transition should be.

And this here, t equals 1, is before

the agent observes anything.

So this is effectively the same situation we just looked at, except now we are evaluating a policy.

We're doing the same search tree kind of thing instead of doing direct policy inference.

So again, these are just transitions, and these up here are fixed.

So we're no longer doing direct policy inference.

We're just computing the free energy, including GV terms, for this model without any observations.

And the thing I want to sort of point out is these composite nodes down here.

They're the exact same that we just had.

But you'll see there's nothing going on here.

These x variables have nothing on them.

But once we get an observation, it's the same as adding this constraint down here.

So we advance the time step.

It goes from one to two.

And then we clamp our observation.

And then we do the same protocol again, because the model hasn't changed.

What's changed is that we constrain one of the variables to be equal to our observation.

And then you keep on going, it's equals two and so on and so forth.

Every time you get a new observation, you just add these little constraints to the model.


SPEAKER_01:
And then you'll essentially get... This reminds me of scientific pre-registration.

Like we have the whole experimental plan laid out.

We know what kind of information is going to flow in.

And we have a distribution or prior over the data.

And then when the data do come in, we just clamp the format that we expected.

And we don't need to do any structural changing to...

factor graph and so it's like as we're moving forward and collecting data we're just clamping timelines on the past and then leaving open what hasn't happened slash what we don't know yeah that's exactly what's happening um like beautifully because except that's exactly what's happening as we get data we're just saying well now i know that this variable in my graph that corresponds to my observation


SPEAKER_00:
I didn't know what it was before, but now I know that it was this value.

So I need to put that observation into my inference problem somehow.

My model is still the same.

It doesn't change the structure of how I think the world works.

Some parameters might have shifted and stuff.

But the main thing that's changed is that I now have a data point that I need to add in.

And you can do that by adding these little data constraints, we call them.

So this here actually shows the exact type of thing that you were just talking about.

How does the model change once we get data points?

So this case here would be pure sort of speculation, pure planning ahead of time.

And this here is, well, once you start observing stuff, how do you actually add the information into your inference problem?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, one other angle on this again, because I think this is really important.

The structure here is kind of like the timeless action perception loop.

And then we can be anywhere from at the top, we have purely speculative, purely anticipatory.

On the bottom, we have purely retrospective.

All the data are already in hand and it's kind of like a solved issue, like looking at something that already played out, or you could be kind of the in media res

in the middle, which is basically just to say that part of it is already clamped in with the past, and then part of it is speculative.

And all of those settings from the purely anticipatory to the purely retrospective to in the middle of things with a little bit of both, all those are structurally described by the same formalism.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And again, that's because the model doesn't change.

What changes is just we need to add in

the data.

And what is kind of nice about this is that it also allows you to talk about doing different things at different times.

So one thing that we, for instance, looked at is once we have all the data, should we do our parameter updates then?

Because you can imagine a situation where you run an episode of something, like you are trying to do some psychophysics experiment, and you have your participant run

an entire episode of an experiment.

And then you expect them to go and update their beliefs about, say, some parameters for what occurs where.

You can model that by saying, once all my observations are clamped, then I send messages towards my parameters, like my thetas down here.

So this sort of highlights the kind of things that you can start to be very, very explicit about.

When do you do certain updates?

What should the graph and the constraints look like?

all these things that often has a tendency to get swept under the rug a little bit that you can now be very, very explicit about.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's super important.

Again, keeping with this theme of kind of like looking forward, looking back, being able to plan out the message passing logistics and scheduling means that you can have a sense of the computational requirements and so on forward looking.

And then also looking back, have a better sense of the way that variables were generated and trace back their kind of informational supply chain so that

system that's what makes it fully synthetic if it were fully synthetic chemical we could trace from the precursors how it were generated this is fully synthetic active inference agent and so that means for every variable we should be able to say well here's how we brought it onto the table and then here's exactly how the messages were passed from once it was placed


SPEAKER_00:
What is the model, what is the inference problem, what is the data, and what are the constraints?

We should have everything be completely transparent.

Because that's, in my opinion, that's good.

The more we're allowing scrutiny of all the little different bits and pieces, and the more we can investigate how everything is going on, the better.


SPEAKER_01:
And this is kind of

the ground floor, like you could keep digging and ask, well, how is addition carried out?

How is multiplication carried out in Julia or however, but this is kind of the layer that is the foundation layer for building then more elaborate graphs.

Like we don't need to go finer scale or do it.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
That's actually kind of funny, because each of these messages, we're drawing those just as arrows, but each of these messages is a computation.

You mentioned that you need to do a multiplication.

One thing we need to do for these models, we also do for this thing here, is we need to multiply a categorical variable by a transition matrix.

That is an inference, that's an operation, that is a message.

There's a whole computation and a whole derivation that you can go and find.

for how to do that operation.

So everything should be completely transparent here.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

All right, I'll ask a question from the live chat.

Andrew writes, if the model is claimed...


SPEAKER_00:
Stop the screen share.

Oh, no, it's fine.

I'll just ask it here.


SPEAKER_01:
If the model is clamped in this manner, how does the generative model evolve?

Is there a way that new variables can be introduced during the inference generative loop?


SPEAKER_00:
That's a thing that's actually quite interesting.

The short answer is not with this formalism.

There is some nice work on structure learning and how to

like to Bayesian model comparison, Bayesian model reduction and expansion that you could use in this context.

But as is, what we've done is we've found a way to write down a model and an inference problem and the corresponding messages that allow you to do GFE-based optimization.

It doesn't tell you how to expand your model.

Again, if you want to combine this with something like Bayesian model reduction or expansion,

That would be cool.

I think someone should really go and do that because that would be an interesting sort of avenue to go down when we can start to combine these things.

And one of the sort of things that I wanted out of these two papers is that I wanted to be able to get this kind of thing explicit.

I wanted to have a language that is not too difficult to pick up that allows people to ask these kinds of questions.

Because there's a very different, at least in my mind, I don't know whether you agree, Andrew, but to me, there's sort of a different vibe to philosophically thinking about what does the model evolve like and saying, well, how do I add a node?

One is a very concrete problem that you can start to talk about, while the other can end up being very, very abstract if you let it.

I like things that are concrete and transparent.

So I'm really glad that this kind of question pops up because that's one of the things that I wanted to do with these papers is to get people thinking along these lines.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

I'll kind of give another angle on that question.

So there's a implicit or unprincipled or ad hoc strategy here, which would be, we're going to be operating our model and then we're going to have some extracurricular diagnostic.

Like if it's taking too long, then we're going to do something else outside of the generative model and change the generative model.

Like, oh, maybe we should add another variable.

So it's kind of like the...

non-principled approach of which there's an infinite amount of these types and they may or may not be documented in the paper whereas the principled approach would be to bring that structural learning that learning structure explicitly in through bayesian

structuring so then you could say okay well there's either one two or three factors in this regression and then we're gonna have a distribution a prior over whether there's one two or three factors and then we're gonna clamp eventually and find the best fitting model whether it is one two or three with the appropriate um

penalization, and then someone says, well, what if there's four?

It's like, great.

Now we're going to explicitly bring that possibility into the model so that we have a unified approach to talking about the kind of sensory motor, lower level parameters, and arbitrary nestings of structure learning.

Those shouldn't be outside the perimeter of the fully synthetic agent.

Otherwise, to the extent that it's outside the perimeter, the engineering perimeter, it's out of control.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think we should be a little bit wary about what we attribute to the agent and what we attribute to the engineer here.

Because when we set this approach up, an agent is just a graph that receives some observations and is allowed to emit some actions.

So there is still an engineering aspect here about how do you construct the graph?

What should the graph look like?

What should the model look like?

which is not addressed in these tables.

But you're absolutely right.

There should be a principled way of doing that, which something like Bayesian model comparison is a way to do.

But the agent, the graph that does inference, just does inference on the graph.

At least out of the tools that are in here, you would need to add something more to do, like an organically growing graph or something.


SPEAKER_01:
does the graph ever undergo structural evolution or does the structure of the graph change but then through clamping and parameter updating the graph can even with a fixed topology represent structural differences or do are there ever actual structural changes in the factor graph


SPEAKER_00:
So I think that's one of the nice things about the CFG approach to writing down models is that you can write, like you need two things to do to minimize free energy functional.

You need a P and a Q. That's what you need to write it.

And writing P is done with a standard phytograph notation.

So you write out your boxes and your edges until you construct your graph, your model.

And the constraints are then done in queue.

That is, you write them separately.

So you can talk about what happens in terms of constraints and what happens in terms of the structure of the graph separately and explicitly.

So the graph, at least what we've done here, doesn't intrinsically undergo any

like topological or structural changes.

It's just the model you write down that you, as an engineer, as a scientist, is interested in.

What you can change is you can change the constraints.

That allows you to do different things with the same model.

For instance, incorporate data points as your agent sort of progresses through time.

What you can do then with this type of notation is you can be explicit.

You can be explicit about when you're doing something with the constraints on the model, sorry, constraints on the inference problem, I should say, where you're defining your Q, and when you're doing something structurally with the generative model, A, when you're defining your P. Because one is done in terms of this bead overlay notation, and the other one is done with standard factor graph methodologies.

So in that context, what's the main advantage of these two papers is that you can be explicit about what you're doing.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, very interesting.

Yeah, I hope so.

Continue with the code here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah.

We've actually reached the end of the notebook.

This is all that is to the policy inference experiments.

But one of the things that you can do with this type of thing, if we go back to the generative model specification, is that this here is just defined in terms of nodes and edges.

I have my variables, and I have my nodes that define them, and I have my goal observation with the P substitutions and everything.

But these units, they're sort of atomic in nature.

All a node cares about is its own marker blanket.

So these things are composable, meaning that if you want to build them with, say, hierarchies or heterarchies, you want to add multiple modalities, all these kinds of things you might want to do.

That still works with the caveat that there might be some coding bugs and stuff you run into because it's still just still software after all.

But theoretically, once you have these different things as little building blocks, you can sort of Lego your way through to any model.

But something that we hint at in the papers as well

that we not really explored in the experiments, which is that this type of active inference works for freeform generative models.

That means because it's local, all the little changes we do are local on the graph.

Everything else can just be whatever it wants to be.

So you're no longer limited to using a POMDP model, which is an awesome model

There's loads of things you can do with it.

It's a great model.

But there are things that might be easier to do, like operate with continuous variables, for instance, that might be easier to do with a different type of model.

And if you can sort of LEGO block your way to a generative model that represents how you think your agent should think that the world operates, that is something you can now do.

because model space has become much, much larger.


SPEAKER_01:
Right there with the how you think an agent should think is the articulation between the engineer and the agent.

That's the second level inference problem.

The first level inference problem is what the synthetic artifact will be doing in its runtime.

And then the engineering question is how to create that.

And so it's almost like the engineer is only interfacing with the inference challenge or environment through the blanket of the fully synthetic agent.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, in my opinion, that's how it should be.

I guess if I put on my engineer's hat for a bit, I'm a lazy engineer.

If I have a problem to solve, I could go to the literature, and I could find 57 solutions, and I could pick one, and I could implement it, tweak it a bit, and now I have 58 solutions.

That's one way I can do it.

I have several solutions for every problem.

That becomes unwieldy real quick, because every problem, you have a boatload of solutions.

What I like to do is say, I want only one tool.

I can only do inference.

I believe that everything can be solved by inference if you set up the problem right.

And the trick then is how you set up the problem right.

So as an engineer, what I would sort of take from this way of approaching problems is that my task is to build a generative model that does the thing that I want it to do.

And there's going to be some iterations and trial and error and some tweaking of things and all these nice sort of practical challenges that we all run into when we try to actually build things.

But the tool should always be the same.

If I want to control a robot or track an object or localization or preference learning or filter an audio signal or whatever you might want to do,

The tools should always be the same.

All I should need to do is do inference.

It's my job as the engineer to figure out what is the model structure that produces the results that I want.

Because it's clear if I want to, say, move a robot arm, and I have a generative model that can only move to the right, I'm going to run into issues.

Now, again, you sort of also hint that there's an extra level that you can go to where it becomes about structure learning.

Now, if you want to learn the structure of the model, you want to learn P, you want to sort of build your graph organically, which would be amazing to solve, but I'm not going to claim that we're anywhere near there with these papers.

These papers is just a way to accurately write down what I, as the engineer, want to happen.


SPEAKER_01:
Is there any more code you want to show?


SPEAKER_00:
We can take a look at the other ones.

But they basically work the same way.

So this is for generalized free energy with an action perception loop, i.e., and then a fixed policy.

This simulates the kind of things you would get in something like PyMTP or SPM.

Excuse me.

So again, the setup here is very, very similar.

Define our model, which has a policy that we want to evaluate.

It has two timesteps.

It has our goal priors.

It has our initial state prior.

But now we're also interested in learning the parameters of our observation matrix.

So we put a prior, a Dirichlet prior, over our A matrix, over our likelihood matrix.

And otherwise, these here move.

They look very much the same.

Instead of mixing models over transitions, it's just fixed transitions.

And this here is calling the exact same sort of p-substituted mean field constraint, all that goodness, node that we used for the last direct policy inference simulations.

And then we do the same thing.

We load up our priors, we load up our matrices.

And because we want to repeat this over and over and over and over, we're actually going to run an agent for 100 episodes.

So it's going to play the game 100 times and try to learn the likelihood matrix.

It does so by inferring an action, as we're doing infinite and missing passing the model, taking an action, executing it in the environment here and here.

And then getting back an observation.

And this getting an observation does this clamping operation that we talked about.

So this is literally the thing that's shown here, t equals 0, t equals 1, t equals 2, and in this case, t equals 3, because that's how many steps is in the t base environment.

Oh, sorry.

And if we do that and we run this 100 times, so every time the agent has completed an episode, so it's two steps, it gets to send messages towards the parameters.

It gets to learn about the A matrix, the likelihood of the observations given the states.

And if we do that, we can look at the differences from

the very flat priors that it gets initially versus the n posteriors to look at what has this agent learned.

And the way to read this plot is that O refers to the origin location, so location 1 in this thing here.

Whoops.

Yeah, location 1 in this thing here is the origin.

We have the left arm and the right arm, L and R. And then we have C, the Q location.

RW means reward.

You get a reward.

NR means no reward.

And this here says is the reward to the left, is the reward to the right.

Q points left, Q points right.

What we can see is that nothing really happens in the origin state.

We're always moving, so we don't really get much.

We can see if we're on the left arm and the Q points to the left, the reward is also on the left arm, we are pretty likely to observe a reward.

If the reward is on the left, we're likely to observe a reward if we go to the left.

Same thing over here.

The reward is on the right, pretty likely to observe a reward on the right.

An interesting thing up here, so what happens at the Q location, right?

Because this says that if the Q points to the left, the reward is also pretty likely to be on the left.

If the Q points to the right, the reward is also pretty likely to be on the right.

So this shows us that if we do this iteration, the agent can actually learn a really good likelihood matrix that predicts where things are and how all the relations actually work in the T-Maze experiment.

Which is nice, because that means that we don't have to put all this in.

We can actually do parameter learning using this GV-based message parsing as well, which is really neat.

And here we have some free energy curves.

So this shows the free energy at the initial time step, so before any observations have been received.

All right.

Yeah, and when the first observation has been received, and then after the second observation has been received, then we do parameter learning.

You'll see everything is nice and decreasing, but there are these spikes here.

And these spikes indicate when the agent predicts a win but gets a loss.

So the agent, the cue says the reward's to the left.

The agent goes to the right, so to the left.

But it doesn't get a reward.

There's a bit of stochasticity in the teammates environment

So it's not always 100% sure, even if the cue points the right way and everything, that the agent actually gets a reward observation in the end.

And this to me is pretty nice because it shows that if the agent's predictions are violated, we can actually directly see that in the free energy of the model.

We get these prediction error spikes.

which I think is really nice.

We have a similar setup, which is completely identical, except we don't do the p-substitution.

We don't introduce a GFE term.

We just run Park-standard variational bethe-free energy minimization.

And the model looks the same.

We just use some bethe options for

this composite node.

What is meta?

So meta is a way, this is all done in RxInfer.

Meta is a way to pass options to a node.

And in this case, a Bethy meta tells this sort of joint node composed of a likelihood model and a goal prior whether it should optimize generalized free energy or Bethy free energy.

So you can think of it as, if we look at the graph again, and we've had this node here, I have to make this a little bigger.

We have this sort of composite node here inside the dashed lines.

There's a difference between if we draw a circle here or we draw a square.

Square would indicate that we do a p-substitution, which turns this locally into a generalized free energy.

Don't do that.

Draw a circle.

Don't do the p-substitution.

What we're left with is a mean field factorized bethy-free energy.

And the way we do this switch between a circle and a square is through this meta object.

You can also use it for other things, for other nodes in RxInfer.

If you have, say, a nonlinear function that you want to use somewhere in your graph, you want to pass messages through it,

We're going to need to do some approximations most of the time.

So you can say pass your approximation method through the meta object.

And if you run some iterations or you need to do some sampling or something, that kind of information is something you can feed in through the meta object.

So what this thing is really saying is just swap the square for a circle.

so that we do beta-free energy instead of generalized free energy.

And then everything else here is exactly the same.

This is literally a copy-paste of the other notebook.

Because again, we're not changing the model.

We're just messing with the constraints.

The model is the same.

All we're doing is messing with the constraints and the p-substitution.

And if we, instead of saving the figures, actually create these, yeah, you'll see this agent only gets stuff around the outcome.

Because it starts with uninformative priors over the A matrix, doesn't really know what the reward is, has no incentive to go and explore.

It just doesn't really accomplish much.

You can see the same thing.

Free energy is flatlining, nothing is happening, and it is consistently not performing well.

It has just endured 100 trials of loss, and I don't think it is particularly enjoying itself.

And again, so the thing that we can illustrate with this is the power of messing with constraints and messing with p-substitutions and messing with these local adaptations to the free energy.

Because the model in both cases, the p, the graph, is actually the same.

There's no difference.

The thing that's different here is we're messing with the constraints, and we are messing with turning this local Bethy free energy into a local generalized free energy.

And that produces these quite drastic changes in the behavior of the agent.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, the Bethy.

free energy agent does not do well here just changing that one aspect moves the epistemic phenomena into the present that's that kind of like efe like component of the gfe that we discussed last time


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

So what this thing does, basically, if you do the battery-free energy, you end up with an agent that does KL control.

This ends up being a completely standard control problem, like controls inference.

There's nothing fancy going on here.

And crucially, that does not include an epistemic component.

We get no information seeking.

And we see that here.

There's no information seeking anywhere here.

This little guy is just flatlining.

But once we start to mess with the function, let me introduce a ZipStem component.

We get expiration, we get good performance, we get this active curiosity, information seeking, all these nice goodies that we know and love about Active Inference Agents.

And we can show that very, very directly by simply saying, well, I'm going to change this little circle to a square.

And then we have some aggregate experiments that we also ran, which is just repeating the same thing over numbers of agents, because there's some stochasticity.

Sometimes they get rewards, sometimes they don't.

If you want to compare how this does in the aggregate, you need to do multiple runs.

I'm not going to run this, because this takes a long time to run.

You can see I ran it earlier today, and it took like an hour and 20 minutes.

But what we can do is we can look at the distribution over when, say, how many times per run does an agent obtain a reward.

And you can see that it is very much sort of skewed to the right, which is good.

That means the agents learn.

They learn the parameters.

And after they learn the parameters, they consistently get rewarded on their trials.

It doesn't always happen.

There's a bit of a tail end down here.

And what this tells us is that sometimes these agents, because there's stochasticity in the rewards, they're just going to get stuck in some unfortunate minima.

They get some conflating information, and they never quite manage to recover.

And that can happen.

Sometimes you learn something that's wrong, and you end up sticking to it.

So it's not a bulletproof thing.

The same thing here, we can show this is the ideal expected reward you can get, that as the trials progress, on average, agents start earning more and more and more and more reward.

How you get closer and closer to this line.

There's some wiggling in here, and that's because we have to use a sampling approximation when we send the message towards the parameters.

So there's some stochasticity in here, which is why we get this bit of wiggling, that and the reward stochasticity.

This basically shows that as an aggregate, agents get better.

They get consistently better.

But again, the model is all the same.

Nothing changes.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Good with the code?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I don't have any more code.

Not for these tables, at least.

Cool.

Yes, thank you then.

So I'll stop the screen share.


SPEAKER_01:
OK, I'll share screen.

I guess just to sort of transition into this second component, when you sit down at the table, where do you begin?


SPEAKER_00:
Usually I begin where I left off the day before.

That's worked for quite a while now.

So there are other things that I'm working on right now that I can't really talk about yet.


SPEAKER_01:
But just as a general building your own generative model, if you had a new, fun, non-proprietary study, where would you begin with sketching out what to be on the road to working with it this way?


SPEAKER_00:
The first thing I would do is that I would start drawing graphs.

I would start drawing my constrained FFGs.

and see if I can figure out what is the problem that I want to solve and get that real accurate.

And that is not a trivial exercise.

Because once you have your model specification and your inference specification in place, then to me, the hard part is done.

Because again, if I put on my engineer's hat,

The main thing that I have to do if I want to build an application, want to solve something, is that I have to come up with a graph, and I have to come up with the constraints that define my inference problem.

Once I'm there, I need to figure out, are there any parts of this problem that I can't solve?

Is there a message that I need to work out?

Is there some approximation that I need to figure out to put in there?

And if so,

It's nice that's sort of a research question on its own quite often.

But if there isn't, then the next thing I would do is I would try and run inference in my model.

Actually, does this model actually behave as I think it does?

Especially if you're in the game of designing active inference agents, sometimes these things have a mind of their own.

There are several reasons why that could be.

It may be your intuitions about the thing that you wrote down don't actually quite hold up to how things manifest in the real world.

Or there might be bugs in your code, all these sort of very practical things.

But once we're at this place, to me, a lot of the heavy lifting is done.

Because the hard part, if you want to build something, is specifying the model and specifying the constraints and figuring out how to solve the inference problem.

Once I have that, then everything else is implementation details.

Actually, funny story.

We had this during the design of the experiments that we just looked at.

So if you look at the transition matrices that we use,

If you have the original teammates transition matrices, they let the agent get stuck in positions two and three.

It's sort of attracting states.

Once you go there, you can't go anywhere else.

And the way that is done practically is that the transition matrix sends you from state two to state two, whatever transition matrix you choose.

If you do that with our setup,

That means you're allowed to send backwards messages that say, well, if I pick action one, which is no go to state one, and I'm coming from state two, I would also go to state two.

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_01:
So then what's the issue or what did that result in?


SPEAKER_00:
The result is that the agent starts inferring some very, very nonsensical policies.

because it'll say, well, I know the goal is at position three, but I'm going to confidently go, like, pick the matrix that corresponds to go to one, or go to four, go to two.

And that's because all these things, all these matrices, allow the reverse mapping from, say, state two, where you think the reward is, to any of the other states.


SPEAKER_01:
Why is there no reverse constraint?


SPEAKER_00:
So because if you're reasoning backwards, you have to think about how do your model run in reverse?

What does your transition mean the other direction?

And the way we solved this was that we let every sort of invalid transition send it back to the beginning.

So every...

basically, if you end up in one of the rewarding arms, every transition that you pick is going to send you back to the start.

It's just going to reset the whole episode.

And if you do that, you get rid of this problem of the backwards message not corresponding to your intuitions as an engineer.

Because we're designing this thing to say, well, one matrix is go to one, one matrix is go to two, and so on and so forth.

But

The math doesn't really care about our intuitions.

The math does what the math does.

It's up to us to make sure that we write things down accurately.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, just to kind of confirm this.

So the initial strategy was you used, as kind of classical in POMDPs, you just had the state of reward be absorbing.

However, it was almost like you could get in, but then you didn't want it to leave with the absorbing state.

But you actually, you had like a ladder out with the backwards message.

And so that was leading to some weird things.

So instead you change it so that the reward state brought you back to the beginning, essentially tucking in the end of the trial to something like the beginning of the next trial.

And then that...

better cohered with intuitions around how policy should be selected.


SPEAKER_00:
So you can think of it also as the backwards message saying, if I go here, where should I come from?

If you are in, say, the rewarding arm, where should you be coming from?

And if you allow the rewarding arm to map from itself to itself, because you make it absorbing,

The agent can, correctly, because that's what you put in, infer that it should be coming from the rewarding arm when it is in the rewarding arm.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

How do you get a million dollars?

Step one, start with a million dollars.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

And that's not the kind of inference that we want our agents to make.

It's right.

If you have a million dollars, the most likely way you got them is that you had them a second before.

You had more a second before.

Had at least a million dollars a second before.

But yeah, that kind of inference is something that we want our agents to not do.

And that's an issue that doesn't, at least for now sort of research, did not arise when we only did the sort of forward rollout version.

Because if you never reason backwards, this kind of thing just doesn't pop up.

But if it's not, then you need to consider this kind of circular step one, start with a million dollars type of reasoning.

This is an example of something that we ran into in the course of this experiment where we were pretty sure that everything was set up correct, and it was.

But the agent did not behave in the way we anticipated and how we wanted it to behave.

So we had to go and look at, well, what is actually happening?

Not what we think is happening, but what is actually happening when you sort of start to look at the code.


SPEAKER_01:
Let me ask a related question from the chat.

Andrew says, what you are saying is there's no conditional probability placed on where the agent thinks it is when doing that reverse message?


SPEAKER_00:
Is when, I think is the question.


SPEAKER_01:
Is there a conditional probability placed on the agent when it is doing the reverse message?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, but it's conditioned on the future.

You're doing everything backwards.

So it is conditional on where you should be in the future.

You can think of the forward rollout approach as saying, well, if I am here and I do this, then I go here and so on and so forth, then you have this large tree that expands to where you could go.

And then you look at all the places you could go and say, well,

That one, that's the one I like.

You can also think of doing the same.

I'm sort of approximating a little bit because we don't actually do search trees.

But you can also think of doing the same thing in reverse, right?

You can say, well, if I have already obtained everything that I want in my life, where is it most likely that I came from?

And I say, all right, if I go one step back, where is it then most likely that I came from, and so on and so forth?

And that distribution, that kind of logic, is what we're doing with the backwards pass.

So then when you have the forwards pass saying, well, this is where I'd like it to end up, the backwards pass saying, well, this is where I want to go, you're solving that difference is what you do when you infer the action.

You have two messages colliding, and they spit out something towards your action variables.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah okay what that's making me think about is we classically think about new data coming in we're conditioning on the existing conditions and then new observation comes in things update so that's the sort of march forward then there's this kind of aspirational or fulfillment based conditioning conditioning on not what has been sedimented and brought forward but conditioning on what is

anticipated or preferred and then let's think about the the um three time step case where there's a clear last step and there's a clear first step and they just meet in the middle and it just like the sort of um

the conditioning from both ends results in just this obvious solution.

However, also, it could be more ambiguous at the beginning or the end, or it could be more than three time steps.

And then that's where we get this message passing and kind of annealing as data are getting clamped through time.

And that has a

relationship with the search tree based methods in that like the territory of what they're explaining is the same sequences of action but again to be really clear this is not doing

policy-specific evaluations followed by comparison of expected free energies or any kind of enumerative search at all, it's solving one direct policy inference problem as this kind of annealing process.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think the beauty of this approach is that you can do both.

I like to do direct policy inference because I think it's, to me, it feels like the right way to go.

But one of the things we do in part one, and to an extent demonstrate in the experiments in part two, is that you can recover these forward rollouts, these classical algorithms, as special cases by only passing messages forwards.

Because when you have these p-substituted goal observation nodes with your mean field constraints and everything, the energy terms of those nodes ends up being equal

to one, that's what we talked about last time, into being equal to one term in the EFE of matching policy.

So you can reproduce the forward rollout method by saying, I'm only going to pass messages in the forward direction.

I'm going to fix all my action variables.

And then I'm going to compare all the energy terms of these little GFE nodes.

And that will reproduce the exact algorithm that

we've all been using for years.

What you can also do is you can add a backwards pass.

What you can also do is you can say, well, now I want to infer my policy, and so on and so forth.

But because this is a toolbox, it's just a way of thinking that allows you to do different things.

So the policy inference is not inherent.

It's something that you can do.

if you want, because it's just an inference problem.

If you don't want to and you have good reasons for doing something else, you can go and do something else.

But sort of to go back a little bit, to me, this idea of reasoning backwards also works with

So my intuitions on at least how I, as a person, often operate, like I'll have some idea in mind.

I have some goal that I want to achieve, which could be, you know, I want to get a PhD or I want to make a tasty dinner or something.

And then I reason backwards.

Well, I need to do this.

I need to do this.

I need to go and buy all the things that I need.

I need to set aside time for cooking and so on and so forth.

There's sort of a backwards reasoning that if I want to go here, I need to do this, this, this, this, this, this.

And then there's the forward planning.

If I am walking out the door, I need to go to there and then there.

And if I keep walking, I'll end up in the right place.

So there's both components to it if you want to put sort of a more anthropomorphic, intuitive spin on it.

In practice,

What this ends up being is just inference on a graph.

And if you're an engineer, it's up to you to design your model and your inference procedure in a way that you end up with the results that you're looking for.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this about the policy selection here.

the forward pass policy is basically habit coming forward because in the absence of any aspiration or preference, policy is just, well, there's various ways you can select policy.

Still, you could select maximum information gain, you could select different things, but the prior on policy, the E vector is habit.

So it's kind of like, that's the starting position for what actions are selected from now.

And then it's just really interesting to think about this forward and backward solving, which is, of course, a classic technique.

But again, being done in this way where you could recover tree search, but it isn't tree search.


SPEAKER_00:
So the thing you would recover is a trajectory, so an evaluation given a particular policy.

The tree search comes about

when you want to try and expand this and be smart about how you compute things given different policies.

Because obviously you can do that for every single policy one at a time and evaluate everything, but that's even more inefficient.

So what you do practically is every time you sort of reach a branching point, you need to select a new policy.

You say, well, I'm just going to take my prediction here of where I would be

And we're going to branch off into all the different policies that I could pursue.

And that'll give me sort of a new set of branches on my tree.

And then you do the same thing.

So that's how the search tree comes about.

But each sort of path through that search tree would correspond to a forward rollout on one of these models.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

You said inference is something that you can do.


SPEAKER_00:
I want to go a little bit back because you mentioned this thing about the E vector, which I actually think is really, really interesting.

I don't know, since you have the screen share, I don't know if you have the papers available.


SPEAKER_01:
Which papers?

Oh, of these, your two?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Do you have a part one?

Yep.

All right.

Can you go to page 33?

Of course.

Thank you.

Here, this is the one I want.

So if you look here, we actually have an E vector sitting right on top as a parameter for the indicator variable.

And what we're saying here is just we're literally putting a prior on which action to pick at each timestamp.

That just comes about because we're building it out of these little graphical building blocks.

So if you wanted to, you could put a prior in E, and then you could learn E. That's absolutely something you could do.

Or you can, say, have a shared E with its own dynamics.

So now your habits are time-dependent.

And that'll be another sort of thing that moves along at the top with its own state space dynamics and everything.

These are the kinds of things that you can start to do.

We used flat priors here, but you could just as well say, I'm going to sort of intrinsically have my agent be really, really biased to go for the goal, whatever it takes.

We could even say it's going to prefer the leftmost goal more than anything in the world.

And that is something you can do.

But what you can do here is you can be explicit about it, exactly how your habits work, exactly how your E-works practice.

The sort of semantics, the intuition you can attach to it is the same as they've always been.

But you can start to look at, well, I'll just look on my graph.

What is the thing that I'm updating?

What does this actually sort of specifically, concretely mean?

And you can draw it.

And if you wanted to do something else, you can.

For instance, imagine that you have hyperpriors for E set by another agent.

That means you extend the graph and maybe that agent has his own observations and so on and so forth.

So then you need to attach that to the edge that is currently clamped with E. And now you're having an agent that sort of influences prior preferences over policies or habits.

If you want to say, well, now these need to update at different rates, that's you having to mess with the schedule in which you pass messages.

Sometimes you pass more in one agent than you do in the other.

But these kinds of things can be explicit now.

That's, to me, one of the big contributions that we wanted to put forward with this paper, is that you can now put all of this directly on the page, unambiguously, what exactly is happening.

You notice, for instance, here we have different E vectors for E and E .

That's also a choice.

You could, for instance, have these be linked together and say they have to share the same thing, and that same thing now has a prior.

That's something you could do, and that would be a completely valid graph, and you could figure out how to do inference in that.

So the idea of opening up free-form models means that model structure, it doesn't have to be like A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and so on and so forth.

We can do whatever model we want.

The space has opened up for things we can try out with active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, I got a little bit of a challenging question.

Nice.

You're talking about active inference and the toolbox, and that sometimes is seemingly not what people expect.

They come to active inference or the free energy principle looking for an account of a human

experience or of a certain cognitive system which of course isn't to be found in the toolbox you know any more than the blueprint or the house itself is to be found in the toolbox so could you from your view going back as deep into history as you like can you give an account of the active inference toolbox what tools have been brought in when which tools were versioned how which tools were deprecated how

Like, when would you trace the Active Inference Toolbox coming to existence?

With what?

Just to get a little bit of a run-up to the state of the toolbox today.


SPEAKER_00:
I think pretty much anyone you're going to ask is going to have a different answer to that.

There are some sort of big fixed entities that we can all look at.

The biggest one, of course, being SPM.

which has been the go-to tool for many, many years and in many ways still is because it is sort of the battle-tested version with all the bells and whistles that Carl himself has in large parts written.

That would be sort of my proposal for a grandfather, grandmother software package for how to do active inference.

This should be the gold standard.

in my opinion.

And later on, we've had pyndp, which was largely implemented by Connor Heinz and Alec Chan and a couple of other collaborators, which is a great project.

I've used it.

It's awesome.

Which is a Python implementation of many of the routines that exist in SPM.

So this sort of brings many of the tools

to Python instead of MATLAB, which is a lot more accessible, a lot more popular these days.

And that was sort of, to my mind, the two big active inference toolboxes.

In BIOSLAB, we have RxInfer, which is a general purpose message passing toolbox.

So it is not specifically an Active Inference Toolbox.

You can use it to do inference, and you can use it to do a lot of things that we would like to do for Active Inference.

But it is a message passing, so a Bayesian inference engine first, before it is a specialized Active Inference Toolbox, which is great.

Because then you can use it to build your Active Inference

parts, like we did with this constrained goal observation node that we used for the simulations we just looked at, that's using mostly stuff that is in RxInfer, and then one little node that we added on that does this GFE-based thing.

I think what to my mind is a more interesting question is the types of algorithms that have been employed.

Because again, and I'm going to miss some here, and for everyone that I don't mention, I'm sorry.

But from the original sort of inception in 2015 of the first active inference routines with the sort of forward search tree through to

something like branch-in-time active inference or sophisticated inference.

There's been a lot of really, really interesting work with Monte Carlo tree search and the whole deep active inference field that I haven't touched on at all in any of these discussions because, again, it's a different approach.

There's been an explosion of really, really interesting algorithmic work

on how to solve the active inference problem in a smart and interesting way.

And the things that we introduce here are sort of more in that tradition where we're saying, instead of trying to find ways to be clever about the search tree or trying to sort of either sophisticated inference for one is a really, really interesting idea, but it's a different thing.

So to be clear about the search tree, we want to introduce this backwards pass so that we can solve everything as part of the inference problem.

Parts of this is also something you can find in, there's actually sort of an interesting thing as well that's mentioned in the papers.

If you go and look at PAR and, for instance, 2019 paper where they introduced the generalized free energy,

Everything is still conditioned on a policy, but the message passing schedule, the forwards-backwards thing, is actually present.

And the update rules are based on generalized free energy.

So they end up looking a lot like the update rules that we derive.

It's quite interesting.

You can sort of see the seeds of what we based this work on quite clearly.

You can look at the equation side by side.

which to my mind is really, really interesting, because that was sort of the inspiration.

You have these update rules, you have this forwards, backwards thing.

What if we try and do this, but we come at it from the point of view of doing message parsing and graphs?

So I agree, this is a big question, and I'm not sure I can do it justice, because there's been so much interesting work on

software and algorithms and simulations for active inference that whatever parts I bring up, I'm bound to have missed something.

But if you put me on the spot, these are all the things I would highlight.

I would highlight SPM, I would highlight PyMDP, and later on, the message passing toolbox from Bias Lab.

And algorithmically, I would highlight the original algorithm, along with all the things we have here, like branching time, Monte Carlo, sophisticated, deep sampling based, all these kinds of things.

And then put our work in that field more as a different approach to solve the problem that we're interested in when we want to design active inference agents that do planning in interesting ways with all the epistemics and what we like.

I don't know who asked that question, but you're right.

It's a tough one.


SPEAKER_01:
It's kind of a perennial question.

I mean, even with some familiarity, sometimes I find myself grasping at how simple and clear the problem is and how we have all the tools to work towards it.

And then there's just this interesting moment.

Like we know what we're interested in and what we want to do.

We also know how to do it.

So then like, what do I do then when we know what we care about and how we prefer it to be and seemingly have no limitation on the actual composability and the implementation, these developments happen year by year.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, there's always going to be more.

I expect that our method is also going to be superseded by something that's even cleverer and even smarter.

And I look forward to figuring out what it is, whether we figure it out or whether someone else figures it out.

Whatever it's going to be, it's going to be awesome.

But I sort of want to dwell on one of the points you just mentioned, which is the idea that if you have what looks like a terribly simple problem, it doesn't mean the solution is simple.

Because most of what we're doing, like 90% of everything we care about here, is really just solving Bayes' rule.

Bayes' rule is pretty simple to write down.

The trick is that it's really, really, really hard to solve.

That's why we have whole fields of variational inference trying to come up with approximate solutions that are good enough.

Why we have all the...

really brilliant, interesting work on Monte Carlo samples and all these kinds of things.

It's all because we know what the problem is.

The problem is easy to state.

The problem is just solve base.

The solution can be really, really difficult.

And that's sort of where the devil in the details and all the work goes in.

Same as saying, I just want to minimize free energy.

It's easy.

Well,

and paper edges, but if you actually have to solve it, you need a lot more paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Easier said than done.

That was probably true about the first rocks being chipped into blades.

Just make it narrower.

Just make it sharper.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's easy.

It's easy.

Just go hunt the mammoth.

It's easy.

Just make it lie down.

You can take all the food.

No, but I think this is sort of, to me, one of the really, really interesting parts about working in this field that oftentimes it's really easy to state what you want, at least for me.

I want to be really, really good at updating beliefs.

I want to do that in a way that's consistent with all these things that we like.

But really, when it comes down to it, we just want to update beliefs in a good way.

How to do it and the details and how the belief updating should work and whether we should introduce all these extra little bits and pieces like information gain terms, all this kind of stuff.

To me, that's where you get to dig down and immerse yourself and find all the cool things and try stuff out.

That's where the work is.

That, to me, is really the exciting part.

But I like that I can always step back and say, well, I just care about doing inference, man.


SPEAKER_01:
let's look at where you left the papers off as we kind of think about where we go so other than broadly summarizing all of the acronyms and terms that's a lot you

clamp the paper in a very interesting way at the end yeah so what what would you say about this final paragraph and like how did the different authors perspectives um arise to result here so this is this actually interesting point um because I think I want to come at it in another way um


SPEAKER_00:
What we're trying to do here is we're trying to provide tools.

We're trying to build really, really good tools for doing active inference.

But as you mentioned earlier, people come to active inference and the free energy principle for all sorts of different reasons and for all sorts of different backgrounds.

Maybe not everyone is interested in building tools.

And the measure of whether our tools are useful are whether they end up being used by other people.

If you or others pick up this notation and pick up these types of message parsing, pick up this Lagrangian action-vention formulation, then this paper is going to have the impact that we'd like it to.

If nobody picks it up, it's just a cool hammer that keeps lying on the shelf.

paradoxically, I think one of the barriers to uptake could be that a lot of the people that come to active inference come from, say, neuroscience or more sort of philosophically bent, which is great.

We need everybody on this train.

But they might be concerned with other things than we are.

And

We didn't make any claims as to whether this is a biologically plausible update algorithm, which may be something that you care a lot about if you're a neuroscientist.

We don't have any claims about how this ties to experience or qualia or consciousness or all the kinds of things that you might be more interested in if you come at it from the more philosophical side.

So these tools is the best we could build as engineers trying to make good Hamels.

But if what you're looking for is not here, if your priorities lie somewhere else, then these might not be the right ones.

And that's OK.

So yeah, I think, paradoxically, one of the things that could hinder uptake and the impact of these papers is that the people for whom we're building tools might care about different things than what we built.

If you really, really, really want to use a screwdriver, it doesn't matter that we have the best hammer in the world.

You still need a screwdriver.

So because this is a

Again, a tool building exercise.

Because this is about doing things from an engineering point of view, that means they are tools for engineers.

So we don't make any claims as to biology or consciousness or all the other things that people are studying under the heading of active inference and the free energy principle.

We'll let people who are better qualified and, in many ways, smarter at these things than we are take care of that.

What we want to do here is just say, here's a really, really good hammer.

If that's what you want, then we got you covered.


SPEAKER_01:
These are really important.

I really respect that approach.

I think in terms of the active inference ecosystem, even if there seem to be like some barriers or hindrances associated with really the articulation of the tool and what it's used for, this is how we bring more perspectives in.

And if...

hammer is oh yeah but then we also included this and here's this proprietary phone home and it only does this type of nail and it only makes houses all of a sudden it's it's not really a hammer anymore it's become welded to a larger apparatus um and yet if the head of the hammer and the handle aren't connected it's not a hammer so then it's a fine line between like what algorithmically and implementationally

does this essential active inference tool do?

What is it?

And then what can be done with it?

And I think actually RxInfer and BiasLab, other than Burr and Ural's incredible work over the last years, by situating within a broader Bayesian message passing framework,

that has helped first off bring in insights from the broader bayesian inference space related to literally four knee graphs message passing reactive message passing and so on and then also it helps us separate out the active inference models from other models and there's nothing wrong with other models if you are building a model you find that your system of interest doesn't require like an active epistemic agent for every single component

No one in the active ecosystem is going to get mad at you for just doing what the situation demands.

And so that's very cool.


SPEAKER_00:
And again, one of the things besides the new messages and everything that allows people to do this type of message-passing-based inference, one of the things we wanted to stress is that we wanted this constrained FFG notation to be something that is quite easy to pick up.

It's easy to write down your graph.

And if you want to do just box standard belief propagation, you don't really have to do anything.

It looks 99% like a normal factor graph.

But if you want to, say, do a factorization here and there, you can just draw that in by adding a little thing for each of the parts of your graph that factor together.

So we really stress this should be something that is intuitive and usable.

Because we want this to be applicable for people who don't care about working out the intricacies of message parsing and factor graphs, this should be a tool for everyone.

And if you come at it from a different background and what you want is a nice and clean modeling tool, it should be that for you.


SPEAKER_01:
What else do you think could come into play, even just totally speculatively or arbitrarily?

What do you imagine in the preferred active toolbox, even if it's some sort of synthetic intelligence fantasy?

What would be the coolest thing that we could bring a new colleague to the table and set them down to?


SPEAKER_00:
To me, I would like to generalize all of these update rules that we have derived, like the general form of the GFE-based messages, to a point where you don't have to worry about whether the thing you need is there.

And then I would want it to be so that I can give it to you, or I can give it to a neuroscience colleague, and I can sit them down and they can draw their graph in their C15 notation.

And all of that should get translated into executable code.

Because then we end up in a situation where if what you want is a modeling language that solves your problem, you can do that.

You don't have to be a technical expert.

And for those of us who want to work on the technical side of things, there's a code base that we can open up and dig into.

But in terms of a toolbox that I would like to have in existence,

It should be something that is really, really easy to use, generic, and fast, because fast is cool.


SPEAKER_01:
You see any difference or reason to build sketches in the factor graph form or in the base graph form we know there's an analytical relationship that links them.

But is there any reason to like work on building intuition about factor graph specifically or would it suffice to build intuition for learners about base graphs knowing that they can be rendered to factor graphs later.


SPEAKER_00:
I actually had this, we had a long conversation about this with a colleague of mine just this week.

And I think if you dig deep enough, the representation doesn't matter that much.

The update rules end up becoming the same.

I would say factor graphs, to me, they're preferred.

I mean, obviously, I'm biased because that's what I work on.

But I also think they allow you to write down more.

If I have a base graph, I can see that two variables are related because I have a node here and I have a node here and an edge between them.

With a factor graph, I can also see what the relation is, because I literally have a little square with a simple end that tells me the relation.

And also, if you adopt the CFFD notation, you don't just write down your generative model.

You also write down your constraints on Q. So you can write down the exact inference problem that you're trying to solve.

And that is something that I

I'm not aware of a way to do on Bayesian networks.

So to me, I think there's more information contained in a factor graph, especially if you adopt constrained FFGs.

And then again, as you say, you can always have a one-to-one mapping between a Bayes net and an FFG.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, to kind of replay this, because there's different ways to constrain a given Bayes graph, there's actually like a few to one projection of factor graphs as constrained.

down to a same unconstrained base graph and so in that sense they can convey more information if you use the cffg and yeah so again they don't call it bias lab for nothing it's definitely your fellows take but


SPEAKER_00:
Again, this is also one of the things we introduce with these papers is that we identify a need to write down more than just the generative model if you want to be clear about everything else you're doing.

Because if you don't have a graphical relation, you need to put it in equations, you need to put in text, and you need like half a page of hieroglyphics to convey what you want to do.

And again, that's a barrier if you want this to be an accessible tool for everyone, which is one of the things that I want.

So we augment FFG notation specifically in a way that I'm not aware of anyone that has done for base nets.

They might be able to.

So in that way, you're right.

There's more information definitely in the CFFG than in the base net.

In general, there's also more in a factor graph because you have to be explicit about the relation between variables more than you do with at least the versions of Bayes' nets that I'm familiar with.

Again, I would say, as I put on my practical hat, you should use whatever is best for your problem, whatever you're most comfortable with.

Because a lot of the math you end up having to do comes out to be the same.

In the end, it's just a picture.

Yeah.

But there's more, to my mind, there's more information in especially constrained FFGs, which means you can be really, really accurate and precise about what you want to do by just writing down the picture.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, a lot of thoughts there.

One, great, you left the door open to somebody introducing a graphical or other than graphical notation for Bayes' graph to create a true one-to-one map between Bayes' graph and the constrained Forney graph.

It's not impossible.

It might even be trivial.

And then it just makes me think of like a learning language that's more broadly...

used base graphs where the nodes and edges have a semantics that are equivalent to what is usually considered as structural modeling yeah and then you enter into the learning language and and play space and toolbox and then there's this

strong relationship between the learning language again just kind of hyperbolizing this and the engineering implementation or specification and then from there it's actually anchored in message passings like that's how we connect the base graph as

sketched to the message passing is like enter the problem into the base graph if you want to enter at that point transfer over to the cffg and then run the messages from there however if you wanted to you could just work directly from the fact graph and a base graph would have never had to enter into it


SPEAKER_00:
I think that's doing a little bit of a disservice to base graphs.

I have my favorites, but if you go and look at the original Wayne and Bishop papers, for instance, where they originally derived the VMP algorithm, it's all done for base graphs.

It's all done for Bayesian networks.

So it's not that you can't do message parsing.

Again, this is just different representations of a generative model, and sometimes one is more useful.

I find that generically,

Factor graphs are more useful when I want to work with message passing, but some other people might disagree.

What I can say is that the versions of base graphs that I've seen contain less information than a constrained FFG because you don't write down the exact inference problems, i.e.

the constraints and the data points and everything.

So I wouldn't say that there isn't a room for base graphs.

Base graphs are great.

But I would say for the kind of work that I'm interested in, factor graphs feel more natural.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for that.

That's great.

Let me ask one more question.

In the

Graphical Brain 2017 paper.

There were three graph types mentioned.

So we've spent a ton of time talking about the complementarities and the transformabilities of Bayes graphs and 40-factor graphs.

Could you say a little bit about this last form of graph, the neural network or neural circuit?


SPEAKER_00:
I am not...

intimately familiar with the formalism of neural circuit graphs.

So I don't think I can add anything above and beyond what's here, especially if I want to make sure that I don't say anything wrong.

Fair enough, fair enough.

Okay, just wanted to check.

Yeah, that's fine.


SPEAKER_01:
They're all like different projections, but just wanted to ask.


SPEAKER_00:
I think if you wanted to try and tie a bow on it, I would say that different graphs, different graph types and different types of graphical notations are useful for different things.

And whatever you need to do, you should pick what is best for the kind of problem you're trying to solve.

If all I'm interested in is dependencies between variables, I just want to know which variable depends on which others, baseNets might be the best way to represent that.

And that might be the case for the problem that someone is working on, that this is the central information that they care about.

I also want the relations between the variables to be explicit, and I want to do message parsing.

maybe an FFG or a CFFG is a better representation.

And if I care about, say, neural implementations, maybe like a neural circuit is the right choice.

Again, I don't want to sort of come out and tell people what they should do, because I think everybody knows what they should do better than I do.

What I want to propose is that there is a type of notation that has these nice properties.

You can easily represent the relationships between your variables, and you can represent the constraints in Q, thereby also the resulting message parsing algorithm, which is something that I find really useful and that I hope other people would.

But if that is not the type of problem

that you're interested in and something else works better for you, you should use something else.

Again, this is all pragmatics.

This is just notation for how we want to get our ideas across clearly.

And in the end, what all this is really designed to do is to communicate information in a nice way.

And the language we would use to speak in should reflect what we want to say.

We could try you and I and have a conversation in German, but I don't think it would end well for either of us.

At least not for me.


SPEAKER_01:
I'd be there to hear, but I wouldn't listen.

Or do you speak German?


SPEAKER_00:
No.


SPEAKER_01:
Nor do I. There you go.


SPEAKER_00:
So again, we could try, and some ideas might be more expressible in German than in English.

But if none of us speak, it's not going to aid us in transmitting

information so for this setting english is probably the right choice of language for other settings it might be baseness and for other settings it might be cffgs i have a bias towards cffgs because i think they are the nicest way to represent everything that we want to do but for other people it might be different and that's okay


SPEAKER_01:
yeah we just did a very long unpacking of the hammer and again as discussed if you're not looking for that function it's not the right language or process i mean it's just such an important higher order point that that clarifies the contribution of the paper and the research direction and

offers up something to hopefully many people who will use it.

At least from my side, only in spoken English, active inference ontology dialect.

I hope that people do use these tools.

There's only seemingly a few individuals who are

working in rx and for making active inference models it is very few relatively so having that number broadly increase yes also training up different kinds of synthetic intelligences to do active inference modeling that enriches and enlivens our ecosystem of shared intelligence

And the engineers also need to have hands-on experience and know and work through simpler examples to build intuitions for larger systems, less larger systems be so far beyond our understanding that it's not useful or helpful.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And so before we end up wrapping up, I want to reiterate the invitation that I gave last time as well.

If anyone out there is interested in working on these things,

Hit me up.

I'll be happy to help you work on your graphs.

Because I think it's important that a measure of a tool, whether it's useful, is whether it's being used.

So if I can assist people in picking this up, I'll be more than happy to.


SPEAKER_01:
That's the most helpful and pragmatic thing, I believe, I guess, just in closing.

What loads up on pragmatic value for you?

What loads up on epistemic value for you in our field as we head into like 2024?


SPEAKER_00:
I think I'm in the very privileged position that I can do research for a living.

So my pragmatic value and my epistemic value tend to overlap a lot.

If I can figure something new out, that's pragmatic because that means I can

write a new paper, and that's the thing that I'm producing.

So I think that would be my answer.

I want to try and see if I can make this practical as I work it out for more models and try it for more things.

But it is a very privileged position to be able to do research.

where we basically get to spend our days trying to figure things out with all the admin and all the academia things and all the stuff that goes on.

But at the end of the day, I do get to spend a large chunk of my time figuring things out.

And that is really, really nice.

So the epistemic and the pragmatic value tend to overlap, which is nice.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, thank you.

It's a beautiful sentiment.

So it was a great series.

This is really a mega tech tree direction for the ACT-AMP ecosystem and beyond.

So good luck with your continued work and play and research, Magnus.

It was awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

I had a blast coming on here.

It's been some really, really great discussions.

And for those of you who participate in chat, got some hard questions.

That's good.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, and it will continue in the Institute Discord.


SPEAKER_00:
Excellent.

I'll see you there.


SPEAKER_01:
See you, Magnus.

Bye.