## Ga8EZMGO460

SPEAKER_05:
All right.

Hello and welcome, everyone.

It's Act-Inf Lab live stream number 34.0 on December 3rd, 2021.

And we're discussing the paper, The Free Energy Principle.

It's not about what it takes.

It's about what took you there.

Welcome to the Act-Inf Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following cool dyadic video chat etiquette today.

At this Coda site, you can find our sortable, searchable, interactable, and growing database of past and future live streams.

And if nothing else, isn't this paper going to be about the past and the future?

And it's also our last paper discussion that we're kicking off for 2021 in number 34.

So it's a pretty cool discussion and I'm really looking forward to it.

In Act-Inf stream number 34, we're going to be discussing the paper, The Free Energy Principle.

It's not about what it takes.

It's about what took you there by actual constant in 2021.

And just like all the other dot zeros, the video is a introduction to some of the ideas and a context for the paper.

It's not a review or an evaluation or a final word.

We'll go over the aims and the claims, the abstract and the roadmap of the paper.

And then there's a couple keywords, including some that we haven't seen before.

And then we'll walk through the key example, which is the numerical example of a simple signal detecting bacterium.

And we'll kind of talk through that example and see where that takes us.

And I'll just note, as with all the other .zeros, check out the paper if you want to learn more.

And Axel's writing is really a pleasure to read and he has deep insight into the FEP.

So we'll start with just saying hello and anything that we else wanted to say.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and

What excited me about this paper and got me excited to discuss it was I think Axel's provocative as well as grounded and respectful approach to dealing with what has and hasn't been done in the FEP.

And the example is so minimal and pared down, but also insightful that I think it lends itself to a jumping off point for many, many other discussions.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Thanks, Daniel.

I'm Dean.

I'm in Calgary.

And I think what excited me about this was that I didn't start out really understanding what the title of the paper even meant.

But then when there was a bit of an inversion and a bit of a taking things inside out and

I don't know if you want to describe that as a reversal of what is typically viewed as the time continuum or not.

It just opened up a whole bunch of interesting ideas, which I was contemplating as a program developer because I knew that

in order for the idea of being able to go from an inference, I believed going from an inference, which is a very small timeframe through a prediction set and finally into being able to get to a place of modeling or understanding covariation as a collective, this paper would probably help.

And then with each section I went through,

It was very helpful in terms of being able to sort of bring this idea, just as an idea, not in terms of its practical implications, but just as an idea to life.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, I'm sure he'll rejoin.

I'm going to just read through some of the big questions and answers.

Again, these are just the ones that we wrote down.

So I'll read the first two and then maybe say something and then Dean, you can take the second two.

So two of the big questions that the paper raises are, what is the free energy principle about?

And what is the entailment relationship between life

and the minimization of free energy.

Or another way to read that is what is the entailment relationship between life and models that emphasize the minimization of free energy?

And I just love how the paper dances between both of them and figuring out what the FEP exactly is and isn't and its distinction from general Bayesian theories from active inference.

These are really crucial distinctions.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so the second two questions were, one was from the author.

I'll read the fourth one first from the author.

Are priors subjective or objective under the FEP?

I put the words with a question mark, yes, because I actually have a question about this.

He comes to a conclusion, but I'm not so sure what the timeline is, which leads back to bullet three, which is what can we say about relationship when we shift from looking at what something is

the comparison of life and free energy principle to how long it lasts.

He talks about duration or the when aspect of that.

And that's the thing that kind of adds a twist to this because you can look at it as very momentary or you can look at his things as very cyclic.

I've used the expression episodic and diachronic and you've used kairos and there's lots and lots of ways to bring that in.

But when we do, things change pretty quickly.


SPEAKER_05:
And it's so funny.

You had to go to the fourth one, but was it really the fourth question if you read it third?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

There we go.


SPEAKER_05:
So the paper was published on 2-2, 2-2-1.

Could have waited a year and gone for the total two, but I understand you got to get those papers out.

And a few of the key aims and claims.

So first, using the author's words, the entailment problem is the confusion in the entailment relationship between free energy minimization and life.

So if you've never heard the word entailment, never heard free energy, we're going to go into some of these things.

But the entailment problem is people being confused about entailment.

That's a problem.

In this paper, the author dissolves what's called the entailment problem proposed here by providing a numerical example of free energy minimization in a hypothetical organism.

I conclude with some brief epistemological, knowledge-oriented remarks that may be of interest for those who worry about the explanatory power of the FEP.

And then this is the last words of the paper, which we'll return to at the end of this live stream.

The claim I set up at the start of the paper is that free energy minimization is not sufficient for life.

Mic drop.

Fidel, true, to the unifying grip of hypotheses in historical sciences, the free energy principle is meant to account for all of that.

You, me, and the organism under study in a unifying fashion.

Any thoughts on those claims?

We'll be exploring them and discussing them today.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, the only thing that I immediately went to was a question that I would ask people who were sort of on the other side of whatever it is that they were moving towards in terms of a sort of a professional participation.

And so the entailment thing for me was, is it opportunity over method?

meaning method entailing opportunity, or is it opportunity being over method, or method being entailed by opportunity?

And that is the same kind of question that Axel looks at here.

So depending on how you see that entailment, things go off in completely different directions.

So let's go and get into the paper now, because yeah, that's something that you can't resolve until post-diction.


SPEAKER_04:
You can expect how it'll be resolved, but then you look back and it might've been different.


SPEAKER_05:
So I'll read the abstract and then feel free to give a thought.

And of course, anyone watching along live is always welcome to give comments and questions in the live chat.

So the abstract is, I'll read the first and the third one.

Philosophical writings on the free energy principle in the life sciences often give the impression that minimizing free energy is sufficient for life.

But minimizing free energy is not a sufficient condition for life.

In fact, one can perfectly well conceive of a system that actively minimizes its free energy and for this very reason moves inexorably towards death.

So, where does the assumption of this entailment relation come from?


SPEAKER_01:
There is indeed an entailment relation, but it goes the other way around.

Life entails minimizing free energy.

Put another way, if you exist now under the right conditions, it's because you've done something like minimizing your free energy.

However, the question of whether you exist tomorrow cannot be settled purely by the resorting to the fact that you'll minimize your free energy in order to get there.


SPEAKER_05:
The simple point I make in this paper is that the free energy principle is not concerned with the sufficient conditions of existence, but rather what must have been the case given that you exist.

It's not about figuring out what it takes to be alive.

It's about figuring out what took you there.

And I'd recommend people to put this in a text-to-speech reader.

It reads just so fantastically in a robotic voice.


SPEAKER_04:
I rarely do that for papers, but I was on my exercise bike listening to the robot talk about this and it was just, it was hilarious.


SPEAKER_05:
So here's the simple point in the paper.

free energy principle is not concerned with the sufficient conditions of existence but rather with what must have been the case given you exist it's worth restating because it's a simple point but the depth of how far off one can be by missing this point is vast it's not about figuring out what it takes to be alive it's about figuring out what took you there not what took the living system there so here's the living system but we can even finesse that it's you

And so the red line is the system looking back, how did I get here?

Or putting kind of in a second person way, looking back at another lifeline, how did I get here?

The question that is often asked by living systems, including us, is, is something alive?

That's answering Schrodinger's question, Ramsted et al.


UNKNOWN:
2018.


SPEAKER_05:
It's an active topic of discussion.

And so here's the line of another system.

And so it's looking at the past, the present, and the future of some other system.

And is the FEP about this red arc of the system projecting back and asking what took place

me there?

Or is it looking out to another system and asking whether it's going to be the ruler of like meter stick of what is alive or not?

So probably other ways to represent it.

Any thoughts on that, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's just the what is alive thing now can be can be

placed beside and when is alive.

And I think that's what this paper really brings forward.

If we look only at what is alive, we may over reduce, may, but if we include when is alive, as you said, things get real interesting really, really fast.


SPEAKER_05:
And a really influential paper was Friston's single author, 2013, Life As We Know It.

And so that's often seen to be making a claim about the blue because it's like, well, life as we know it, this is like how we know what's alive.

But then it's like, even in the title with so few words, as we know it.

So even in there, there's a little bit more depth.

So this is a nice road trip.

There's only a few stops, few sections and figures.

So there's an introduction and then minimizing free energy for better or worse.

Basically, just like you could minimize your potential energy right off a cliff, you can minimize free energy right off a cliff.

So for better or for worse, assuming life is better, we prefer it to be life.

There's a section on the conceptual distinctions between Bayes and the free energy principle, which is very didactic.

There's a numerical example presented in formalism as well as in a figure, which we'll talk about a lot today.

And then free energy on a wing and a prior.

The last section is called future direction, free energy minimization as a historical scientific principle, which...

thought was exciting and appropriate for the paper being in biology and philosophy so for those who are not steeped deeply in the philosophy game there's some different terminology but that's why the whole field is enriched by people bringing these different perspectives to bear so the keywords that are brought up uh prediction and post diction

before and after, historical sciences, the free energy principle, and then I think we added active inference and strong and weak claims

argue they weren't given as a keyword but they are keywords for this discussion so let's start with prediction okay i'll just say what i have on the slide then dean our resident prediction matter expert so um first never make predictions especially about the future casey stengel or as they say in trading either predict the price or the date but never both

And on the Wikipedia page for prediction, there's so many different related areas.

And that just tells you like, well, what is it that's related to all these areas?

Things that are spooky and forward thinking like an omen or an oracle, like almost metaphysical or supernatural.

all the way to things that are very technical, reference class, forecasting, regression, trends, expectations, forecasting.

And I think in Act-Inf, there's multiple ways that prediction comes into play.

So just listing only four of a certain set, there's the prediction or the now casting of sensations.

And that's like predictive processing.

Like the top-down priors are modeled as providing predictions about sensory inputs.

There's the prediction of, or inference of, hidden causes in the world from those sensory inputs, which are not directly observed.

There's, and importantly notice that these two predictions are actually almost instantaneous.

And then we also talk about prediction through time, like at time t,

there's the prediction or the anticipation of states at a future time.

And those could be internal, external, sense, action states.

So predicted future states.

And then there's also the prediction of the consequences of action, which is anticipatory cybernetics.

And that can include counterfactuals.

So what if something were to happen?

That's like a prediction about a counterfactual

So there's multiple ways that prediction and active inference come into play.

What do you think about that, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think it's all true.

I think it just points, if we're going to ask how time is included, then we can break out how time has been included, like what the difference is in terms of how time is included in an expectation versus how time is included in a trend estimation.

Because I think that's what causes us to be able to see multiple different ways of prediction.

So not just types of prediction, but then the actual time given over to that particular type.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

Those who study prediction...

might be considered future studiers or futurologists.

And that's also an interesting Wiki page and search area.

Just like how many frameworks were brought up?

I mean, they forgot one.

It starts with active and ends with inference.

There's a lot of different methods here, and I'm sure we could all think of more, but it's kind of like we have prediction as a concept looking forward in time, or even to the now, which is kind of forward in time from when we made that prediction.

And then there's the field around that.

because we're going to also look at postdiction and then the fields that deal with postdiction.

So just whether you're hearing about active inference for the first time or not, think about what is prediction fundamentally, looking forward in time, and then what are the attributes of fields that look forward in time?

For example, they may not have proof because they're making a prediction about something that hasn't yet played out.

So they might be an estimate that you'll bet the house on, but can one say that they have proof when they're talking about something going forward in time?

Now.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is where it gets really interesting because if you're an archaeologist slash anthropologist and you're trying to figure out whether the plains of Salisbury, where Salisbury was the originating place for all those rocks to get tipped up,

You're actually looking forward into a future that you think is maybe unresolved, even though you're looking into the deep past as well.

So again, I know that time zero seems to be going only one direction, but our minds don't seem to necessarily honor that.


SPEAKER_05:
Exactly.

So we can contrast that.

prediction with postdiction, and so quoting the paper.

As a reasoning pattern, the FEP can be used to generate postdictive statements in the sense of Friston et al.

2017, which we'll talk about.

Accordingly, FEP reasoning might be interpreted as a principle akin to those found in the postdictive sciences, aka historical sciences, hashtag keyword, like geology,

paleontology, archaeology, or any science that deals with irreproducible causes, Cleland.

Postdictive scientific statements are concerned with what must have been the case instead of what will be the case.

So, Cleland's paper from 2002 is posted here, and it's very clear to see how the paper under discussion draws on this one.

And just to read the conclusion of the abstract, I show that these different patterns of reasoning...

are grounded in an objective and remarkably pervasive time asymmetry of nature.

So there is this like entropy's arrow, time's arrow, and that makes talking about the future and the now different than talking about the past.

That's the historical sciences.

And then the Fristian et al.

2017 paper.

Now this is interesting because postdictive was only used one time in the paper.

Figure two illustrates the recurrent nature of the message passing that mediates this predictive and postdictive inference using little arrows.

One can clearly see that the first outcome can influence expectation about the final hidden state and expectations about the final hidden state reach back and influence expectations about the initial step.

This will become an important aspect of the deep temporal models considered later.

So here's that figure two.

It's the partially observable Markov decision process that we know and love with a layer of the message passing added because Parr and DeVries are authors.

And this is like a very, I mean, 2017 wasn't so long ago, but this was an important work that combined a lot of different areas together.

And here's that reach around through time in an interesting way.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is where bringing your history and my history into this interaction creates a new history.

And I know that's symbolically, that's a gross oversimplification.

But if you were trying to share this with somebody with not as much background, maybe that would be a simple tell.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

And just like we talked about future studies, let's think about the historical sciences.

So here we have the past, present, and future, and historical sciences can refer to history proper.

The auxiliary sciences of history, or any science that draws from records of past events, aren't experiments also past events?

Now, the auxiliary sciences include, but are not limited to, and there's so many fun fields here, things that are kind of like subfields of history, like heraldry, paleography.

So there's some great vexillology, a lot of awesome terms in here.

And then I was thinking, well, you can't prove something in the future.

It hasn't happened yet.

And then historically, you also can't prove it because it couldn't have been otherwise.

Hence, you have to only say what must have been the case instead of what will be the case.

Like you can't generalize.

You can't say, well, the Galapagos are biodiverse because, and then just give one singular answer, even putting Tinbergen aside and everything.

Then, so what's left?

the past, the present, and the future.

And then the now is just this like kind of moving indicator that we're experiencing.

And so it doesn't really make sense to prove something only in the now either.

So that's just very interesting how there's that, as Cleland calls it, the pervasive time asymmetry of nature.

And you know, put your hand down if you disagree, but what does that leave for us to actually work with in terms of scientific modeling?

And from that tension is actually where FEP and Act-Imp are going to be doing some interesting things.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I love the images that you put up here because one of the things from a learning standpoint that I found really helpful is instead of a test being what answers can you pull from your memory bank, it was a learning exhibition where the chronology

was kind of the slow hand.

You'd lived out X number of months of working in a professional setting and now, in front of a significant audience, you were laying out a chronological timeline where the focus was on

the feelings now top-down, organized and narrated, but that whole, that entire picture of feelings of working in a professional setting for months actually now came out in terms of a narrative.

So the historical sciences piece here is actually an amazing consolidator as well.

And that's what I found about this paper.

It was actually an incredible consolidator.


SPEAKER_05:
Agreed.

So necessity and sufficiency.

They're different words.

They mean different things.

And sometimes it's easy to get it right in a simple case, but then when science gonna science, it gets like really mixed up.

So necessity means that you need it.

Like the car needs wheels to roll normally.

If you take it away, it's a loss of function.

The wheels are a necessity for the car.

But are wheels a sufficiency for the car?

Well, no, because just four wheels doesn't equal a car.

Or you could have all the car, but if there's no gas, like there's something else that's also necessary.

So they're very similar terms.

They both describe the conditions that are sufficient and or necessary for something being the case.

and that's been discussed in the math 3ma in this figure in the mathematical case of course necessity and sufficiency is a key topic in the gene regulatory network case that i've studied where they talk about genes being necessary or sufficient for a given phenotype and then also in a legal case from this yale law journal

talking about the most restrictive to the least restrictive.

Like if somebody had no causal role in a crime that inarguably occurred,

they're blameless.

If somebody was necessary and sufficient for something to be caused, it makes sense that they would be guilty of that being occurred.

But then there's complex systems in between, and there's the difference that makes a difference.

And there's so many ways to talk about necessity and sufficiency.

So there's sort of a simple bookmark on both necessity and sufficiency and neither.

And then there's a complex space in between.


SPEAKER_01:
i would say is no matter how often you talk about causation it's amazing how much stuff just gets roman candle information wise out of that simple word that's all i need to say about that the last keyword proper is free energy principle and check out active stream number 14 number 32 number 26 i mean roll the die


SPEAKER_05:
We talk about it a lot, but it's always important to go over it because it may be someone's first time hearing it, and the simple aspects of it are the parts that we want to return to again and again, kind of like a strange attractor in our model, kind of like the FEP.

We've talked about some of the technical part on the bottom, so check out especially 32 and 26 for the bottom parts.

And then the free energy principle is this imperative

to be self-evidencing and anti-dissipative.

If I could only choose two words, potentially those would be it.

And they're both going to come up today because anti-dissipative will be equated to persistent duration of survival.

And then evidencing is going to be related to Bayesian approaches to modeling evidence.

And then where do you go from there?

There's so many places to go.

Active inference, the corollary process theory,

And we're going to talk and unpack FEP in a few different domains.

So good to move to the next slide.

All right, so how does FEP, free energy principle, relate to life in this paper?

So the paper says, minimizing free energy is the process whereby one maintains one's structural integrity in phase of environmental perturbations by revisiting one's most probable organization of physiologic states.

is in that sense that minimizing free energy is considered a condition for life one can equate survival with life since one supposes the other under the fep and then kind of two slogans cool sentence structure if i survived it means that i maintained my structural integrity in face of environmental perturbations in a dissipative universe according to the arrow of time and maintaining my structural integrity is what qualifies me as living

From the point of view of the FEP, when considering metamorphic organisms, it may be said that the life cycle that corresponds to the thing whose integrity is maintained over time, e.g.

over evolutionary time, not the specific form that the system takes at one stage of its development, e.g.

the adult form of a frog or ant.

This casts the FEP within the realm of process ontology versus substance ontology.

And I just have to say that Bucky Fuller talks about structural integrity as being like the house that stays up through time, but pattern integrity is in his ontology, a system that recapitulates itself.

And so it retains dynamical integrity.

And then it's,

that's connected to the idea of process ontology versus substance ontology, which we'll discuss more on the next slide, but it's just awesome.

Like this is an ant, an ant has a life cycle, but then you can almost pull back and say, well, really the integrity of this egg becoming an adult, it's related to the nurses feeding that egg.

So even if that egg to adult transition reminds us of a solitary organism, the integrity that's being regenerated

generation after generation is like the colony.

And so what are we talking about the persistence of when you never step into the same river twice?

Like in one sense, there is no integrity being maintained because things are always changing.

And so the FEP framing life in that way is very interesting.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

This is where it's, I would often say to people, I want you to go into this situation.

I know it's new for you, but I want you to go into this situation with both eyes open.

And with one of the eyes, I want you to see the project at hand, potentially.

And with the other, I want you to be able to see the system at hand, potentially.

And that's very confusing because, I mean, the best that most of us can do is just deal with the complexity of the project or the complexity of the system, not the complexity of both co-occurringly.

But

Having said that, the better you can work at knowing both are present, regardless of what you decide is your focal point in that particular moment.

the better you'll have an opportunity to sort of get the whole picture going on here.

It's hard.

In fact, it takes some moving away from the way that most people are trained to try to look at things.

So it's really hard to be honest.


SPEAKER_05:
Let's dig into process versus substance ontology.

So the 2020 Dupree paper is cited, Life as Process, and also just a cool kind of coincidence that it's a bilingual abstract, if not paper, with English and Russian.

And check out the paper and all the citations if you want to read more, but just to read the highlighted parts that kind of get the essence of the abstract.

The metaphysics that has dominated Western philosophy and that currently shapes most understanding of life and the life sciences sees the world as composed of things and their properties.

While these things appear to undergo all kinds of changes, like metabolism, development, context changes, it has often been supposed that this amounts to no more than a change in the spatial relations of their unchanging parts.

From antiquity, however, there has been a rival to this view, the process ontology, associated in antiquity with the fragmentary surviving writings of Heraclitus.

For process ontology, what most fundamentally exists is change or process,

What we are tempted to think of as constant things are in reality merely temporary stabilities in this constant flux of change, eddies in the flux of process.

My main claim in this paper will be that a metaphysics of the latter kind is the only kind adequate to making sense of the living world.

And also related research is this causally powerful processes from earlier in 2021 by Dupree in synthese.

So this is a fascinating line of research about

moving from a substance to a process-based view and where causation comes into play with that with respect to the historical sciences

There's so many other ways to take this.

Another quote that one of my philosophy professors would always say, and I think it was a quote from Kant, was there will never be a Newton for a blade of grass because there isn't a mechanistic explanation that's timeless for a blade of grass in the way that there plausibly could be for like Newton's cradle.


SPEAKER_01:
So I wanted to ask you, did you find this, have you known about this before reading this paper, or did the paper cause you to go and look and find papers on process ontology?

Because two of our colleagues talk about flux, Blue and Stephen,

a lot.

And so when you brought this forward, I thought, okay, so has Daniel been hiding this from me all along?

Cause he's kind of known about this network or did the paper in effect create a situation where you wanted to know more about process ontology.


SPEAKER_05:
I followed the stigma.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.


SPEAKER_05:
the paper it says it's unclear whether um it might be argued life and survival refer to an enduring process that advocates of process oncology would call organism in the sense of pre-2020 went down to the citations there was yeah yeah i knew this philosopher i knew this philosopher but i hadn't read this paper yeah so exactly process ontology now generating new process ontologies


SPEAKER_01:
Variation upon variation, right?

And still in the FEP, still at that FEP narrow timeframe.

That goes back to, as I said, I'm not sure if it's just subjective or subjective and objective.

So anyway, I'm glad you found this because now I got to read Dupree.

Because, yeah, anyway.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, substance, where art thy sting?


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
So how does the FEP relate to active inference?

We're kind of getting ahead in the paper in one sense, so we'll be coming back around to it, but the FEP on its own is a principle.

namely a foundation for reasoning about things, e.g.

living things.

In this paper, we approach the FEP as such.

However, the FEP can also be read more broadly as a research program that uses FEP reasoning patterns to generate scientific hypotheses.

This involves implementing FEP reasoning into a theory called active inference, which is routinely used to study various cognitive functions.

When you go to the footnote, there's only one, it's important to note that FEP includes processes other than free energy minimization.

It also includes expected free energy minimization and generalized free energy minimization.

While minimizing free energy endows the organism with postdictive inference, which we're gonna go into in the example and talk about more, minimizing expected free energy endows the organism with predictive inference.

So FEP is postdictive.

It looks at the oncoming stream of data and it compares that to basically what must have been the case.

But ACT-INF or any other predictive theory that's about expectations, it kind of has to be different because the consequences of action are in the future.

So it has to be these two different modes

And then we're going to come back to these ideas, but FEP reasoning yields historical hypotheses and not just like epic or legendary, but they're about the past because it operates a historical evidentiary pattern and provides a compelling unifying causal story.

It operates a curious evidentiary pattern though, because it assumes that both the investigator and the thing under investigation can form to that evidentiary pattern.

That pattern is free energy minimization per se.


SPEAKER_01:
So if you're making fewer prediction errors, your time frame carries on, but you actually do become, I don't know if you want the label, but you do become somebody more versed in post-dictive

what do we want to call them?

Postdictive confirmations?

I don't even know how to describe it.

But this was a huge thing for me.


SPEAKER_05:
Postdictator?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I guess.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, we talk a lot about prediction markets, but where's the postdiction market?

And what if organisms are so good at postdiction, it looks predictive?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, they've got disclaimers whenever you read the forward-looking statements, right?

Like, postdictive is now a new term that I can pull into those conversations around the disclaimer.


SPEAKER_05:
It's like if something's not predictive, it's either about right now or it's postdictive.


SPEAKER_02:
Right, exactly.


SPEAKER_05:
Let's get to the core thing.

terminology that axel is bringing up here and like this is what reading the paper means is to understand like why this entailment problem is framed what responses exist to that problem implicitly explicitly how it's addressed in this paper and what the implications are going forward that's like you'll have read the paper to have known those things

This was an earlier quote that sometimes arguments in the literature in the FEP give the impression that in order to be alive, e.g.

sufficiency, one must minimize free energy.

Such a claim does not straightforwardly apply to the FEP, however, and this is what the paper will demonstrate.

Minimizing free energy does not entail life.

candles minimize Fe2.

Rather, the argument is that if you're alive, it probably means that you have done something like minimizing your free energy, which is the base optimal thing to do when your life depends upon solving complex inference problems.

This is a subtle but crucial point to getting the story straight.

I shall call this the entailment problem.

That is the confusion in the entailment relation between free energy minimization and life.

Here, the notion of entailment refers to the implication, i.e.

first order logical property between free energy minimization and the fact of displaying some life related processes.

So let's think about two different islands.

minimizing free energy and life.

So we could think of it as like a Venn diagram.

They could be overlapping, they could be partially overlapping, they could be not overlapping, arrows could be drawn anywhere as long as you label them.

Axel frames there to be two different kinds of threads, like two archetypes of framings in the literature.

The first is the strong claim.

The strong claim is that, or what's called the overly generous claim by Kirchhoff and Froese, 2017, is minimizing free energy is a sufficient condition for life.

So we're going to go out there with our free energy thermometer and things that are minimizing free energy are alive because it's sufficient.

The other claim is the weak claim.

If a system is currently alive, it means that it minimized its free energy.

In other words, minimizing free energy was necessary, but not necessarily sufficient for being alive.

Such a claim does not assume the FEP is designed to set the bar for the sufficient conditions of life or meant to predict what things may or may not be alive.

Rather, it limits the scope of application of the principle to beings that we think are alive now

What made us think that?

That's not in the theory.

And enables us to know the necessary conditions under which those beings can be living, i.e.

can actively resist the loss of structural integrity.

What took them there?

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I just think it's interesting that he talks later on, we'll get to this, is that you need the correct or right priors.

And if you go with the strong argument, you assume that the right priors going forward will continue to just materialize versus the weak argument, which says it's not until afterwards whether we know whether or not the right priors were the ones picked.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

There's so many fun examples.

So let's talk about Bayesian organisms.

Bayesian approaches to animal behavior, whether it's Bayesian approaches to foraging or the Bayesian brain, propose that one can model

Red light.

One can model.

Not that organisms are.

One can model.

So just to forestall any kind of map territory distinction, which we always return to, but can't be returned to enough.

One can model organisms as representing their relation to environmental states using priors and a likelihood.

Let's call those representations Bayesian beliefs.

Not in the organism.

It's our representation of that in the model.

On the basis of those beliefs, organisms generate adaptive behavior.

Bayes' beliefs can represent the probability of environmental states prior to observing a signal, that's called a prior, means before, and the relation between environmental states and the observed environmental signals, AKA a likelihood.

Bayes' theorem, from which terms such as the prior and likelihood come from, is typically expressed as an evidentiary relationship between some prior hypotheses, P of H, and the observation or hand, or data, that's E. So E is going to be like evidence or empirical, H is for like hypothesis.

In the way that this sentence is read, this expression, this is Bayes' theorem, and it's read as the probability of the hypothesis given the evidence.

Vertical bar means given or conditioned on.

So the probability of the hypothesis given the evidence equals, there's the equal sign, both sides are the same.

The probability of the evidence given the hypothesis

multiplied by the probability of the hypothesis, that's in the brackets, divided by the probability of the evidence.

That's Bayes theorem.

People use Bayes theorem to model all kinds of things about different systems.

The free energy principle is a Bayesian formulation of the manner in which organisms infer the posterior probability of their prior beliefs after having observed an environmental signal with a given likelihood.

And in doing so, infer some hidden or unobserved variables.

Same equation as the last slide.

stands for the h are unobserved variables whose prior probability forms the hypothesis and what stands for e are the sensory signals organisms receive the data so this is like i think it's equally likely that it's day or night like it's 12 and 12. so 50 50 on whether the latent cause of the world the hypothesis is daytime or nighttime but you can't observe daytime or nighttime all you get are photons on the retina so then

It's like you have a prior that's like 50, 50, and then evidence comes in photons.

And then if there's a lot of photons, you update your prior to get the posterior.

And then you think, okay, it's daytime because I'm getting a lot of photons.

Hence, it is often said that under the free energy principle, organisms are viewed as embodying a hypothesis, belief, or best guess about the cause of their sensations or sensory signals that they receive.

That's because the evidence for an organism are its onboard sensors.

And so the hypotheses are about causes of what is giving rise to sensation.

Just like in the daylight example, it was a hypothesis about what was giving rise to the photons.

Because beliefs are embodied by the organism,

hashtag embedded, enacted, et cetera, and thus the organism's own states, the uncertainty and the likelihood in the prior can be viewed as representing uncertainty inherent to the biological apparatus instead of uncertainty in the world, as would be the case under typical Bayesian models.

Under the FEP, uncertainty should be thus read as reporting a Bayesian credence or credibility score over the organism's own beliefs as it reports the probability of a state or hypothesis relative to other possible hypotheses.

What do you think, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
What do I think?

I'm going to ask you a question back.

So is this another way of saying an account of uncertainty?


SPEAKER_00:
Right?


SPEAKER_01:
Like, so that sounds like, wait a second, how can we have an account of something that we don't know?

But is that what he's, I know, I don't want to interrupt the math, because I really like the way he step by step goes through this.

But when I read this, again, when I read this the first time, I went, oh, okay, well, this is an account of uncertainty.

Wait a second, how can that be?

So,


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

Uncertainty is about the hypothesis giving rise to... So the when?

It takes place over a duration because the updating of priors is happening through time.

So it's like as my tummy is sending me signals, the body is as if

determining whether I'm hungry or not.

And then that uncertainty is the probability of a state or hypothesis relative to other hypotheses.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so the traditional models or methods that we use to try to account for what has been learned doesn't necessarily take this into consideration, when in fact, this is the basis for moving forward and for learning.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes?

I think there'd be some interesting dot one and dot two discussions about uncertainty in frequentism versus Bayesian probability and about what it means for a frequentist p-value driven understanding of certainty or not.

I fail to reject hunger at the 0.05 p-value

Versus the Bayesian credible interval or the Bayes factor of being hungry is this or that relative to this.

Conditioned on the sensory inputs, literally, hypothesis, hungry or not, conditioned on the inputs.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Anyway, again, I don't want to take this off on a tangent.

Let's get back to the math because he does a brilliant job of clearing this up.


SPEAKER_05:
This is such a cool discussion.

The simple answer to the question of whether priors are objective or subjective under the FEP is that they're subjective.

Where's my gavel?

It's over.

As we said, they track the confidence over a system's belief.

Under the FEP, priors do not conform to a rationality beyond the rationality of the inference per se, but nor are they rationally unconstrained.

So this always makes me think of like sort of the new atheist, like if you were rational, you would believe like we believe.

And then that kind of absolutist rationality making way for a multi-perspective rationality, like I guess different people with different priors and sensory inputs

implement their own local rationality and they come to different conclusions.

Fancy that.

There's a rationality beyond Bayesian rationality.

It comes from the way variational Bayes is realized by the system.

And we're going to talk about that later.

It basically embeds when into that process because the approximation to the posterior in the variational Bayesian inference Q is the prior used in the next cycle of inference.

The rational constraint over priors is the fact that the approximate subjective posterior cue will not only be Bayesian, but will also always be the best guess relative to what the true posterior ought to be.

In short, under the FEP, even though priors refer to psychological states of the system or internal states of the system, updates of the system make those priors an approximation of what they should have been had the prior been updated with exact Bayes.

Thus, it might be said that priors under the FEP cut across the objective-subjective dichotomy.

They are subjective, just like the gavel said above, while satisfying a rational constraint mandated by the existence of the system per se.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is the precise approximation argument that comes up often, meaning it's not a question of do we need both?

We do.

But how do we have both available to us?

Well, we've got to keep both eyes open.

We've got to look at both the system and the project, which is really hard because it's much easier to just one or the other and give our attention over to that thing.

That's why postdiction is important.

a little bit easier, maybe.

Hindsight isn't 20-20, as we'll prove in this paper, but it's still better than making that bet with absolutely no priors.


SPEAKER_05:
We talked about substance versus process ontology.

Right.

And then we have this subjective objective.

So it's almost like substance ontology maps with objective because it's like the object.

It's the substance.


SPEAKER_03:
The what.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, the what.

And then process ontology maps to subjective because subjective is relational and dynamic.

It entails something different.


SPEAKER_02:
The when, yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
And then we can kind of lean more on one side or the other, but really it's like they're nested within each other.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

We can't let, if we let, if we drop one or the other, or if you hear people dropping one or the other, you kind of have to bring them back to know that they're both here.

They're both present and they're both available regardless of what you choose to make your focal point.


SPEAKER_05:
That's, that's when they go, well, that's like just your opinion, man.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Exactly.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
So let's go to the crux of the paper, which is the numerical example.

Okay.

So there's some other pieces, you know, we're giving a linear ordering and we're kind of jumping through the paper.

We're going to think about a organism, like a bacterium, that's going to infer whether A or B occurs externally.

Yeah.

For the organism, A and B are part of the class R, and the representations by the organism are A or B. So R can kind of be read like receptor state.

A and B are inferred when receiving a chemical signal part of the class S, like for signal, which can be alpha or beta.

So S is the signal molecule, alpha or beta.

We assume that before observing any signal, so prior, the probability of A is P and the probability of B is one minus P. So they're mutually exclusive and they form a probability together.

Then the numbers are given for A and B, the prior, and then the conditional probabilities.

And then this is where life and death enters the picture.

You got to guess correctly.

If it's A, if alpha is out there and you guess A, you live.

If alpha is out there and you guess wrong, you die.

So you want to be like on the diagonals.

You want A and alpha to go together and B and beta, but you don't want the off diagonals, you'll die.

Okay, let's look at it graphically in figure one.

So the right panel is a visual representation of the organism inferring its prior beliefs about the cause of the observations it makes.

And then it restates several of these pieces.

So we have like the prior, and then we have the signals A and B out there.

Here's something really important for all you active heads out there.

There's no action involved in our example.

We're not talking about active inference.

In more biologically realistic descriptions of behavior, like chance at all 2020, which is where this example is a simplified version of, we need to discuss active inference.

In active inference, behavior is the result of a different inference process, that of an action policy.

This involves more priors, namely about the transition between hidden states and often about preferred sensory outcomes.

So that would entail a model where it's like, okay, there's a probability of transition between alpha and beta out there.

then there's going to be a preference for alpha and then i'm doing action selection on tumble or not based upon whether things are going well for me or not so that's several more pieces to the model right but it's a toy toy example that's going to make the point that minimizing free energy is not sufficient for being alive but it is necessary and so we're just we're

distilling to the simplest possible sensory processing example that doesn't even have action.

So maybe someone could argue that, well, adding action somehow makes this example null and void or whatever, but I don't think that's the case.

And so this does involve more priors and action is then distinguished from inferring hidden states.

It's about inferring another hidden variable, which is policy.

so the first line is the generative model the joint distribution which is multiplying the prior and the likelihood the second and the third line these two represent the prior and the likelihood so here's the prior it's 80 a priori that it's um that i perceive a and 20 a priori i perceive b

And then there's this mapping with A and alpha, and there's like more density there.

And then B and beta, more density there, and the off diagonals are like less.

The fourth line is a possible Bayesian algorithm that could be used.

And then the fifth line is a variational free energy minimization, which we'll talk more about.

But that's kind of this example, is we're just thinking about the sensory processing of a bacteria or cell that is needing to correctly guess

because outside when it's only getting a receptor on its membrane, for example.

What do you think, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Daniel, do you think people will know what the difference is between the process that you and I and Stephen walked through in 33.2 and what we're looking at right here?

Will they know just how different those two representations are?

What do you think?


SPEAKER_05:
It's a good question.

We can restate that this is not an active inference model.

It's also not even trying to be the most awesome Bayesian bacteria model ever.

This is like just using Bayes' theorem to show that

simply minimizing free energy is not going to cut it for being alive under this contrived setting.

But when we were in 32 or yeah, 33.2 and we walked through the matrices where there was a preference and there was the hidden States, it was quite different.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
So check that.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you see, do you see co-variation happening at all in this?


SPEAKER_05:
co-variation um one example of co-variation is like you need to believe that you have accurate sensors if you there needs to be a co-variation between a and alpha okay if you don't have them and you don't assume that you have them are you not dead eventually or pretty quickly that's sort of the um gentle invisible hand of selection sweeping those kinds of systems off the table


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, okay.

Well, I'm just asking because when I saw this, the first thing I said to myself is, my goodness, if there was a continuum between 33.2 and figure one of 34.0, man, these two things are really, really far apart.

They are?

Well, you know, let's go to 33.2.


SPEAKER_05:
So in 33.2, this is like looking, here's what we had done just last week or whatever, earlier this week.

Here, the observations are getting mapped to this prediction about hidden states.

So that's actually this A matrix,

is also the mapping matrix.

Maybe it could have been a little bit clearer because also A is like the hidden state that's being inferred.

But this bacterium is just reflecting this part right here.

So the prior comes in, it's like just this sort of right angle neighborhood where you have the prior beliefs and then we're gonna have observations coming in and then a mapping to the hidden states

What active inference brings in is this whole tree where we're going to influence through policy selection, how hidden states change through time.

And that entails the preferences, free energy minimization, and the affordances.

So this is like just a sub components of active.

All right.

So we're going to assume that the computation is conformant to Bayes' theorem.

and that the posterior probability after observing the signal is going to basically update the prior towards what is most likely given what was observed.

We're going to infer the posterior probability of A after observing alpha.

So the prior on A was 0.8.

And then the probability of alpha, observing alpha contingent on A was 0.7.

So if it's A in reality, then 70% of the time you hear about alpha.

That's what is actually on the receptor.

And then B is just one minus such.

And so 0.7, 0.3.

Okay.

Bayes rule is applied and you carry through the math.

And basically after you've observed alpha,

your probability of estimating that the external state was A went from 0.8 to 0.9032.

So it didn't take you to 100, but it bumped you up.

And then that is Bayes updating.

So that's a Bayesian bacterium updating its

belief about a hidden state of the world based upon a molecule that actually only has a 70-30 accuracy.

And that's really important to know.

Like it sounds like 70-30, it sounds like that should almost like degrade your accuracy, but it actually, even if it were 51-49, it would still upgrade your accuracy a tiny, tiny, tiny bit.

Now, if it were 1-0-0-1, well then, yeah, observing it, if it's perfectly associated, is going to update your belief a lot.

But even something that's relatively noisy like 70-30 can still make you go from 80 to 90% sure.


SPEAKER_01:
This is just basically taking whether or not you've got a decontextualized set of information versus a contextualized one.

and what the benefits of adding the contextualization does, I think.

Again, maybe I'm oversimplifying, but I think that.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

So with exact Bayesian inference, this could be computed, but potentially that's not tractable in biological systems, especially if you start to think about how there could be like 500 metabolites.

and that's called the black box problem or the solipsism or seclusion problem variously in the FEP literature.

So how does the FEP get around that?

In order to bypass the problem, the FEP models that inference as approximate base.

Approximate base bypasses the direct evaluation of the likelihood, and that makes it a lot more tractable.

The central claim of the FEP is

interesting to read, is that changes leading to behavioral and neurophysiological responses in living systems conform to a form of approximate Bayesian inference known as variational base.

So check out active number 26 to learn more about variational Bayes, which basically relates to, we're going to control the family of equations, and then we're going to do model fitting on a family of equations.

And that'll be easy.

Like we're going to constrain our equation to Y equals MX plus B, linear model.

Well, then we can fit it with a least squares error.

It's going to be a convex optimization.

We can do it.

These are different types of problems, but similarly, we're going to have a certain family of equations that we parameterize, and that's variational base.

What citations did you add?


SPEAKER_01:
All I put in here was some stuff that I've been looking at over a decade ago now, and some conversations that I had with people like Morris Moskovich and Raina around the idea that

neurobiologically, is there some sort of an analog between walking, an elephant walking across this man at once and not really seeing the desire line versus if a trace is going, if traces are going through multiple times, how does that affect potential gene folding in the neurons and stuff like that?

And so it doesn't really, it doesn't really, I don't, I don't think it builds on the idea of what you're talking about in terms of how we can

We might want to be able to set up software, recognition software, but over a decade ago, the idea that how something is grooved in, eventually an approximation becomes something clearer and the energy that you have to put into that

And that's where you had the top cat being maybe too energy intensive.

I just think it's really interesting because back over a decade ago, FMRIs were supposed to be the thing that was going to give us a clearer picture.

And there were people, even back then, they were saying, wait a second.

We want to be able to talk about when a really blurry picture becomes a more clear picture as opposed to this is what a bump in energy tells us.

We're trying to kill that idea more than a decade ago.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Now, in that example, everything went well for the bacteria, right?

It perceived alpha, it updated A, it's all good.

So the following numerical example will demonstrate that minimizing free energy is not sufficient for life, as it can lead to the exact opposite death.

This is really key.

FEP haters out there.

Note that the scope of the following numerical example is deliberately limited.

The goal is to demonstrate minimizing free energy can lead to maladaptive inference when performed with the wrong priors.

All things being kept fixed.

If the priors are allowed to update, the inference should lead to adaptive behavior.

So it's a contrived example.

This isn't how you would do FEP modeling if you wanted your system to work.

Adaptivity is guaranteed to the extent which priors match environmental constraints more than by the machinery employed to perform the inference.

So just saying we used bays, it's like, this isn't a sales pitch.

You could have the wrong priors.

We used free energy minimization in our software.

Okay, well-

you're going right off a cliff.

So you can think, have the prior, this is fine.

So it's not enough to hide behind the methodology.

The priors have to be stated and they have to be adaptive.

It's not enough just to say, well, free energy minimization occurred, so things worked, right?

No, it's not just like your one-stop shop.

It's like a linear model, but a little bit different and more complex.

So the following example of free energy minimization is provided with a sole purpose of supporting our response to the entailment problem, which is to say supporting the weak and refuting the strong claim.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_05:
the goal is to give a formal intuition as to why minimizing free energy is not sufficient for life understood as the preservation of structural integrity by no means should the following numerical example be viewed as an exemplar of the manner in which free energy minimization operates mathematically okay so this is not an fep model

It's just not.

It's an FEP-like model that we're using to make some important claims about FEP.

And so here is the, in equation four, is the free energy formulation.

This is the variational inference, which we're not going to go into right now.

But what we'll note is just the QR information.

Q of R, R is remember the receptor state, like alpha or beta, corresponds to the proposal recognition or approximate posterior density referred to in the FEP literature.

It is Q of R, the recognition density, remember we're only making a sensory model that is embodied by the organisms, not to be confused with the P of R and alpha, which would be the joint distribution or generative model.

So way back in live stream number six,

We talked about how there's like the recognition model, which is from the data to the hyperparameters.

That's from the observation of alpha or beta to A or B. And that's related to perception.

The world is handing us alpha or beta, and then we're updating our causal model of the world.

But then we're not here discussing action.

So it's kind of a limited example.

It's more like a unidirectional example, but adding in the second direction doesn't get around the fact that perceptual free energy was minimized and that doesn't always work.

So let's look at it not work.

So we're going to... It's funny because it's true.

It's like, and it works because it doesn't.

So let's assume our organism operates under variational Bayes and still represented A with the same level of confidence.

So here's what happens.

This is actually a good variational Bayes case.

Okay, so here A is observed and the FE is calculated at 0.47.

And then in six...

Beta is observed, or B, it's a question of whether B has a higher free energy contingent on observing A. So that gives a free energy of 2.297, 2792.

So-

Minimizing free energy is better.

So under the variational model, we still would have selected the right outcome.

So this is actually the variational equation working.

We're going to change it in a second.

Variational equation works.

Friston's like, yeah.

you got it minimizing free energy leads to survival only under the right conditions which is if you have the right priors so now we're going to imagine the same scenario with inverted maladaptive priors okay so you're dumped into the desert but the priors are for um the ocean or something so here the p of b is 0.8 so now after there's an update

The energy, free energy of representing B after sensing A is 0.96.

And the free energy when representing A after sensing alpha, which is like the correct thing to do is higher.

It's over one.

Okay.

So the minimal free energy would be representing B after sensing alpha because you had such an overwhelming belief in B

that even observing A doesn't push you all the way to believing A. I think there's a typo in the paper because it says represented state B with 0.63% confidence, but it's actually 63% or 0.63.

But the point is, if you started at 80% believing in B, then you got alpha,

you drop from 0.8 to 0.63.

So you're still 63, you're less confident, but still you're two thirds believing in B. So in other words, free energy minimization just happened and you just picked the wrong thing because your priors were wrong.

That bacteria is gonna die.

So that's the hand sweeping those maladaptive priors off the table.

That's like evolution by natural selection.

Hence, minimizing free energy per se does not entail life.

Not under the wrong prior.

Not dressed like that, you don't.

But it's just, again, making a simple, important point.

Minimizing free energy is not sufficient for being alive.

It is necessary for being alive.

Although free energy minimization is not sufficient for life,

The numerical example suggests there may be an entailment that goes the other way around.

If you're alive, it might very well be because you did something like minimize free energy.

So that's the weak relationship.

So we kind of invalidated the strong claim of sufficiency, but we're actually finding support for the weak claim of necessity.

This makes the FEP an interesting epistemic principle for researchers interested in development.

of themselves, of cities, of organisms?

In a reverse engineering fashion, if we observe a free energy minimizing organism still living at the time that we observe it, just like all things that we observe are, we can trust it has good enough priors to remain alive.

Like I look at the ants, I think whatever they're doing as the world has changed, they've been doing it for 120 million years.

That's what we know about that.

Oh, well, how do they know what to do when there's a break in the trail?

Well, the ones that didn't aren't here and the ones that are here did it well enough.

And that's like a first pass at an answer.

And then also on a wing and a prior,

On a wing means like sort of like a few different things, but it reminded me of the winged snowflake, the 2007 paper, and then moth to a flame.

And so if you're observing these snowflakes, the ones you observe are going to increasingly be the ones that have wings that can stay solid because the ones that don't, don't exist.

So that's FEP on a wing and a prior.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.


SPEAKER_05:
One could rightfully say that minimizing free energy when equipped with the right prior beliefs is sufficient for life, i.e.

all you need to be qualified as living or maintaining your structural integrity under the FEP.

The point here is the choice of prior, whether under Bayesian or approximate Bayesian regime, is a real concern since the entailment relation between life and FEP entirely depends on the adaptivity of those priors.

Interestingly, some have argued the adaptivity of priors can also be guaranteed by a free energy minimization operating at the population level as a form of natural selection.

The citation there was to HESP 2019, a multi-scale proposal of the emerging complexity of life with HESP, Ramstead, Constant, Badcock, Kirchhoff, and Friston.

And here's a figure from there.

I'll say, though, that upcoming there will be a paper with myself, Axel, Blue, Parr, and Friston that will go into a lot more detail on this.

So it's absolutely a great point, and I believe that it's the case.

Dean, what did you write here?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I was just wondering, from the perspective of what a prior is...

Is it available there in terms of something that we can leverage off of?

And then of, then what do we do?

Because we have some sort of previous marker from which to infer eventually.

So I was wondering if that's the essence of what an adaptive as function, as an action is.

But I think I'll wait until we bring up that paper with five authors because... We'll discuss it.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, exactly.

We will discuss it.

It's like... We'll have fun things to discuss.

I can think of more examples, but I'll save them.

So, in the future direction.

Last section.

The dissolution of the entailment problem.

You know, again...

Write a pape if you don't think that the entailment problem is adequately parsed and dissolved in this paper.

It's a great paper if somebody wanted to write it.

Puts us in a good position to move to another related difficulty in the philosophical literature on the FEP, which is this time of an exegetic kind.

Look at these synonyms.

Hermeneutical, there's an awesome Friston paper about the hermeneutics of communication.

These are just nice adjectives.

If minimizing free energy is not sufficient for life or survival, how should we interpret statements such as the minimization of free energy may be necessary if not sufficient characteristic of evolutionary successful systems?

Friston and Stephan, 2007.

Way, way, way back.

Postdictive scientific statements are concerned with what must have been the case instead of what will be the case.

Like saying that the Hox gene duplication allowed for this body plan to change, it doesn't say about what will happen, but it is about what was necessary for happening.

So a statement such as the minimization of free energy may be a necessary, if not sufficient characteristic of evolutionary successful systems, this quote, is probably such a postdictive statement.

statement should be interpreted as claiming that free energy minimization must have occurred if a system is evolutionarily successful not the other way around we're looking at living creatures and post-dicting what got them there not looking at the class of all systems hypothetical failing etc and then saying what will make them alive because you can again minimize your free energy right off a cliff

Burn yourself out like a candle.

That'll minimize free energy too.

You could have maladaptive priors and also be minimizing your free energy.


SPEAKER_01:
Daniel, do you think this talks about the difference between deductively realizing when and inductively realizing when?


SPEAKER_05:
Let's talk about deduction, induction, and abduction.


SPEAKER_01:
The when piece of this.

Again, I don't want to push this too far into the future because we're almost at the end here, but maybe that's a 0.1 thing.

I'm not sure.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it's a definite 0.1.

Okay.

So the final slide, it's also the final lines of the paper.

Okay.

um it's a little bit of a personal you know it's interesting to read a paper with i it's the first one author paper but it's also more of like a philosophy and dupree's papers are written in this way as well when they're single author it's like i argue that this so that's kind of an interesting style that um stem papers usually don't have so um

This is Axel kind of bringing it all together.

As a person who used the free energy principle in the numerical example above, the puzzling trace for which I was seeking a causal explanation for was the survival of the organism.

That was my observation.

The causal story or hypothesis for that observation under the conditions we imposed to our simulated organism was the free energy principle, the inference over which led me to write the paper you are reading at the moment and the live stream you're listening to at this moment.

That paper functioned as sensory evidence for my hypothesis, e.g.

when writing down the number and seeing they were adding up.

And that paper, livestream, is the observation that you are using to evidence your hypothesis concerning the claim I set at the start of the paper, namely that free energy minimization is not sufficient for life.

So if you had wildly out of whack priors on that claim, maybe even listening to us talk, you still believe what you believe.

That's okay.

It's all consistent and good.

Fidel to the unifying grip of hypotheses in the historical sciences, the free energy principle is meant to account for all of that.

You, me, and the organism understudy in a unifying fashion.

So here is Axel looking at his figure one, and then we're reading the paper, and then like Act-Inf Lab and the broader ecosystem,

is observing that and there's other things observing us.

So FEP, all I see.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Yeah, again, back to the question of whether it can be both objective and subjective at the same time and whether that fits within the relatively small timeframes of what we're looking at when we're talking about FEP.

And this is even a smaller version of FEP than maybe others look at in terms of a unit of analysis.

Anyway, I just think the way he was able to

use math to show that there is a way of arriving at knowing what is the numerator and what's the denominator here.

A was clear, B it was pretty concise given the complexity, and C it's pretty compelling.


SPEAKER_05:
agree with all of that really looking forward to the dot one and dot two of course axel and anyone else is welcome to join in those discussions and then we have just so many more papes to discuss in the coming years

We're going to just do what we do in the dot one and dot two.

We're going to be in the bathtub phase, be in the thick of it, be in the forest for the dot one.

And then we're going to have our springboard and our jumping off in the dot two.

And...

We looked forward to this .zero, but soon we're going to be looking back on it, won't we, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, exactly.

Perfect.

Perfect setup.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Thank you so much.

Absolutely.

Thanks, everybody, for watching.

Hope to see you around.

All right.

Bye.

## JtXvkawQ1rY

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 34.1.

It's December 7th, 2021.

Welcome to ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at some of the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

All Act In Flap activities are participatory, so let us know if you want to join in or co-organize.

We have three organizational units, education, communication, and tools, and weekly meetings for each of those units, a ton of interesting projects to get involved in.

coda.io at Active Inference Lab slash Active Lab, you'll find a searchable and sortable site where you can learn more about the past and upcoming live streams that we have.

today in active stream number 34.1 we're going to be learning and discussing about this fun paper the free energy principle it's not about what it takes it's about what took you there by actual constant in 2021 and in 34.0

Dean and I had a great time.

We talked about the paper, so check out the dot zero and of course, read the paper if you wanna learn more.

Today in 34.1, we can go over some of the key claims.

We can look at some of the examples again and differentiate the Bayesian approach versus the free energy approach and just really take it anywhere that people think is interesting.

So if you're watching live,

just ask questions in the live chat and we'll be keeping our eye on that.

And we will just introduce ourselves, go around, and then we'll take it wherever we take it.

We can introduce ourselves, we can say hi and say maybe something that was exciting about the paper that we remembered or something that we'd like to reduce our uncertainty on by the end of this discussion.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and I'm actually just looking forward to seeing if anyone in the live chat has some questions to ask because there's so many cool adjacencies to this paper and just the

beginnings of the thread were explored by Dean and I in the dot zero.

So exploring the implications and what people see as relevant in this paper, I think will be really exciting.

And I will pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Daniel.

I'm Dean.

I'm Calgary.

I'm just curious, again, to see how as you start pulling on a thread,

discovering how many things are actually there as opposed to just the threads.

So yeah, I think today should be a pretty interesting day and I'll pass it over to David.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Dave.

I live north of Manila.

I did natural language processing with big computers and studied cybernetic learning theory.

And I'm excited that he's given us some simple math.

Axel Constant is kind of bringing it down to those of us who stalled by the end of Calculus 1.


SPEAKER_00:
Just to sort of lead in question, Dave, in the area of cybernetics, is there any...

analogous work anyone who said well it's not really about being a cybernetic system it's about how you came to be that cybernetic system like are there any parallels in the cybernetics literature for the kinds of things that are explored in this paper well there are yeah um in terms of um


SPEAKER_02:
Not so much necessarily the origins.

Well, yes, in cybernetic learning theory, a branch called conversation theory

They completely cut loose the notion of the physical embodiments of systems from the mimetic or functional or conceptual or cognitive aspects of systems.

In fact, even types of systems.

Very much like what Richard Dawkins did

30 plus years ago on separating genetics from mimetics, which in his case originally was just a proof of principle, not something he wanted to pursue especially, and it has been pursued.

In cybernetic learning theory, the individual is equated to the conversation, is equated with a type of system that originates, that persists, that merges into other systems,

that may very well function through many bodies, so you have distributed intelligence right out of the gate, as well as internal differentiation, internal self-definition of each individual as a conversation.

So definitely the...

And there's a lot of math, even going way back to the 60s and 70s.

There were cyberneticians who took precise quantitative work very seriously and dug down very carefully on quantified attention, quantified uncertainty, resolution of uncertainty, and the qualitative consequences of deciding

what's really happening, what my plan really is, very much the sort of sudden, abrupt, and often irreversible changes that the world looked at in a lot of depth when catastrophe theory burst upon the world.

Sudden catastrophic, perhaps an improvement, but a catastrophic, a sudden, a relatively irreversible change.

and here it is still working on it in deeper and deeper in detail and wider scope so good for mr const dr const pretty interesting it makes me think about like a friendship and how maybe it's not just about


SPEAKER_00:
what the friendship is or what it takes to have a friendship, but it's about the specific conversations that take you there.

So let's just kind of look at the main aims and claims and parts of the paper, and then either of you raise your hand, of course.

Maybe some others will join and anyone in the live chat, please just ask any question or make a comment.

We're just chilling.

So the center topic that's raised and it's a term that's introduced in this paper, not the word, but its usage in this situation is the entailment problem.

And just like the dog and the tail, as they say,

The entailment problem is about the relationship, the necessity and the sufficiency relationship, which one is following which and under what situations they're following each other.

The entailment problem is the confusion in the entailment relation between free energy minimization and life.

So is free energy minimization necessary for life?

Is it sufficient?

Those are the core pieces of the entailment problem.

And what happens in this paper is a simple dissolution through a trivial toy simplified example of that entailment problem.

And we're going to probably walk through it again today, but this numerical example, which is very stripped down, it's not full act-inf, there's no action in the loop, it's just a perceptive example.

And it just shows that free energy minimization does not always lead to the correct choices.

It's also conditional upon the priors.

In other words, how you got there.

It's about what took you there because the priors don't come from nowhere.

They come from the past.

So this kind of connects this rigorous logic within the action perception loop, or in this case, just a simplified perception loop, to the often ill or illogical way that things happened to get the way they are.

So it's going to be that tension between, is this a rational analysis?

Is it locally rational, but maybe globally irrational?

All those kinds of topics come up.

And just to skip to the final words of the paper, the claim is,

in this paper that's explored is that free energy minimization is not sufficient for life.

So not that FEP has nothing to say about life, not that Act-Inf is irrelevant, but that free energy minimization is not sufficient.

It turns out that it's necessary to be doing something like free energy minimization to persist in a dissipative world.

but it's not sufficient.

It can't be all that you have.

The wheels are necessary for the car to go round and round, round and round, but they're not sufficient.

And then that last sentence, the free energy principle is meant to account for all kinds of systems.

You, the listener slash reader, the author of the paper, and the system of interest, the organism under study in a unifying fashion.

So we should also explore like, what is the unifying principle

lens or what is the framing under which the research scholar and the person who's just sort of like, what is the free energy principle and the bacterium?

And what is that unifying principle?

And what does the free energy principle have to do with that?

Okay.

So Dean, where do you think we should jump in or what would be a fun question or a place to start here?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so I have a little bit of history with this.

So what took you there?

So if I'm meeting somebody and they're an expert at something, I don't typically ask, why are you an expert?

Because that's kind of offensive.

But to ask, what got you here?

What got you to the place where you now bear this title?

The weight of that title is an interesting way of going about trying to figure out what

what logics they have applied in the past to untangle problems and resolve things that maybe somebody

with less expertise struggles with or doesn't seem to be able to overcome.

So that's where this paper was really helpful to me.

Instead of why do I have to do this or why are you such an expert, asking where did you come from and then being specific in terms of so how did you resolve something that I still find

Difficult to resolve like why do I have to tie my shoes?

And then the expert says well because you're going to trip over your shoelace fall down Well, I haven't tripped over my shoelace instead of going down that path figuring it out in a slightly more sophisticated way and


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, thank you.

I'm not going to read this Blake quote, but of course we have to write it down.

It makes me think about how why, which is an important question, often lends itself towards generalization.

Like, why are you studying machine learning?

Well, it's really important and it's going to become increasingly important and I wanted to have a good job and other people told me it was relevant.

It kind of generalizes out and

Whereas what took you there is always going to be a trajectory.

It's kind of a path.

And that's where you get the answer.

That's more like, well, I met this mentor and then I was curious about this specific topic.

And then we did this program.

So what took you there is about the specifics and what,

is broached in why questions is often generalizations.

And we know that there's not even a single answer to why.

Like we've talked about Aristotle's whys and about Tinbergen why, like why is always going to be a plurality of answers.

Whereas what took you there is gonna be a specific path.

And so that's the tension.

in living systems is we want to understand something general like surely there are some generalizations we can make across single-celled life or across mammals but also we're explaining specific systems so which aspects are going to be generalizable and which ones aren't and i think again free energy principle as a theory of everything

and something that does clearly make generalizations across systems, at least apply to different systems.

How does this hyper specific trajectory based way of approaching answering a question relate to more of a mean field approximation averaged over multiple categories?

I think it's that tension that's really interesting to describe.

So one is this general versus specific tension.

and then if we can go to the simple point that's made in the paper that the free energy principle is not concerned with the sufficient conditions of existence but rather with what must have been the case given that you exist so this is related to necessity and sufficiency which we talked about in the dot zero they're similar words so we should use them differently they're different words in other words it's about necessity but not necessarily sufficiency

And then it's not about what figuring out what it takes to be alive.

It's about figuring out what took you there.

So the title is restated and turned around many, many different times because it is such a distillable and simple yet important concept.

And I think the piece that I'd like to explore a little more is really the pronoun use of

I understand why the paper is written from an I perspective, because that's convention with single author philosophy papers, but it's about figuring out what took you there.

So there's a sort of rhetorical element of speaking to a reader, which is returning at the end of the paper, those last few lines about you, me, and the system under study.

But then also it's almost like

about how the free energy principle is about systems looking at their own timeline and trajectory and perhaps not as much as looking out.

So I'm curious about what does that relational element mean here with the person relating to their past and us as systems relating to other systems, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so the necessity might be you show up

you attend in order for things to sort of continue on.

But the sufficiency part is how available you are.

So you can show up and turn all your senses off and be present, but not necessarily be taking in anything, or at least trying to actively avoid taking information in.

And so that's the part, again, I would agree with you.

That's the part I found really interesting because

To not understand or appreciate that there's a difference between what is necessary, I'm here, I'm in part of this live stream now, but then I could be distracted in all different directions, not really be available to what is going on around me is a whole different matter.

And I think that's what Axel has done a really good job of bringing it down to that personal level.


SPEAKER_00:
sufficiency has to be exhaustive to say what's truly sufficient for the bacteria to live it it's going to include things like well you need the laws of physics and you need gravity and you need um just all everything it's like really you're giving almost a bit by bit play by play

So sufficiency, it requires an exhaustive account because if you're missing something that's necessary, you didn't capture what was sufficient.

Necessity allows us to just focus on some aspect that we know is relevant and then talk about the why and the what and the how of necessity while acknowledging that we're just focusing on one piece like that.

one line in that one Kandinsky painting, it's necessary for my interpretation of it.

It's not sufficient because the sufficiency of the interpretation of art would just send you off into the whole universe.

Maybe you need all of human cultural history, including from cultures that you wouldn't even directly acknowledge for the sufficiency to be garnered in that interpretive setting.

But necessity is a lot easier to point your finger to

That relates to what are distinguished as the strong and the weak responses to the entailment problem.

So let's look over at this.

And again, anyone with any kind of a question, please just ask it because we're chilling and looking forward to your questions.

So this is where in the paper, the entailment problem is specified.

arguments in the literature on the free energy principle give the impression that in order to be alive to count as a living system one must minimize free energy and so there's a few ways to think about this relationship between minimizing free energy and life sorry if you thought it was going to be a discussion on a different topic because that's what this paper is about and it just again it's so simple it's like

a shape in your hand, you're turning it over.

The shape is simple in some ways, but then the implications of the shape and the way it gets connected to other ideas is really critical.

And

Axel distinguishes two ways to talk about the relationship, the strong and the weak.

And as we'll see, they differ not just in their strength, but also essentially in the direction which the arrow is pointing.

So it's kind of like, it's not like there's a little mountain and a big mountain, but the arrow of elevation is pointing the same way.

There's something a little bit different happening.

The strong claim in response to the entailment problem is that minimizing free energy is a sufficient condition for life.

And that's also called in some earlier work, the overly generous claim, which is kind of a framing that already says that it's probably too generous.

It's incorrect in that way.

And the strong claim is the sufficiency claim.

Minimizing free energy, that's all you need.

It's sufficient to minimize free energy to be a living system.

The implication of the strong claim would be that all we need to do is have that free energy thermometer, and then we could determine who's minimizing free energy.

We have our meter stick on this left side, and then that would be sufficient to talk about what systems were alive or not.

In contrast, the weak claim is a necessity claim.

If a system is currently alive, it means that it has minimized its free energy.

And such a type of claim does not assume the FEP is designed to set the bar for the sufficient conditions of life or meant to predict what things may or may not be alive.

Rather, it limits the scope of the application of the principle to beings that we think are alive now

enables us to know the necessary conditions under which those beings can be living i.e can actively resist the loss of structural integrity what took them there so there's a few interesting pieces just they differ in strength these two responses or claims that are generated by the entailment problem

I wonder what is the scope of the FEP?

And is it for systems that we have a priori decided are already alive?

Are...

non-living systems under the scope of the FVP.

So maybe we can try to like do some duplicate the slide and do a little diagramming and Venn diagrams on what does the minimizing free energy circle look like with respect to the life circle?

And then what is life if we don't have the thermometer over here on the left side?


SPEAKER_01:
So can I ask a question, Daniel?

Would it be going too far off the rails if I wondered to take this idea and say, okay, so I want to build out, I'm an academic or I'm a trainer and I want to build out a curriculum.

Knowing this, what does that imply in terms of, well, I know what's the difference between something that's

surprisal removal, because remember, I'm the one that already knows this, and I'm trying to pass this along to somebody who doesn't know it.

So I'm trying to guess what surprisal removal or minimization means to them.

I'm supposed to be guessing what life means to them.

I'm supposed to be knowing what is necessary, what absolutely they must know, and what will be sufficient.

So in that context, how would we...

How would we order this?


SPEAKER_00:
Let's kind of lay out a few options.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
So we have behind the first door, we'll use letters to talk about them.

So we'll have... I'll take the cash, Monty.

Are you sure?

I can reveal that one of the doors has nothing behind it.

Okay, so we're going to have scenario A, which is there are systems that are minimizing free energy.

So there are systems outside of that circle.

So there may be systems that are not minimizing free energy.

But within the set of living things, all of them are minimizing free energy.

So let's think about what kind of world that is, okay?

So then we can have scenario B where there's living systems, there's non-living systems as well.

So we could ask what puts us in one category, living or non-living, but there's living systems that are minimizing free energy and there's ones that are not.

I think we can say that because if we go with the weak claim,

then it's fair to say that b is ruled out because this would say that there's living systems that are not minimizing free energy so we can say like basically weak claim uh disreputes this area the area of that crescent moon

that's being sort of invicted against.

Is disrepute a word?

Disputes.

We'll go with that.

The weak claim disputes this area of the crescent.

It's saying, well, all living systems have to be minimizing free energy.

It's a necessity, but it's not sufficiency.

So then a third scenario would be like, they're the exact same thing.

So, well,

that would be sort of a well you could have minimizing free energy is a sufficient condition for life so that means that the life circle is we'll have to you can't show a total overlap but the life circle everything that's minimizing free energy is alive

So here in A, there are free energy minimizing systems that aren't alive.

Like a ball falling off of a cliff might be minimizing its free energy, just like it's minimizing its potential energy, or a burning candle might be minimizing free energy, but it doesn't have to be alive.

So these are free energy minimizing systems in the crescent of A that are not alive.

In C,

we have this perfect relationship between the two things and that is a very strong claim which is that if it's minimizing free energy that's sufficient for being alive and if it's not minimizing free energy it's not alive so this is sort of the the weakest claim is on the left side

Doesn't mean it's useless.

Doesn't mean it's inadequate, but this is the weakest claim.

This is the necessity claim.

Then we have the strong claim here that minimizing free energy is, well, this is the strongest claim in C, that minimizing free energy is sufficient for life.

So anything that, you know, if,

Doing X is sufficient for greetings blue.

Hello, cool light.

We're in the slides on 24, just talking about necessity and sufficiency.

C is the strongest case.

It's saying it's sufficient

And so you're either going to be minimizing free energy and therefore sufficient to be called alive, or you're doing neither.

And then B is a little bit of a middle case that's saying there's some living systems that are not minimizing their free energy, but some are.

So are there other possible layouts?

And then Dean, let's return to your question about like educating and how do we think about this?

How do we distinguish these scenarios in an education context?

Or welcome, Blue, if you would like to say hello or just what makes you excited for this paper.


SPEAKER_03:
I loved this paper.

I thought it was great.

And I have been listening along in the live stream, so I'm kind of up to speed with where you guys are and what you're talking about.

But I enjoyed Axel's writing, and I like the fact that

I can implement the free energy without having to ascribe to panpsychism and also without having to ascribe to the mind-life continuity hypothesis or all of these things that we've been discussing, like the necessity, sufficiency, it's there.

I think that Axel sets out a really logical argument or set of arguments and doesn't make any claims that aren't justifiable with math.


SPEAKER_00:
yes using a simple mathematical example um we'll we'll keep this slide around because we can wonder maybe is there some well another relationship that we could speculate would be like a kind of something like this like life there's systems that are minimizing free energy or not

and then there's systems that are alive or not and sometimes they overlap but they don't have to overlap but there's some special living systems that are doing it and there's some that aren't and there's some that are neither so this is the most uh we'll just call this one situation d d is the most is the most flexible

scenario because you could have a or b i mean well i won't use those letters you could have life free energy minimizing both or neither so d is the most flexible case c is the most restrictive case and then we have two possible nesting relationships where one is nested inside of the other and it's kind of interesting to wonder what kind of world do each of these exist in

well where is the mind bubble yes let's should be around the whole slide is that the mind the the modeler is that why there's that relational or personal framing of the paper because the mind is the mapping of these different venn diagrams dean


SPEAKER_01:
And I think it's really interesting too, Daniel, that in real time, we now have a slide 23 and now a new slide 24.

And although we now know the order that they presented themselves to us as, could we have started with 24 and worked our way back to 23?

That's when it gets really kind of weird and twisted, but it's also what I think the paper is speaking to.

If we're actually thinking about this as another example of a post, potentially post-diction way of viewing things historically now.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, so...

23, which now it has a little logo on it for those who don't have the slide deck at hand.

23 was derived heavily from the paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.


SPEAKER_00:
It was quotes from the paper and then just a visual representation.

Now, that was not in the paper, but it could have been interesting.

And then, that's right, through the specifics of who joined when and what we were thinking about when, that's what led to 24.

But maybe we'll add another slide before 23, and then they'll both be a different number.

But it does bring up an interesting question.

I think we could look at, well, first, Dave, thanks for writing in the chat.

Do you want to read what you wrote or would you like me to read what you have in the YouTube live chat?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, could I expand on it just slightly?

Please.

What I would have posted if I didn't have the big limit.

Title, Necessary vs. Sufficient.

Two of the original concepts of general systems theory have recently, as of 1975, been resuscitated.

There's an admirable discussion by Russell Akoff.

The first of the two concepts is that whereas causal argument considers necessary and sufficient conditions, systematic theory or cybernetic argument deals primarily with a logic of necessary conditions.

see Fred Singer's discussion of the producer and product relations and in Sommerhoff this is called goal relations and I'd add this deals with intentional action where there are goals

You know, there's an old painful discussion going back to way before Darwin that the world exists only as push.

Galileo wanted to absolutely banish goals of any kind, any value had to be absolutely driven from science.

If you say for the purpose of science, get out, you're not a scientist.

I continue, this notion underlies the more sophisticated treatment of goals and intentions, conceivably partly specified intentions.

Fuzzy goals, goals with ill-defined criteria, which you might or might not be aware of, I would add.

The other concept of about the same importance is the presupposition of a systematic universe.

There is a tacit assumption that things, objects, and other elementary entities are interdependent rather than being isolated units, which is the assumption behind the majority of sciences.

Further, as a result of their interdependence, or, with the same meaning, of the supposition that things, objects, and so on are not really unitary, these entities form systems, and it is systems which may be observed and manipulated.

So the notion that there's one and only one way to approach an argument, one and only one order among real things that are scientifically respectable, utterly wrong.

Utterly wrong.

If you can't work your argument in at least two different directions, you haven't thought about what your argument is.

You don't know the boundaries.

You don't know what it is.

You don't know what a jellyfish is.

You think you know what a jellyfish is, but you don't know the difference between the inside and the outside.

You may end up in the inside.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's almost like if there's only one way to run through the argument, that's when necessity and sufficiency are easily confused.

So if somebody just drives in one lane from the beginning to the end, and I made my case and that's all I have to say, well, then you've implicitly through your actions, your enacted behavior, you've, uh,

acted consistently as if what you had to say was sufficient for making your case.

The prosecution rests.

And also it was necessary.

You think I've included everything necessary and sufficient.

So that's actually where you get, and here's maybe where we should duplicate the slide again.

That's an overlap of necessity and sufficiency.

But then if you did two parallel arguments, just you did one from start to finish and the other one from start to finish, now you could say, well, both of them are in their own timeline.

They were both necessary, even if they have totally disjoint information that was being used.

And then what is the relationship of the goals there?

And that is kind of like Dean's multiple eyes open, giving us the perspective to look at goals when we have multiple realizations, because it does help us distinguish necessity and sufficiency because we literally see, well, it could have been done a different way.

So it being done in way one can't be the whole story because we just saw it done in way two.

Dean?

sorry daniel you dropped off on me for a second there but so i wanted to ask david a question about yeah dean kind of drops in and out he was giving some funny descriptors of his internet hardware earlier it was pretty funny start again sorry


SPEAKER_01:
So I agree with what David was saying.

And there's a book called The Origins of Order, Project and System.

And what the author basically says is that projects are easy to get trapped in goal-directed behavior, whereas where you can also hold up the system, you can see the number, sort of the multitudes of different directions all at once.

And so I was wondering, does that sort of fit in with what David now was trying to speak to?

Trying to find out the author's name here.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, Stuart Kaufman, who is, I think he has become a little more active recently.

I know they're pushing his book, Origins of Order, really hard.

That's something I read in like the 80s.


SPEAKER_01:
Who's that?

This is a new one.

This is Paul Kahn.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, okay.

Yeah, okay, K-A-H-N?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, K-A-H-N.

And he's basically trying to use the argument that you can look at the Constitution or you can look at the actual laws, and you hold up both.

One is goal-directed, the project piece, whereas the other one is trying to work from within and around.


SPEAKER_02:
so that's it's that sort of between and inside argument and that's not the same as as projecting yourself to a particular outcome yeah i can't i can't answer that right now but i do want to tell a little quick story uh when i was working as a senior programmer analyst i was organizing this project it was going to take a couple of months and my super is kind of looking over my shoulder and i have the

criteria and i have a big flow chart and he says oh so dave's this how you're going to do it and i says i haven't decided he said wait a minute what's missing i mean you've you've got the whole thing laid out it looks like it ought to work and says yeah i haven't decided i've only done it one way there's no decisions involved in that i've just stated the requirements i didn't decide how to do it oh

ended up using a much better technique that saved us a huge amount of rewrite that nobody would have noticed because they would have said, oh, we have the answer, let's go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
It's almost, it's the zero to one, which we've talked about, and it's also related to act, infer, serve,

Infer, you'll have something to infer about when you've acted, whether getting that first draft out or just doing a private voice memo or whatever stigmergy you need, you'll have something interesting to infer if you act, I promise.

And then maybe you'll be closer to service than you expect.

But infer is still within the realm of like, well, what would be sufficient to get the job done?

But if you go, well, what would be necessary to do this one way?

This is what would be necessary.

We could walk from California to New York.

That would be necessary for getting to New York.

Okay, it's going to take too long.

I just don't have that kind of time.

What would be another way to do it?

So there is almost a necessity and a sufficiency in action and inference, right?

where action has a lot more to do what's needed and inference or thought maybe moves us more towards thinking about what's sufficient.

Not sure about that, but also thanks for sharing this resource.


SPEAKER_01:
And back to what David was saying, in the work that I was doing, I often had people who

who are very well versed in setting up all kinds of sophisticated projects, asking me, where's the project in this?

And me having to jump up and down and wave hands and say, this isn't a project, that's why we're doing it.

We don't know how it's going to turn out until we do.

And then we can look back on it and say, well,

Did we minimize free energy?

We weren't using minimizing free energy, but because I wasn't, you know, first in that lexicon yet, but that's essentially what we were doing.

We wouldn't know until we'd arrived that we'd arrived.

And that's really uncomfortable for people who are constantly saying, show me the milestones.

Okay, well, I can show you the stages, right?

And I can show you how identity is now turning into identifying as people are constantly processing who they are as they're on board this idea.

But I can't tell you...

what it's like because it's not necessarily goal directed other than the fact that we want to try to keep it open as long as we can and figure out what logic people are using in order to be able to untangle and pull things out of hats that others don't know how to do.

Yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
One other thing that makes me think about is grants applications.

So a grant application might frame things in terms implicitly or explicitly in terms of sufficiency.

If you fund me, we're going to fix this disease.

Like this is the grant that will be sufficient for fixing this disease.

Whereas saying that it's a necessary step, like we do need to understand how protein one, two, three works.

It'll be necessary, but it's not the whole picture.

It's not sufficient.

So, so much when we really turn it over is related to necessity.

because there's so many things that are necessary and so little, save for totally exhaustive examinations of really contrived systems, so rarely do we find sufficiency.

Because if you can define sufficiency, you can make that bacteria in the test tube de novo.

And then life, it's kind of like puts a little twist on it.

Like what would be necessary and sufficient for having a bacteria in a test tube?

putting a preexisting bacteria in and having it replicate.

So life, as this paper explores, it sort of threads the needle of necessity and sufficiency because the past is necessary and sufficient for living systems to be in the state that they're in now.

And so that's like the generalization as well as the minute particulars.

If anyone wants to ask a question, otherwise, I think it's good to take a second, look at the numerical example.

Yes, blue first.


SPEAKER_03:
So just like what got us to this point, the past is necessary, but not sufficient, but it just echoes the title.

Like how did we even get here, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So let's look at that.

bacteria and then of course we can jump around anywhere else okay so the numerical example is of a sensing and feeling a sentient bacteria not necessarily experiencing and action isn't even in the loop here but it's a sensing bacteria

And so the organism is inferring its prior beliefs about the cause of the observations it makes.

So it has a prior... Let's just go over the sort of letters again.

So there's a class of events for the organism.

So this is like...

need a special color or some metadata tag like how can we tag map and how can we tag territory let's just use like one set of colors or one font like map comic sans territory some calligraphy script or something like that for the organism map of the organism now it's our map of the organism's map

A and B are events that are part of the class R. And so R is like the receptor state.

And then A and B are inferred downstream of a chemical signal, which is S. So S is like for signal and S is whether the actual molecule on the outside is the A or the B. And so this is kind of a discrete binary choice.

It's briefly discussed in the paper, like what happens if there's multiple molecules, or one could imagine that what's being inferred is a continuous variable, like blood sugar.

But alpha and beta are S. That's the outside stuff.

And then A and B are the organism's receptor inference.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
Go ahead, and then I'll just go at the end.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so just to sort of look at it in figure one or in the formalism block that's in the paper, the organism has a prior and it's the specification of priors that differentiate Bayesian statistics versus frequentist statistics.

among a few other pieces, but that's really the key piece.

And so the prior P of R is 80, 20 in favor of A. So a priori before, how did you get there?

But a priori it's 80% likely that it's A and 20% B before any info comes in.

then there's a likelihood mapping.

So that's the distribution of the signal conditioned on the receptor state.

So we're talking about what's the probability of alpha outside conditioned on A and B. And so it's 70 A and 30 for B and vice versa.

So what's interesting about this is that's a pretty noisy signal.

It's really only saying, it's like if it were 50-50, it'd be a useless signal because it wouldn't, knowing it one way, well, it would also depend a little bit on the frequency of alpha and beta.

But this is a very noisy signal.

Like 30% of the time, the receptor is giving the wrong answer.

So this is a way to show that with multiple signals,

uncertainties connected the right way, you can actually tighten your estimate.

Because in this example, with an 80% prior on A, and then a 70% likelihood mapping, which is also A, that's more like classic ACT-INF jargon.

After observing alpha, it turns out that the estimate of alpha is

The estimate of state being A conditioned on alpha being observed tightens that prior from 0.8 to 0.9.

So there's still a tightening of the prior by a significant amount, even though the mapping between the molecule and the receptor state is somewhat noisy.

So that's like a Bayesian bacteria.

It's just applying Bayes' rule to this simple binary outcome that it's doing inference on.

Blue, any thoughts there?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so this goes back to something that Dean brought up in the dot zero.

And it's actually something that Axel wrote in the paper.

Is the prior subjective or objective?

And the dysfunctional priors and the survivability of organisms with dysfunctional priors,

So I just feel like, I mean, I know Axel says it's subjective, but I feel like it's nested.

So I feel like there's, the prior must be a subjective prior over an objective frequency, right?

Like, so if I frequently observe, you know,

sunshine outside when it's warm or something like that.

Like if mostly when it's more, when I feel warm, I observe sunshine.

So when I have these two things linked, like based on that frequency, I then make a subjective assumption.

And that's how I feel that the structure of the prior kind of has to be.

Otherwise, like it doesn't make sense to put the math into the prior.

Like in my mind, like if you can't,

If an objective prior is based on frequencies, but a subjective prior is not, a subjective prior is a guess, but it's a guess over the frequencies.

I don't know.

I feel like there's like an extra layer that needs to be tucked into the subjective prior if you're going to put math there.


SPEAKER_00:
one way that that's dealt with empirically and then dean is what's called parametric empirical bays and in parametric empirical bays you kind of start with just the prior being what you observed in the past so if you had eight sunny days and two rainy days that's where that 0.8 and 0.2 prior comes from so

It's not a way around specifying a prior.

It just starts your prior in a place that's empirically grounded.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So I think in the point zero two, I was trying to figure out how the likelihood is really the kind of background that we have.

And that's what Blue is kind of talking to you.

And I was wondering about in terms of context, because if I see a black dot on a white background, I think of period.

Whereas if I see a white dot in a black background with a whole bunch of white dots, I think how many light years away is that concentration of hydrogen, right?

So again, we can decontextualize this.

But if we do decontextualize, and this is where it gets really hard for me, I get lost in all of the terms, but if we do decontextualize it,

does that help us in any way understand both the subjective and objective factors in play?

That's all I'm wondering about.

And again, I get lost in the number of different ways to be able to describe this.

That's part of my problem.

I have an upper limit on how much of this stuff I can do at once.

If you want me to focus on days, I can do that.

That's hard enough for me to concentrate on that.

But if you actually think about this, okay, so what does this actually...

imply in terms of entailment then it gets really really tricky because i can't just focus on one thing at once i got to sort of think about what all the implications of that are and man can never go off in different directions all at the same time so i don't want to be too tangential here but yeah that i i'm still not sure whether the subjectivity in isolation can work i'm not saying it can't i don't know thanks dean blue then dave


SPEAKER_03:
So in like the empirical parametric base, that would be like an objective prior.

Like, do you have subjectivity in empirical parametric base?

Because like, that's what Axel was describing in the paper.

You do, you can have an objective prior based on frequencies.

Like it's 80% of the time,

you know, sunny and 20% of the time rainy.

And so you get these frequencies and that's what goes into constructing an objective prior.

But when it comes to like an organism and a choice or even like a scientist conducting an experiment, you know, like why would you even do the experiment in the first place?

You have a guess, right?

Like you have something that you think will be the outcome.

And so like a totally subjective prior is like, well, I think,

60% of the time it's gonna be blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.

And like, that's a completely subjective prior.

It's just your best guess, which if you're gonna try to really do objective Bayesian analysis, like you need to have a flat prior, not your best guess.

Your prior needs to come from previous observations and not you guessing.

But you could very well not do a very empirical or objective Bayesian analysis and just say, my guess is this.

And then you count, make the observations, observe the frequencies.

You go through the entire time step.

And then at your next time step, there is that tightening between the previous likelihood and the prior.

So that is...

I mean, as far as I understand it, now I'm definitely not an expert, but so I think like the subjectivity and objectivity is, I don't know, I think that there's some link there.

Like I get it for scientific Bayesian data analysis, like you want to have a flat prior, you want to do objective analysis, you want to use the previous frequencies or whatever.

But I think that in terms of a mental calculation,

it's also over frequencies or it's your best guess.

Like, what do you think will be the outcome?

And it's not always, it doesn't always line up.

Right.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks blue.

Dave.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Um,

The term decontextualized, I kind of, that shocked me when Professor Jarren started using that.

I said, decontextualized?

That's just some sudden jerk opens his mouth and decontextualized his feelings at me.

you know, if I want to know what's going on, I hyper-contextualize.

I'm particularly attentive to my own prejudices and my own viewpoint.

You know, think about what goes, you know, Einstein hated the word relativity.

He wanted to come up with something like hyper-contextualized or the real world or the tensor description where you don't have to ask where are you because you have the structure of the world.

What do people mean by decontextualize?

Is it a term of praise as well as a term of contempt?

Or have I just always misunderstood?

Liv?


SPEAKER_03:
So I love this term, hyper-contextualize.

And I don't know that I would use it in the way that you use it, Dave.

I would use it like, I would play out all of the potential, like, what ifs.

Like, let's talk about counterfactuals.

Can we put it into, you know, how many different contexts will it fit?

And that's when I think about hyper-contextualization, it's like playing out all the potential scenarios for me.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and building on what Blue just said, so I saw a YouTube video where a guy had figured out a way to make a target move so that no matter where you threw the dart, as long as you were directing it towards the dart board, the target would create

the algorithm would create the target moving so that you hit a bullseye every time.

And I was a phys ed teacher.

I was like, oh, this is amazing.

And I took it to one of my colleagues who shall remain nameless.

And I said, we should show this video to the kids.

And he was like, why?

And I said, well, think about it.

Every time a person moves their hands to catch the ball, they're making the same kind of adjustment.

And it was like a light went off.

A lot of the things that I was coaching were then decontextualized, and the proof was in the fact that when you saw something out of context that was running the same parallel function, you didn't necessarily recognize it.

So this was a really – I love hypercontextualized.


SPEAKER_00:
So I wonder if that's like abstraction or –

de-irrelevant contextualizing you take away the irrelevant part of that setting which is oh it's hands or some other specific system and then that paradoxically gets you to hyper contextualize because it does highlight the parts of the context that matter dave


SPEAKER_02:
And there's that famous phrase from 1923, consciousness of abstracting.

Training people to think scientifically, one of the first things you do is get them really aware that they're how much they're missing.

You're abstracting away from at least 90% of whatever you're looking at.

And since I've got the mic, there was the question of how a fielder catches a baseball.

fly ball here it comes it's coming out of the sky at you and you know a good fielder knows how to do that you ask him how do you well i just i just go to where the ball's gonna be but he can't tell you how and there were a bunch of people mathematicians and programmers and physiologists or

And philosophers, how in the world are they doing this?

It looks like they can't because we can't come up with an algorithm that does it.

And they finally watched them.

And I guess they got one guy that's high on whatever it is, openness, the big five.

And they says, well, what are you doing?

How do you know that you're going to catch the ball?

Oh, I know I'm going to catch the ball when I look at it and it doesn't move.

It doesn't move.

Yeah, it just hangs there.

And I put up my mitt, and I know where it's going.

It's going up my mitt.

And it's not moving.

And it's in my mitt, and it didn't move then either.

That's how they get there.

They figure out what point in the field makes it look like the ball's not going to move as it comes toward there.

And that's where you go.

And then it just hangs in the field until it's in your mitt.


SPEAKER_00:
Classic baseball physics.

The other thought was, have you ever been high on openness?

But then it's true.

There is a simple algorithm.

Like if you're looking and it's to the left, then you should go to the left.

If you're looking, it's to the right.

And then you're cool.

Active baseball and anticipation and the path of least action.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
you want to talk about high on openness.

I don't know that it reminds me of our conversations with Adam Saffron.

Right.

And so like what the psychedelic, like I would like to see like the psychedelic, like comparison with big five, like the integration of those two kind of things in terms of active inference, because I do think that, um,

the openness like increases a lot under, under the psychedelic influence.

And so it's, it's not, have you been high on openness, but has being high ever made you more open maybe is a different question.


SPEAKER_00:
And well, a few things, there's sort of the rebus, cebus, albus, relaxation of beliefs under psychedelic strengthening, or just the altering of beliefs with Fristin, Karhar Harris, Saffron.

And what is being, what priors are being opened, which priors are being tightened.

And that was sort of at the heart of the rebus versus cebus.

And then the sort of

um hegelian synthesis in albus and then also in terms of how we got here the first two weeks of january was live stream number 13 with adam and colleague on the cybernetic big five

And so that actually sort of started our year with thinking about how frameworks that a priori have nothing to do with Act-Inf or FEP.

Like big five was a principal component analysis based various partitioning on psychometric data.

Yet we saw how Act-Inf could help us reimagine that and generalize it.

while also bringing action into the loop so then it's kind of cool to see how the personality traits come back into play uh Dave and then we're going to return to bays and then we're going to move into the variational free energy well stop me if I already mentioned this but um there's been some uh chronological studies of the way psychedelics are used by


SPEAKER_02:
as a recruiting tool of violent cults.

You go to a rally in favor of I will not say whom, and if somebody seems like they're really grooving and really into it, you give them a little ecstasy, and that locks them into the mentality.

And if he's kind of getting fired up, but he's not quite with it, you take him home, you give him some LSD, and you take him through the session, and that moves him out of what he was in and moves him into where he needs to be in order to do the right things in life.

Maybe another little bit of ecstasy now and then over subsequent months to just get him locked back in where he needs to be.

Just like Safran was saying, you either get him out of where he is or you get him right deep into where he is.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, there's a long history of people engaging in experiences, taking substances to move their psychodynamics one way or the other.

I think the active streams verge on it, but we also remind people to be responsible and legal with their behavior and with the one and only brain and mind that they have.

Let's return to the Bayesian maths and then see how that Bayesian bacteria moves into the variational free energy bacteria.

But I pulled out that one quote from a online statistics resource.

So we can, you know, the 0.0 is the frequentest bacteria.

And so the frequentest is basically looking at the outcome of an experiment.

You flip the coin 10 times, it comes up seven heads and three tails.

Now that's not the most likely possible outcome for a fair coin, but it's totally not an unexpected outcome.

So in that case, the frequentist can produce a 95% confidence interval

given the variance granted by the sample size and say, okay, if I get within these two numbers, then I'm going to fail to reject the hypothesis that it's fair.

If I'm outside of those two numbers with my empirical results, I will reject at a given p-value, a given alpha.

And so for the frequentist, there's no sense in asking about the probability that the coin is fair.

It is either fair or not fair.

So that's like, accept the hypothesis,

implicitly because of the failure to reject or reject the null hypothesis in favor of a specified alternative.

The frequentist makes statements about the probability of a sample after making an assumption about the population parameter, which is just the kind of averaged out value of the probability of tossing a Hess.

The Bayesian, in contrast, starts with information about coins.

So specifies some distribution.

So it could be like a bell curve, a Gaussian centered at 0.5, could be a super tight prior, could be a very loose prior.

And then the extreme case of the Gaussian with infinite variance is the uniform distribution.

And so that is like a flat across all the possible values.

That probability assessment of the head's proportion is called the prior probability.

Each person might have their individual assessment based on their personal experience called a subjective prior.

Alternatively, a prior probability distribution might be selected on good properties of the resulting estimates called an objective prior.

I don't know if this is the only way to use subjective and objective in the Bayesian context, but this is just an important difference between frequentism and Bayesian.

So here is our Bayesian bacteria.

Again, it has some A matrix that's mapping the signal condition on the receptor state, and then it has a prior over those receptor states.

That Bayesian bacteria then, again, it's a Bayesian perceiving bacteria, we're not bringing action into the loop yet, but we're just assuming like if you had the right estimate, then it would be easier to know what to do correctly.

This is called exact Bayes because the exact numbers are plugged in and then there's some exact number that comes out and it's pretty much just granted by Bayes' rule.

What's the issue?

Well, it's unclear whether living systems have sufficient computational power to accomplish that, especially when there's just massive multivariate landscapes.

So what is the answer in the FEP?

Well, instead of doing exact Bayes, there's what's called variational Bayesian inference.

So here we're going to propose this Q function.

And the Q function is going to be from a family that is specified a priori, and it is more easily fit than just sort of the exact base.

And then the way that we compare is not by comparing at the end, the posterior likelihood,

but rather we can compare different options by comparing their free energy.

And this is how free energy is being defined here.

It's the negative sum over R, those are the receptor states, A and B, of some Q distribution, and then the natural log of the joint distribution of the states R and the signal alpha

multiplied, then divided by QR.

And so then in dot zero, we explored a little bit about how that's like the recognition model.

That's like we're going contingent on alpha, and now we're doing a hyperparameter estimate, like alpha, we're going to A, and then what we're not gonna be exploring here is like a generative model.

And then we talked about how those map onto perception and action in the world.

So then the numerical example shows that, okay, so the Bayesian bacteria, it did the right thing.

It didn't go to that rally that Dave was telling it to go to.

But we can also have a free energy minimizing creature, bacterium, and we're going to see a case in which the free energy minimization does the right thing.

And we're going to see a case where the free energy minimization does the wrong thing.

The difference between these two cases is going to be the prior that's set.

And so that is the crux of the argument that minimizing free energy is not sufficient to be alive, AKA make the right decisions, because both of these examples are going to minimize free energy.

And one of them is going to minimize free energy in the right direction.

and make the right choice because it had appropriate priors, a maladaptive priors can minimize free energy, but still result in the wrong outcome.

So in this case, we have the free energy calculation for this 80, 20 prior with a favor of A and contingent on observing alpha,

the free energy of this is 0.47, which doesn't have an interpretation as a probability, importantly.

So we're not within that zero to one bounded space.

And then in contrast, the representation of B, so that QR setting that to B, that has a free energy of 2.2.

So free energy minimization saves the day in that context.

However, it's not simply because the free energy was minimized that the right decision was reached.

Here is a creature with a prior on B of 0.8.

And then we see that just barely, upon observing alpha, the free energy of representing B after sensing A is 0.96, and the F when representing A after sensing alpha is 1.094.

So the Enzing posterior likelihood is 63% in favor of B and 37% in favor of A. So we sort of did move the needle towards A because we observed alpha, but our prior was so far off

that just one cycle of free energy minimization still results in the wrong outcome.

That's the crux of the numerical example provided in this paper.

And the only point that it's being made, not this is how you'd model a bacteria with the FEP.

The point it's making is free energy minimization is not sufficient for life.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
So Daniel, I got a question to ask.

So I don't know, because we're just talking about sensing, we're not talking about, you mentioned doing, but is it doing or is it directing?

So because of the sample sensed,

And because of what the math points to, should we think of this kind of analogous to a compass?

We're pointed in the right direction.

We still haven't actually acted or developed a feeling from the sense yet.

We're still pre-doing.

We're orienting.

Is that or am I wrong?


SPEAKER_00:
So if anyone else has a thought after this, I think there's a few aspects to this compass and orienting approach.

So this little toy motif about the recognition model, about having a prior over states in the world and then getting some input, that could be plugged into an action model in a slightly more elaborate case.

So for example, as written in the caption for figure one,

More biologically realistic descriptions of behavior require discussion of active inference.

They require it.

It's necessary and sufficient.

You just have to do it.

Behavior is the result of a different inference process, that of an action policy.

So pi is not here in this bacteria.

This involves more priors, namely about the transition between hidden states and often about preferred sensory outcomes.

So in active inference with a partially observable Markov decision process, we've seen how there's like a matrix of the transition frequency B

between the states at one time and the states at the next time.

And then policies are inferred based upon which policies minimize free energy, which ones are going to have the best chance through time of bringing states into alignment with preference.

The other thing that it made me think about with the compass is like the exact base just returns a probability.

And that is sort of like one compass needle

giving you just saying, okay, you're going north by northwest or whatever it happens to be.

This is your one estimate.

And you could be wildly off, but given where you were, and then just one blip of information, that's where your compass needle is now pointing to.

Free energy, it's almost like there's two compass needles in this binary choice.

And then we're going to select which one has a lower free energy

because we're looking, the fact that this is 0.478 F and this was 2.27, they don't have a natural interpretation, just like entropies.

You can talk about the difference in entropy, but something having like four doesn't have an interpretation in the world.

And so it's kind of maybe like there's two different compass needles and we're looking at the difference between them, or we're going to select the one that has a lower free energy.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I don't want to say that orienting isn't a form of doing as well.

It's just that what this shows me is that, I cut out again, but when we're trying to determine

A and B with a background.

We haven't taken an action step.

We haven't developed a feeling yet.

Do we categorize that differently than if we were to look at this through an active inference lens where we would then push a policy forward, right?

So I'm not sure does the orienting fitting fit into the policy piece or is it pre-policy?

That's what I'm trying to get clear in my mind.


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

makes me think about the uda observe orient decide act loop and about our recent paper that connected active to the ouda stages orienting i think in this reduced example the um the north pole north star whatever it is is the prior like that is what is oriented relative to

So that's a purely recognition model sense of orienting.

Whereas in the physical realized world, orienting has much to do with action and wayfinding.

But this is sort of in the recognition toy.

There is still an orientation of the prior, but I'm not 100% sure.

What do you think, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
What I find interesting is that when I look at this and I see a 0.8 and a 0.2, it's very clear that we're somewhere between 0 and 1.

But when we're actually getting to that wave binding space and we're talking about entailment, one hole over two holes

is different than two over one.

So as soon as we move past one into some of the more, as you say, material realities that we have to face down,

that's when those actions become material like we can see what the process ontology is but what axel did was he brought the process ontology down to it even even closer to zero point because he was using free energy principle and he's talking about free energy principle and bayesian stuff so again sometimes

I have a general sense of this stuff and just enough to get me into trouble and be an insurgent and point at people who are really, really smart and kind of go, I think I know what you're on to, but it doesn't get me deep enough to be able to write a parallel paper to axles and sort of either build them up or tear them down.

Yeah, I don't know.

That's why I'm asking.

I don't know where orienting fits in this because I think it fits in the zero to one space and I think it fits in the one to three space as the dimensionality blows out.

That's back to the subjective objective crossing back and forth.

And again, I just come off sounding like a complete idiot here because there's somebody way smarter than me who can blow my argument up.

But at least I'm putting it out there.

I'm showing up.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, by being on a live stream and talking about it, you're like 80% of the way to the paper.

Dave?


SPEAKER_02:
Is there something in this context that would correspond to urgency?

And I'm particularly thinking in the terms that Freud was concentrating on when he talked about how to get people to be less neurotic.

He says...

The point that a person is in real trouble as a neurotic is when the dominant factor in his life is reducing his anxiety.

And what we want to do is to get him to tolerate his anxiety.

Tolerate, for instance, ambiguity.

Not knowing is my wife mad at me or not, but don't get crazy.

Sometimes you just can't do anything about it.

calm down, tolerate the anxiety.

Is there something, and I'm just taking that as a case of urgency.

Urgency seems like something that would fit into this literature better.


SPEAKER_01:
Hmm.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So I just want to, like, so I don't know about urgency.

I'm going to kind of derail off of that and more hook onto this toleration of anxiety or toleration of circumstances that are not preferable.

for like a later, more preferable outcome.

And so this is something that is taught like, I don't know, in self-development, like a lot, right?

Like you have to put yourself out of your comfort zone.

But I mean, also like in like the meditative traditions, like learning to like be with that discomforting feeling and not like, you don't have to like,

get all upset and do anything about it.

So I just wonder if that fits, like it's a different thing, different than urgency, but what about like, where's the temporal, there has to be like a loop, right?

Like I'm going to tolerate this bad thing for something that I think will be like a more predictive outcome later.

Like how can I base that?

That would be like an interesting mathematical way

thing to try to work out.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I added a slide here.

Here's the Eisenhower matrix.

So the X axis is urgent to not urgent.

And then the Y axis is important to not important.

So one of the reasons why this is such a useful and well-known tool is it separates urgency from importance because there's things that are urgent, like a chat message.

that urge you to do something, or they have sort of a short time horizon, but then there's things that are important or not important.

And then there's an orientation when you're figuring out what is in what quadrant, kind of like the Rumsfeld matrix as well.

And then that has implications for action.

So let's see, urgency and anxiety.

Dave, you mentioned, I don't know about the Freudian urgency concept much, but it's of course with Soames, with Friston and the Project for Scientific Psychiatry.

There's some clear links there, so it wouldn't be unexpected.

And then the idea that the imperative is,

is to reduce our uncertainty through updating our model learning and through action so the reduction of anxiety is an imperative and then sometimes it crosses a threshold towards being truly urgent so it's kind of always in the background but then other times it really is urgent but it's always important and then blue i i agree um delayed gratification

It's like having the time horizon depth to take the right policy selection today so that your expected free energy is higher in the future.

So it's like, would you rather have $1 every day or $1,000 in one year?

Depending on how badly you need the money today and what you think you'll do with it in the meantime and all these other things,

one person given their priors might minimize free energy and come to two different conclusions.

And I think that's where we return to this subjective versus objective FEP take, which is like a person could rationally evaluate given their subjective priors and choose to take that marshmallow

maybe that is just the weighting that they have on their priors.

Or maybe somebody does the opposite and that is just where their priors and that stimuli, that's the action selection that they take.

And so I'm not sure how all these pieces tie together, but I think it speaks to the

the the logic of action and inference and we want to have a logic of action and inference or a framework for it that is broad enough to accommodate like making bad decisions if our action and inference framework is only about tightly constrained scenarios that are addressable then it doesn't really help us as much with real world scenarios

But it will be very cool to see how a lot of these daily phenomena connect to the things that we're talking about here.

So let's see what else we had in the pieces.

And also, if Axel is listening or wants to join for a .2 next week or for a future .3, I think there's probably many things we could ask and what brought you two

write this paper, and then where do you go after this one?

But pretty much the paper delivers the mic drop, the coup de grace, with the free energy minimizing bacteria, which has bad priors, or let's just say maladaptive priors, and it minimizes free energy and makes the wrong decisions.

So that's where that section concludes.

Then there's a jump back to the more philosophical framing.

So although free energy minimization is not sufficient for life, there might be an entailment relation that goes the other way around.

If you are alive, it might very well be because you did something like minimizing free energy.

That entailment relation is that which corresponds to the weak version of the life free energy entailment relation.

So remember way back when, when we were looking at the relationship between life and minimizing free energy, this example has decimated the strong claim, blown out, make a YouTube reaction video.

but the weak claim is actually supported because it seems like making adaptive decisions is consistent with free energy minimization, just like it would be with making adaptive Bayesian decisions, but

We can say that it's not sufficient to do so.

And then the name of the section, free energy on a wing and a prior.

So yuck, yuck, yuck.

Anyone can give a comment on that, but we just sort of were reminded of two winged creatures that we have talked about only a few weeks ago in 32.

There's the winged snowflake and then the Lepidoptera to a flame, the moth to a flame over here.

And about how in this snowflake example, so go to 32 to check it out in more detail, but it's like the snowflakes with wings that act adaptively are going to persist.

And those are the ones that are going to be looking as if they've minimized free energy in selecting the correct action policies, right?

Whereas the ones that don't exist just aren't.

If it makes bad decisions, it's going to fail to exist.

So it's an interesting section and it uses sort of evolutionary logic in a little bit of a different way because the evolutionary answer for everything is just sort of like, that's what was favored by evolution slash selection.

uh why does this organ have this shape it's like well that's what was selected on and so that's just that's just why it is that way even though we've talked about timber again other things we know there's multiple whys um but here

we can now see the adaptivity of priors instead of relative fitness, merely.

Blue, as we know.

More information here soon.

But the adaptivity of the priors

we'll be looking as if it has been minimizing free energy at the population level.

So whether we frame natural selection as increasing individuals with fitness or increasing the mean fitness of the population, but not necessarily the relative fitness, we can also do the same, but rather with a Malthusian exponent

or some other kind of economic fitness parameter, we can think about it in terms of the free energy minimization.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I keep falling off here, so I'm going to have to get past all the hidden stuff that you guys talked about when I wasn't staying on the broadcast.

But what this points to me is interesting is because back to the previous slide you talked about, my first...


SPEAKER_00:
RIP Dean.

Please, F in chat for Dean.

He'll rejoin in just a few seconds.

Sorry, guys.

Continue.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, is it a wing?

My first question is, is it a wing as wing?

And then second, what does it still serve a function?

Like, could I use it to fly?

And so that's where the adaptive piece actually comes in for me.

So again, there's two questions, necessity and sufficiency, right?

And you can even see it in the representations.

Is there enough information in the representation that I identify it as wing?

And then the second part of it is,

well then I can see it can carry a moth or I can see it can carry a snowflake.

That's the function that it serves.

And so that to me, again, is the minimum of two.

And make sure that we don't blend those two things up because it's the fact that we hold both of them as discrete and each serving a different purpose that helps.

I'm going to jump off prematurely because I'm tired of having to catch up and slow you guys down, but I'll watch the video and see in the point two.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Peace, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, cool.

So we walk through much of the paper.

It's not a very long paper, and it has just one core numerical example, again, with a Bayesian walkthrough, and then two variational Bayes

one variational Bayes that basically recapitulates the first Bayesian example of an adaptive prior and then a second counterexample that provides a maladaptive prior.

That is connected to evolution and to the idea that we're only going to see adaptive priors moving forward because if that model of recognition or that action model is maladaptive,

it will be seen less and less as time goes on.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So something that Axel didn't mention in the paper, or maybe didn't mention, or if he did mention it, I didn't catch it.

But so the adaptive priors always fit a certain niche, right?

And so like you're only adaptive, you know, if you're like a,

thermophilic bacteria, right?

Like you're functional in a hot spring, maybe not in like an ice patch, right?

So I think that there's, you know, if you take the thermophilic bacteria out of the hot environment and put it somewhere cold, then it's maladaptive.

Its priors are maladaptive, but only because it's just not fit to the correct niche environment.

And so I think that there's this...

you know, the importance of the niche environment.

And also it makes me wonder a lot in terms of evolutionary, like conceptually, like, you know, what if it's always, we always think about like the best fit to the niche, but what if it's like,

the best generalists?

Like, is there like the evolutionary, I mean, I guess that's like the cockroach, right?

Like the evolutionary generalists that can go anywhere, be anywhere, survive in any niche, survive on anything.

Like, is that the best?

Like, how does that like, like a prior that fits no niche or fits all niches?

How does that like play into this evolutionary paradigm?

I mean, I guess the cockroach will prevail.


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

Maybe this is related to our discussion about context.

Having the prior of 8020, and then we observed alpha, but we could have flipped that if it was all of a sudden dipped into the beta ocean.

then that prior would be as wrong as the maladaptive prior was in this paper so whether or not it is adaptive as you point out it is absolutely about the statistical regularities of the niche and that's the fitness of the model fitness of the organism to the generative process

Is the generative model going to be fit to the generative process?

And then generative processes change.

Things change out there in the world.

Dave?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, if the work on mimetics, going back to Dawkins and the English lady that did a lot more development of that notion, if that can be adapted to free energy, that will give a lot of very detailed discussion of generation after generation of the co-evolution of adaptability and that which is adapting.

the the notion that the brain has been adapted to imitate and to remember and to pass on and to uh recast concepts into many different modalities so to what blue was asking yes agree with that


SPEAKER_00:
can then just maybe look at the last few pieces in the future directions and then i think see if we have any ideas for things to discuss in point two and then other than that just invite everybody who's interested in listening to join us for point two because we've covered much in point one in zero so it's our last journal discussion of 2021 come join and

share how you got here and then what action selections you're going to take in 22. the last section is free energy minimization as a historical scientific principle so that's a very fascinating idea because it's about anticipatory systems yet it's a historical principle

That's where we get into the difference between pre-diction and post-diction.

Post-dictive scientific statements are concerned with what must have been the case instead of what will be the case.

A statement such as the minimization of free energy may be necessary if not sufficient characteristic of evolutionary systems, which was from the Friston and Stephan 2007, is probably such a post-dictive statement.

And then Axel claims that that statement should be interpreted according to the weak claim rather than according to the strong claim.

So interesting that even back then, the necessity and sufficiency was being used and arguably used properly.

So then what happened?

How did we get off the rails?

Or how did the strong claim come to be?

And the paper, I think, makes a powerful argument for the FEP as a postdictive model, but that doesn't mean that it can't be used in an anticipatory way for anticipatory systems moving forward.

and doing inference on the consequences of our action which are also in the future so how the uh past and the present and the future are linked that's more of a dot too how are the historical Sciences anticipatory Sciences and uh I don't know is there now Sciences now that's what I call science 21.

What else would people like to discuss in dot one?

Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
So I would like to maybe get into more about the living versus non-living and maybe talk about, um,

you know, this idea of maintaining structural integrity, like is that a quality of life or do things always maintain structural integrity?

And like, does the FEP apply when structural integrity is maintained?

and there's not life.

I mean, it's like, I mean, we talk about like free energy minimization and chemistry all the time.

Like you form the products that minimizes the free energy.

And so I know that there's some differences or some, a lot of extrapolation that has to be done to get from thermodynamics to the FEP or not extrapolation, but like it's retrofit is maybe the right word.

So I don't know.

I would like to maybe see some of that

Where does FEP apply in situations that are not animate?

Is it computationally?

Is it relevant?

Like when we're talking about robotics?

Yeah, that type of thing.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And is animate the same as sentient?

Like animate, sentient, inanimate, not moving, not animated, insentient.

Yes.

Like, can we just have an Act-Inf model that doesn't have any affordances or where it only has one affordance?

So it still is doing a recognition model, but then it's policy selection is extremely constrained.


SPEAKER_03:
Or like, so, I mean, I don't even like to like use life and non-life because there are some things that like blur that boundary also.

Like it gets into like, well, what is a virus?

Is a virus alive?

And a virus is very exploitative, like has DNA.

Like there's some things, some qualities of viruses that make me feel like they're alive, but they're technically not.

So yeah.

like what about if we just say DNA containing, but then it's like, it's this test tube full of DNA alive.

Like, I don't know.

It's hard.

And so instead of even sentient and animate, like alive and not alive, I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I think that the paper's succinctness and clarity of argument hides a big question, which is okay.

So if it's alive, who told you that?

So if we can't go from minimizing free energy to inferring what's alive, then how did we get to here?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

Or what does even alive mean?

Like, I don't think it's fully defined.

Like if we can't fully define death, like, I mean, how do we fully define life?

Right.

So I don't know.

It's this, there's this big sticky thing.

I don't know, weird area.

We kind of instinctually know what is life and what is alive and what is not alive.


SPEAKER_00:
Anyway.

But the

I mean, are the crystals in bone alive?

Well, they're part of a bigger system that people usually don't have a problem saying is alive, but then why should what people think matter?

Like, especially if we believe in evolution and we think that our cognition is oriented not necessarily towards like ontological realism, then why should it matter what 1% or 99% or even 100% of people agree upon?


SPEAKER_03:
Or even if we zoom, like, way out and get super meta, like, how does life maintain the structural integrity of life?

That's an interesting one to think about.

Like, because, I mean, it's dependent upon the niche environment, which includes many non-alive things, like the crystals that are inside of bone or inside the inner ear, which help us maintain balance, right?

So there's all of those things.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think...

following with this quote from the point of view of the fep the life cycle is that which corresponds to the thing whose integrity is maintained over evolutionary time so then the ants nest architecture is as much recapitulated as is the casing of the larva as is the larva itself so

how will we define life I guess we can just add that as a good you know just sort of just something quick to hit at the end of 32 or of 34.2 just you know what is life and then um has Schrodinger's question been answered I mean it's been a few years since 2018 and Ram said it all but has it been answered what is life 1944

Okay, so I think we will conclude there.

I hope if you're listening that you would like to join us in the dot two, where we'll talk a little more about this paper and how we got here and then where we're going to go in 22.

Anything else, Dave or Blue?

Okay, thanks for the fun, Convo.

Talk to you all later.

## vkZ_vnN0--Y

SPEAKER_02:
All right.

Hello, everyone.

Welcome to Act Inflab, live stream number 34.2.

It's December 14th, 2021.

Welcome to the Act-Inf Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at some of the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

If you check out this Coda link, which I will post into the YouTube live chat right now, you can see a lot of information on past, present, and future live streams, and also more information on if you want to participate, because that's what a participatory lab is.

If you're hearing this, you have the affordance to get involved.

Today in ActiveStream 34.2, we're going to be having our third discussion on the paper, Free Energy Principle.

It's not about what it takes.

It's about what took you there by Axel Constant from 2021.

And we're just going to be having a fun .2 jumping off.

we'll go over any parts of the paper that we want to look at return to some of the formalisms and then also we've written down a few questions specifically to address but of course anything people raise or anything that people ask in the live chat we can get to that and usually it says next week we will discuss other papers or we'll be discussing the same paper but actually it's next year because this is the last regularly scheduled

weekly journal discussion that we're doing and we'll have a little bit of an encore on this thursday with uh 32.3 when connor hines will join for a dot three that's kind of like the triple jump the hop skip and the jump uh rather than just the mirror jump but this is kind of the ending of a really awesome year of discussions and we haven't quite set

which papers to discuss next year.

So if you have suggestions or you want to get involved in the .com's organizational unit where we make these kinds of decisions collectively, then just contact us through any channel.

Okay.

So we'll begin with an introductions and warm-up section so people can say hello and they can address any of these warm-up questions like what they're excited to talk about today or just anything else they want to mention.

So this should be fun and thanks to everybody who's joining on the video stream and those who are watching live on YouTube.

So I'll start.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and

I think today I'm a little bit excited about talking about how we got here, where we are, and then where we go.

What does the free energy principle and active inference say about where we go?

And I'll pass to Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

And I am excited to talk about the difference between...

living and non-living systems and where the FEP may come into play there.


SPEAKER_02:
All right.

How about Dean?

Sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
I actually don't hear Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, sorry about that.

I'm Dean.

I'm obviously not fully awake and I'm still warming up because I'm in Canada in the mountains and it's snowing as we speak.

What's interesting to me about this paper and about its role in terms of FEP and active inference is so once we have identified the entailment problem, then what happens?

And I'll pass it over to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
hello steven here i'm in toronto and i'm interested in this reframing um i think this paper does i think it's helpful um maybe thinking about you know where was i in the river of life when something happened to take me to where i am rather it's sort of

might be never fully known but the principles might be useful i like that rather than this is the calculation of what happened which is that temptation so i think there's something about that going on here so i look forward to pursuing that more i'm going to pass this over to dave the two things i'm excited about are that in this city north of manila


SPEAKER_04:
which has ruffled the population of Pittsburgh or Anaheim or Manchester.

We had one new case of COVID yesterday and zero today.

And also, as soon as Daniel pulled his Pope Alexander VI routine and said, when will you make an end?

Suddenly Maria and I are just barreling through the redaction of the seminar.

Is there anybody else?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, Dave was just mentioning there the imminent completion of the Fristin Symposium transcript, where we're taking the symposium that we had earlier in the year and enriching it into something that can be used for closed captioning, as well as translations and enrichment and connections to other aspects of our knowledge base.

So that will be very fun.

And it's also...

speaks to how we got here and where we're going, I think, because eventually we'll give that kind of a treatment to all of these live streams.

And that will be quite interesting.

So, Stephen, yes, please.

I'm actually, so because we're using a slightly different Jitsi, let's just get all of our emojis out of the way.

If you go to the hand and then you do emojis, it does like...

Okay.

Oh, perfect.

Disable sounds for all.

Please disable it.

Okay.

Now feel free to use emojis.

You can signal by repeatedly clicking how shocked you are, for example, at what Dean says.

Okay.

Stephen, please.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Okay.

It works a bit more cleanly as well, I think, this interface.

I was going to say that I'm interested as well...

The question of scale.

The question of scale, I think there's something in this is like, we're saying it's not how you got there.

Well, what scale is you?

Is it scale-free?

Is it scale-friendly?

I know we've been talking about that, but is this you like the royal one?

Is it like a very broad term or is it something that's like very much

at the scale of an agent?

Is it across scales, nested scales?

I'm not saying this necessarily goes into that, but I think because I'm interested in, okay, taking this philosophical underpinning, which at first looks like it adds an extra burden or becomes a side issue for a more applied context, actually I think it does help

um just back up a bit it helps back up and in doing that backing up i think it keeps us with that unifying principle approach rather than a unified theory temptation which i think is what often happens

and to everyone, right?

So I think that keeping it at that slightly more nascent understanding may give us a way to understand the types of principles that could be seen to have played a part, which could therefore be seen to have been useful in other people trying to do something similar, which is not the same as a unified theory of why something happened.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Stephen.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
So what the paper brings out for me, and it kind of ties into what Stephen was just saying, is that you have an entailment question that you want to have answered.

And now you have to think of that in terms of what's necessary and what's sufficient.

If you look at that

unidirectionally, meaning through the course of time as the flow or the river or whatever metaphor you want to apply here.

If you look at that one directionally, that's going to kick out one version.

And what this paper points out is that there's two directions at the same time.

So there's a relationship between

meaning a different form of entailment not one causing the other necessarily but the fact that there are two and now they are somehow relating to one another

which is a different animal.

And so I think what I'm going to be really curious about in terms of the point-to-iveness of what we're doing here today is seeing whether or not we can address what each one of those things, one unidirectionally through the course of time, and the other strictly relationally,

in terms of how do two things that we know are present interact with one another.

I'm going to be really curious to see what other people think might be the difference between those two very two different views.

Because I think that's what the author asks us to entertain is not just the one, but both.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool, I think to Steven's question about scale, I think it's also a important thing to keep in mind.

So the example in the paper, which we talked about in the dot zero and the dot one was this bacterium.

So this is the toy example that shows that first off the differences between the Bayesian bacterium and the variational Bayesian free energy minimizing bacterium.

and then shows how it's not simply sufficient to be minimizing free energy, but rather one has to be minimizing free energy with the appropriate priors.

So it's not enough to be doing just Bayesian statistics.

You have to have the right priors in order to make the right kinds of decisions.

And then the relationship between free energy minimization and life is what is discussed as the entailment problem.

So we talked about those earlier.

So just go back and check if you'd like.

But what is the scale at which the entailment problem is even applying?

Is it the cell membrane of the bacterium?

It just aligns perfectly with the physical scope of the agent?

Or is it the colony of bacteria?

Or is it the bacteria and its niche that has to be explained how it got there?

aren't we always going to have super systems that are going to need their own explanation?

And I think that really speaks to also what you said, Steven, about the difference between the unifying approach

versus the unified theory this is like past tense it's been unified what else do we need to know there's only one versus unifying is this ongoing process and it's an approach where we might have some guidebooks or tools or memes for the road but it's not over yet we're still approaching some other question but then how did we get that other question

Yeah, Steven.

And also, I don't think that people need to raise their hand.

Maybe they can throw up an emoji silently because it still blinks a little bit.

But I think if you just use, for example, laugh, then I'll see a flurry of laughter.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, nice.

Then I'll be laughing as well.

That's not probably a bad thing.

Make me a bit more cheerful.

Yeah, I've got this vision of these little faces now.

There's something... I'd be interested in a bit more on what you were just saying there, basically, because you said there needs to be more.

I'd be interested in what people's thoughts are around what makes this helpful from an applied perspective.

Because one of the big...

So I think one of the key things often in a more applied perspective is maybe the application of some kind of minimal model theory that's been shown to give a type of transitional structuring, for instance, what some cognitive agent who might be engaging with the world more like someone with autism

the nature of how they process sensory information or other types of situations.

So that kind of general sense of the types of ways can then be used and maybe applied at a bigger scale.

But generally speaking, you also, once you get, if the applied side of it is starting to go beyond a fairly low dimensional model,

and into these more complex real life, that's not the right term, but applied context, then these heuristics might be more broad, like the unifying approach is going to be maybe more valid.

And I'm wondering, how does the jump from a biological philosophy mindset that's informing this paper


SPEAKER_02:
translate into those so i'd be curious just what others thoughts are on that good question how does philosophy impact or influence application how do basic or theoretical biology questions influence the day-to-day and the way that different projects are carried out because it seems almost

trivial to say that the projects that we're implementing, whether it's a road construction or whatever it is, it kind of has a biological component.

It's by us, for us, and then it has a philosophical component, even if only implicitly in the top-down structuring.

So we're talking about philosophy and biology.

I think that's even what journal the paper is in.

So then what does that


SPEAKER_00:
mean for how we apply and yeah what else is part of the approach i think these are interesting questions yeah go for it one thing i've been very interested in is a new field by michael quinn patton around principles focused evaluation

which sort of extends his utility-focused evaluation and developmental evaluation, where your things are unfolding.

So the evaluator is not evaluating after the fact, but is part of the strategic journey to say, well, what sort of, you could say, in our case, what sort of free energy-like minimising strategy

incident happened that looks significant to the context.

Okay, so it's not completely noisy, it's not completely unknown, yet it's complex enough that we're not following a rolled out system that's kind of relatively dead and relatively slapped down on the table each time like a piece of meat that's dead.

It's something that's kind of evolving and going.

And I think there's something quite nice here

to that principles approach and what principles are going to be useful when you're looking at understanding if there were particular choices in the particular stream that happened to have been present that made free energy minimizing happen or maybe when it didn't happen when the agent didn't manage to make the

choices and things started to unravel that could also be interesting because often it's more interesting to see you don't really know which one made the difference when something has been kept on track because it it never fully uh you know spiraled out and magnified but what were the times when something went wrong or or can we find out trace where that perturbation that started to

rock other parts of the system of interest came from.

And that might be where this type of work ties in as a thought.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, can I ask a question without raising my hand?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think we can just go for it in this one.


SPEAKER_03:
So here's my question, and it ties in directly with this paper.

I don't think the author is asking in the generic sense, which came first, the chicken or the egg, any more than I think when he's looking at an entailment problem, which came first, sensing or acting?

Which came first, internal or external?

which came first in all aspects of the philosophical sense of what's the relationship between internal, external sensing acting.

I think what trips people up and what gets them on that unidirectional linear kind of approach is asking what's first instead of holding up the relationship between and then seeing what falls out the other side.

So if it's an entailment question, is internal necessary for external?

Linearly speaking, you could make that argument.

But I don't know that that necessarily holds then if you're saying, does external then make necessary internal?

However, if you look at it as a relationship between internal and external, both are necessary.

So one can be satisfactory for the other if you're looking at it unidirectionally.

But if you're looking at it bidirectionally, now all of a sudden the frame shifts and both become necessary in a relationship in order for the relationship to continue forward.

So I think for a lot of people, asking which came first, the chicken or the egg, from a relational standpoint, doesn't matter.

They both have to exist.

for the question to continue.

Not which came first, but do both exist?

And I think that's the entailment question that this author is asking us to

at least contemplate a little bit, are we holding ourselves to one view, that unilateral view, when really what we should be doing is looking at the relationship and what entails the other as being either satisfying or necessary.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen, thought on that?

And sort of following on from Dean there is maybe, like you say,

when we get into do they exist, now we're into the structural stuff.

We're into the structures, we're into the structures where action and interaction happens as opposed to a meta system of egg and, you know, there's a structure.

And I suppose the question can also be is, do they sufficiently exist?

And at what point, so for instance, at what point may be through

pollution lack of calcium in diet Kinetic impact are they no longer sufficiently persistent and Suddenly one of the eggs can't make another chicken Okay, so that that that could become you know that then maybe is out of the how did 50,000 eggs get made?

Well, maybe it's more useful.

So or when I

What point did 0.1% of those eggs not continue?

What was then outside of the pullback attractor, or whatever way we want to say it, that was needed to keep it within a viable living trajectory?


SPEAKER_02:
So one kind of funny answer to which came first, the chicken or the egg?

from an instrumentalist perspective, you go, oh, in your sentence, chicken.

Just that's the answer.

The way you spoke that question, it was chicken.

And someone said, well, what came first, the egg or the chicken?

Okay.

Then the egg came first in how you asked it.

So what came first in your model?

But that question smacks of realism.

We start thinking about the actual way that things might've played out.

And is it more the case that there was a chicken that...

That's the realism question.

And then when we take this relational instrumentalist perspective, there are different kinds of time relationships falling out.

And I don't know if these are the right words, but just a few of them.

So one thing is about the internal and the external that Dean mentioned.

The partition is simultaneous.

When we do

particular partition of internal external and their corresponding blanket states those are all co-instantiated at the same time in model time or in the relational instrumental time that doesn't mean that they had to have been um coming into existence as actual external entities whether that static structural ontology or a dynamical process ontology but once we're in the modeler's time the partitioning comes into

existence at the same time and then we have things that are changing through time so there's the intra model act in formalism like the subscript next to the letter when we're talking about stay at time one two three four that's

within the model, within the act in formalism changes through time.

Then there's the extra formalism, like outside of the kernel of the model, which is the iterated modeling, which is also changing through time because it's not like any program is just produced and then that's the final version.

There's always an iteration process in the real world.

So that's changes through time.

And then

somehow spinning that around we actually get to this timeless and momentary relationship that's like the complex entailments where we start to ask about the relationship that's actually not conditioned on a given moment but

Not sure exactly if that's the right way to talk about that, but there is something that's, it's not time travel, but it's not just forward in time, but it's not merely reflection or memory on the past.


SPEAKER_03:
So Daniel, here's a thing to think about.

If you start with the model, if you begin with the model, you start at near time zero, even in the model that Axel brings out, it's simple then by its...

place in the time continuum if you end with the model it's got to be much more sophisticated because a whole bunch of things have happened a whole bunch of new information has been available now to include in the prior so i don't know that it's it's complex entailment happens the further out you wait

for the model to appear.

If you start with the model, you're going to get a different result than if the model is closer to the end of the loop closure.

That's what this entailment question is actually surfacing for us.

It's when the model.

So where did that come from?

Space-time means when the model.

When did the model appear so that we close one loop and start the next update?

That's where the sufficiency and the necessity part gets really strange because it's essentially a space-time question.

And if we include two arrows, we're now including space and time.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Dean.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
And within that space and time, I think as Daniel has mentioned, we can have these implicit assumptions just in the way we're framing our questions, which would be subliminal, but it's sitting there, right?

Like you say, by even talking about things in certain ways, it privileges a certain type of thinking.

And I'm really interested...

even in this paper, we talk about what did it take for you to get here?

Okay.

So there's also, it's almost like that picture of like, you know, the beautiful puppy.

It's like, and I can imagine asking, how did it take, what did it take for you to get here?

Right.

But there's also those really inspiring moments when you see the really sort of starved,

small dog that's kind of in a really bad shape.

Right.

And I was thinking, what does it need to get back to there or something like that?

I a relatively viable, healthy, thriving type of animal.

So that's also, and I think that often is like the priors in some ways, when things have gone out of kilter, there's a need, um, there's been a prior set of experiences, which have been non-optimal, but hasn't killed the animal.

um well how do those what priors need to be fed in to get back on track although the word track is not the right term but to get closer to something and even there i'm struggling i think this is where the ontology should i be saying get back to a non-equilibrium steady state to an attractor to a thriving and maybe it doesn't need to at that point maybe there's there's some concept that doesn't have to be in the free energy principle exactly it's like some idea of

thriving type of organism.

But that situation has taken the living entity away from the stream that would be desired and has to find a way back or it won't survive.


SPEAKER_02:
Luke?


SPEAKER_01:
So I was like, just to kind of hit on both what Dean and Stephen were saying, like, how did we get here?

Like you, I often think of here as like, like a physical place, but it's also like to this present time point or here, like, how did we become alive and get to this like non-equilibrium steady state?

So it makes me wonder what Dean was saying.

Like here is also a when, right?

Like, so what are all the things that brought you to this moment?

Um, and really like, I don't know, like, so all of the circumstances that have made you in this present moment, who you are, like whatever you are separated by your partition, like is the present, uh, uh,

part of the steady state like like that that's what makes me think of that i mean the present can't be like a steady state system so

it's because it's like always constantly like going forward.

And so I don't know, it makes me think of that as an attractor is the present moment.

Can that be an attractor?

Like, is, is that possible?

Stay in the moment, stay in the present.

When we think about mental action, like, like what does that mean to stay in the moment?

Like, can that be like an attractor state?

Like is the future and attractor state?

I don't know.

It just made me think about that.


SPEAKER_02:
Certainly some kind of pull from the future is what's happening with free energy minimization in the physical Gibbs free energy sense.

It's as if there is a pull from the future down the hill, but it's actually this sort of instantaneous movement of the reaction

yet it does act as if there's this long-term pull and also maybe the necessity and sufficiency so what does it take to get here it depends how stringent we want to be with what's here and now because even some tiny tiny gravitational factor of some other planet or some object on the other side of the planet

it's safe to say that some molecule in a given body would be in a different orientation, even if trivially so.

So then is that going to mean that everything is

Like everything that was there was sufficient to get us here, but also everything was necessary.

Is that too stringent or how loosely do we hold the system?

And I think instrumentalism gives us an answer, which is just how detailed is our model?

And then that's the level of stringency.

Like which variables are we going to include and what precision will we have over those variables?

And then just to the question about

thriving, I guess, that Steven asked whether that's in the Act Dymph ontology or not.

So it'll be fun to find out what is and isn't in the ontology and then translations or transpositions of memes from Act Dymph to apply to those other cases.

So like, for example,

the person looking at the puppy and thinking, here are the physiological variables that I can measure.

There's the shine on the coat and there's the blood sugar and there's the cortisol level.

That's my instrumental model.

There's other things happening that I don't know, but those are the ones.

And my preference for the attractor

would be dot, dot, dot.

And so what policies can I take in relationship to this animal so that its attractor is now as if it's here in that three-dimensional space of shine and blood sugar and cortisol, rather than the current attractor that it appears to be orbiting?

So then we can just talk about preferences and expectations and policies of the caretaker.

And then we've kind of transposed this sort of like floating obligation for the puppy to be healthy, but then things do die.

So we've transposed this kind of implicit philosophy around a floating obligation

into a specific relationship and the policies that a specific caretaker in their model are going to engage in that's uh that's a good point and i think actually this is when we we find ourselves getting back into the core of


SPEAKER_00:
what's the agent's journey in different contexts and getting into that and becomes contextual and what's the expectations, what's the surprise.

And when you're into the agent's journey, what was surprising or what's relevant out of all the huge amount of surprise that can be going on across all levels is kind of what becomes important potentially.

because that becomes where choices were being made or not being made.

And I think that when we talk about, or when often there's this question about the minimal conditions for life, that becomes a sort of false question because it's, again, it's in that kind of, what's the minimal questions to get life?

Now that's great if someone's applied active inference work is to create life from scratch.

I can't see anyone doing that for a long time.

So, however, if we want to know what were the key expectations, surprise or policy shifts in a living entity,

got them to this new living entity?

Because there's change, right?

I've got the scars on my hand from maybe I cut myself with a knife and I had to heal.

What were the kind of journeys on that route?

And those are the things outside of a Monty Python foot coming down on my head, in which case I don't have much surprise because I'm gone, is what were those

That I think is more interesting, and that is maybe what this talks about, because one of the key things he talks about is structural integrity, how to resist the loss of structural integrity.

He doesn't say how to keep the system going.

It doesn't matter what we see the system to be.

If it's acting, it's got structural integrity to be a thing with the ability to act.

Whether that thing is now looked at as a system is academic.


SPEAKER_02:
In the discussion on the metamorphic systems where the paper writes, it may be said that the life cycle that corresponds to the thing whose integrity is maintained over time

is the process integrity using Bucky Fuller's ontology rather than the structural integrity.

The structure of the egg is always being broken down.

The larva is always breaking down.

The adult is always breaking down and forming, but there doesn't need to be structural integrity or the retention of change at any point.

There's a higher order integrity

in the reproductive process.

And then that's the question is, okay, so can we just look at one nestmate?

Do we have to look at the colony, colony and the symbionts, colony and the abiotic niche?

What is that life cycle thing?

What's the thing's life cycle?

Is that gonna be like a realist answer where there's kind of one

true thing whose pattern integrity is being retained or might there be multiple possible answers for which thing is having its life cycle maintained so then there wouldn't be a answer for what is life or is are things alive it'd be model dependent and i think that's what we've

One of the things that we've wrote down to explore about like, what is life?

Obviously classic questions.

And how does the FEP and ACT-DIMF apply to all kinds of identified systems?

Animate meaning with activity and motion.

Sentient meaning with sensation.

inanimate without motion and then insentient without perception and yeah which systems is it a slam dunk for and where is it going to be where is it overpowered where is it underpowered what changes would it need to be more adequate in those different areas


SPEAKER_03:
Can I add something, Daniel?

If I'm a rock, without anthropomorphizing this, if I'm a rock, I can be now and now and now, or I can be then and then and then.

But it would seem to me what the free energy principles tells us is there is some relationship

to these living things because they whether they can articulate it or not they have some sense of the relationship between now and then whether then is in the past and they have a prior or then is in the future and they have a projection they're not like the non-living things which don't require some relationship between time points

And I think that's one of the things that, again, Axel's trying to point to in terms of an entailment question.

Yes, I can be in the moment and I can be mindful, but the only reason why I'm aware that I'm in this moment and not then in the past or then in the future is because there is something other than now.

And I think that that, again, kind of speaks to when we can take this and look at it as bidirectionality as opposed to unidirectionality, just entropy carrying out what entropy does.


SPEAKER_00:
Any scenes, Steven?

When we think about this free energy principle applying,

Like Dean mentioned, entropy will be doing what it does.

You mentioned earlier about the flickering flame.

Now, if I've got a gas flame, if I maintain the input of gas, there will be a structural integrity of the flame over time.

So the flame at one scale with one perception of what it means to be a flame, it could be seen to be persisting.

However, does that mean that it's time averaging trying to maintain if the lens is a flame-like structure, which may be if coupled to our niche somehow, we are trying to make it do that.

But then becomes the question of where is the variational impact

free energy being looked at is is it about free energy minimization or is it about leveraging the fact that there is a free energy principle happening there is free energy minimization there's but there's also just free energy variation

So I could look at that and I maybe get some insight by seeing the flickering flame, which isn't structurally, hasn't got that much integrity, but it has a form that is always changing, yet has a certain, at some scale of information, I don't know if I should say scale of information or something, but some qualitative nature of information persists over time.

Where is that flame in relation to?

Is it just because there's a fluctuation that I can extract the information from the persistence and the variation, even if there's no inherent motion to reduce dissipation per se?


SPEAKER_02:
interesting i think that if we return to the entailment problem and the strong and the weak claims so the strong claim minimizing free energy is sufficient for life

the overly generous claim.

And then the weak necessity, if the system is currently alive, which as we looked at with that metamorphic slide, means that it has persisted in its pattern integrity, which I know it was used as structural integrity, but that's actually a static concept.

It means that it minimized its free energy.

So the flame burning is kind of the canonical free energy chemical minimizing system.

It's dissipating literally the chemical potential energy.

And it's described perfectly by the dissipation of free energy into its environment.

And it's even that metaphor of like, oh, wait a minute.

If you put a candle under a glass jar, it burns out the oxygen and then no more, right?

Same thing happens with life forms that require oxygen to do respiration, which basically is just taking that big drop in free energy that you can get from high energy molecules like fats, and then just trickling that and yes, making some heat, but also using it to structure

other macromolecular systems, internal and external, that allow other fats to get eaten.

So yeah, blue.


SPEAKER_01:
So I want to push back on Dean for a minute.

He's got me stuck in this temporal, I don't know, zone.

So you were talking a little bit about the relationship a rock has now and a rock has then.

But I was not clear.

I want you to clarify.

I'm going to really push hard on you.

I want you to clarify what you mean.

What is the difference there between a rock and something that's alive?

Is it a relationship between now and then, be it past or future?

Or is it awareness of the past and the future?

And how do you know a rock is not aware or that a bacterium is aware?

So can you clarify what actually is this now-then relationship?

Nest.

Sure.

Great.


SPEAKER_03:
So, so what I'm saying is I don't need, I don't, I don't believe if, if you could, I said, I don't want to answer anthropomorphize it, but if you could ask a rock, does it need both a now and a then I think the answer would give back is I need one or the other.

I don't need both.

And to the point about the flame, if I, if I, if I consider myself metaphorically to have it, a fire burning inside of me, if I'm an engine and,

I have to know that in order to keep the fire going, I have to bring in more energy.

I can't just like a candle burn myself out.

So I can't go unilaterally towards the conclusion.

I have to continue to bring up now and then.

Oh, I guess I'm getting closer to the end of my energy cycle.

I have to now recapitulate and bring myself back up to that place where I can continue to burn energy.

So that's why I'm saying, I think if we want to look at this

from the standpoint of what is actually using now and then versus what can continue to exist in, I don't know if the word is entropic, but a world of entropy.

That's one of those things that we could look at in terms of what free energy principle is asking us to incorporate in terms of a relationship.

Not just the relationship between two objects in space, but the amount of time that's incorporated in that relationship, the now and the then.

I'm not asking us to pin down what exactly that is.

I'm saying let's hold that up as either continuing or not.


SPEAKER_01:
So, like, I think that...

A rock must have a past in order to exist in the now.


SPEAKER_03:
To you.

To you and your relationship with that rock.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, even for the rock to be itself, it didn't just appear out of nowhere or did it?

Maybe, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's what I'm saying.

I don't think it has a self because it doesn't have a them.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so perhaps...

What is necessary or what is necessary for something to be alive is a delta.

between now and then like a rock was, could have been a rock then in the past and could be a rock then in the future, but, but doesn't require any kind of Delta between now and then like any kind of change at all in its structure.

Although it does change, right?

I mean like pieces of it fall off and it crumbles away and turns to dust, et cetera.


SPEAKER_03:
Entropy, right?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Right.

So I mean, it does change over time, but, but it doesn't require that, that,

And so, so perhaps that Delta is one of the things like I need to be different now than I was in the past.

And I need to be different now than I'm going to be in the future in order to be alive.

Maybe.


SPEAKER_02:
Here's a meme it made me think of.

Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind.

It's like a book or whatever.

Spot, it's kind of like a particle.

We talk a lot about particular states.

So eternal sunshine of the particle-less mind.

Like if you don't have a particular state, which is the internal and the blanket states, those are the particular states,

if you don't have the existence of a partition, it's kind of eternal.

It's just like an empty field.

Now that doesn't have to be a realist claim about like what was there before the big bang and or Genesis one, it can just be like in the model before a partition and a timescale has been applied, there was no distinctions.

But then once you engage a particular

partitioning, then if it is going to persist through model time and then maybe more speculatively through real time, it does have to engage at least in looking like it's making adequate policy selection.

So one rock, we're going to be scratching our heads over it for a long time.

But then if we had a field of rocks,

Some of them would be, and then there was like one side of the rock field had some corrosive acid and one part didn't.

Like the rocks that did take the policy to be on the other side, those would be the ones that would look like they were persisting.

And so when we kind of zoom out to the population level, which is also what happens at the end of this paper,

we look at the population level of a similar type of entities then we start to see the strategies that lead to persistence versus the ones that don't so like when people think about the rock i don't know they rarely talk about other rocks and about differentiating which ones are more lifelike or less lifelike but rather when you only have one reference point you can't really have a delta dean


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and this is where I think all of us that are looking at this free energy and active inference thing can actually see a difference between three rocks on the ground and a dolmen.

The now and then can be looked at two ways.

They were just three rocks on the ground, and now they're stacked.

There's a now and a then, but that's different than the partition between us as living things and those things that have now been reordered.

And that's what this paper is asking us to look at.

Do we want to look only at the way that the rocks have been reordered, or do we want to look at the now and then of our relationship to the rock?

If we can include both, we get a completely different picture.


SPEAKER_02:
And of course we even use the rock example back in the day, back in the dot zero.

So here was sort of the two lifelines or trajectories because both the person and the rock got there.

There was a how they got there or what it takes to get there for both.

So here is a restatement of the point of the paper, which is our strange attractor.

The simple point I make in this paper is that the free energy principle is not concerned with the sufficient conditions of existence, but rather with what must have been the case necessity, given that you exist.

It's not about figuring out what it takes to be alive.

It's about figuring out what took you there.

So here's the lifeline of another system.

And Schrodinger's question, at least as it's framed, is kind of like asking, give me the binary.

Is it alive or not?

But that is predicated on us thinking we're alive, right?

I think that's fair to say.

It's not stated in there that humans are alive and that's my reference point or I'm alive or the writer of this article is alive.

But that is a very different question.

So figuring out what took you there is a different question than asking whether the past and the present and the future of the rock is alive.

Now, both entities to exist in a dissipative world

will have done something like minimize free energy, whether with respect to a complex boundary condition and a complex policy space like a human, or a simpler boundary condition and potentially a negligible affordance space like a rock.

It's almost like people talk about whether rocks are alive, but then are we alive?

And we should have a little bit of an answer there for what is alive.

What scale are we alive at?


SPEAKER_03:
So can I add to that, Daniel?

So if we look at some lots and lots of those figures and we see T and then we see T plus one and then we see T plus two, we can look at that two different ways now.

Those are then and then and then in a linear way.

Or we can look at it as then in relationship to now.

And again, that's what I think Axel is asking us to contemplate is both.

If we look at it simply as then and then and then and then, I could be a rock.

But if I'm now relating it to some other time point,

That's when whatever else free energy principle speaks to, it says it isn't just another point on a continuum.

It's in a relationship with something else.

And I think that's what makes it really interesting in terms of the entailment question.

What's necessary and what's sufficient?

Because you can actually look at it as another point on a continuum and it actually kicks out as sufficient.

But if you look at it as a relationship to, for example, now, it becomes necessary.

And that's the, I think, without going too far off on a tangent, that's kind of where it gets really interesting.

It's how you are looking at it because there's a you asking, how did I get here?


SPEAKER_02:
So I modified the slide a little bit.

Now the living red line creature.

So we're just going to say alive like me.

That's the kind of one that matters in the sense that it has a quasi-crystalline aperiodic information structure and it's negantropic.

Those are the two answers that Schrodinger provides in 1944, What is Life?

And we just can't ignore this.

This is where we're looking through our lens and our perspective on the system.

So it's not like we get a sort of transparent look or an objective or a monolithic look at the rock.

It's through our perception of the past, present, future of the rock

And that's where like the specific time scale that we choose to model it at, because over, if you speed up the rock, it's just going to be burning like the candle.

Now, maybe that takes like millions of years just in as the surface reacts with oxygen and gets oxidized, but isn't the candle oxidizing?

And then weren't we just talking about how we were oxidizing?

And then maybe the special part of our systems is that we're doing like this or something, something like that.

Like we're back casting with our meta cognitive model, how we got here.

Well, it's been this many years.

Well, since what?

Since the hospital signed your birth certificate or since you were conceived as a zygote or conceived as an idea or what exactly is that starting point?

And I think that's kind of why the starting point here is just off the edge because again, we may never know what is sufficient and sufficiency may include everything.

But when we talk about necessity, we can actually do counterfactuals, we can do loss of function experiments.

Necessity can be explored for complex systems in a way that sufficiency may never suffice.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So, like, you were talking about since you were, you know, born, conceived, since you were an idea.

But what about, like, since you were recycled from, like, previously existing organic matter?

Like, I mean, literally, we are all stardust, right?

So...

like there's somehow some kind of partition gets created around us, like at conception, at birth, at when, right?

Like, so this whole temporal thing is, is very interesting.

And it's like, you know, would you exist?

Could you exist without a mother or a father or someone to care for you as an infant?

Like, no.

Um,

But I mean, and that distinction is very different for different life forms.

Like bacterium, they don't need any care.

But is perhaps like the reproduction, like the act of even binary fission, is that sufficient care?

You know, like what does that relationship look like in life and in aliveness?

And, you know, we talk about like one of the necessary qualities of life or, you know, I mean, I'm not sure we can look at that.

Have they changed?

But like the ability to reproduce oneself is one of the necessary qualities.

qualities for for being alive and um you know lots of things we produce that are not considered alive like i mean lots of things so um viruses nanobots uh you know i don't know it's interesting sorry i'm like off on a random tangent yeah thanks blue dean


SPEAKER_03:
Blue, I don't really think that's tangential.

I think without collapsing to first-year philosophy classes, the fact that we can hold up two things as important.

One of the things that's important is which came first.

We spend a lot of time trying to figure out order through that lens.

The second lens is there's a here and now and a then.

It doesn't matter which came first.

It's just that we understand that the two things are different.

That's the second lens open.

They don't play well together.

Because the one that wants to figure out the order is literally trying to find a source.

The other is just saying, we're not going to collapse to one.

We're going to hold up two things

as long as we possibly can.

They're bad playmates.

We shouldn't put them on a play date because they're inevitably going to fight with one another.

But if we have both of our eyes open, what does that say then about us being able to get a better grip so that we can let go

when free energy principle is included or incorporated in these sloped moments.

Because I think it's the two, the figuring out which came first and here's the relationship between the two.

It's not one matters more than the other that creates the actual slope.

That's where, as I said, I don't want to turn it into a philosophy course, but I don't think that's a tangent.

I think that's what we're trying to reconcile because we call it a tension.

We can call it a, you know, they don't play well together, whatever.

But the bottom line is, is that as long as we understand there are multiple arrows, sometimes we can break them up as then and then and then and then and then.

And sometimes it's about the now and then.

And I think that's the part that for most of the stuff that we've seen in terms of how it's represented, as Daniel pointed out, it's that spontaneity of partition part that we have to also include.

And if we do, it doesn't make it any easier.

They still don't get along, but at least it tells us what might be at play.

That's why I keep coming back to play.

It's uncertain who's going to win out in any particular moment.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think like while we're discussing when, I think when was the partition created is important.

And like, you know, I mean, in something like binary fission, it's pretty easy to see, you know, like when the two, you know, cells separate and become, you know, by a certain distance, by any distance separated.

That's when, you know, the partition is made and perhaps that's true for all of the reproducing things or perhaps not.

I mean, I don't know, like the chicken is separate from the egg, right?

Going back to the chicken and the egg, but they separate very early.

So like the...

you know, maybe the separation, physical separation isn't sufficient.

Like at that moment, you don't have your own partition because the baby chick or the egg could not fully develop without the mother chicken sitting on it, even though they're physically separated.

So it's this really sticky situation.

Like where, when is the partition made that makes someone an individual?

And that's why I always go back to that David Krakauer paper.

Like when there's a bidirectional information flow,

upward and downward.

And that's like what makes you an individual.

And so like, I don't know that an egg, a developing egg has that bidirectional information flow yet.

Like maybe there's no downward causation in the egg.

There's no ability for the egg to act on its own other than do anything except develop.

like the capability for action or like the, the downward causation, like an egg is still in this emerging, it's still going through emergence, but you have to have both like, you know, emergence and downward causation for, for individuality to exist.

I always go back to that.

So, so I don't know in a, in a rock, is there downward causation or emergence?

Like either one of those things, do those exist?

And so,

That paper just nailed it for me.

I don't know that it's necessarily the answer to Schrodinger's question, but I think it does a good job of getting us somewhere.


SPEAKER_03:
I completely agree.

I guess what I'm suggesting is entanglement is a feature.

not a flaw.

And in that entanglement feature set, we can look at order, right?

And which came first, and we can look at relation.

And so I know that if there was an entanglement, even though it's multiple light years away, that entanglement tells me what the spin is, and it's not the same direction.

It's an opposite.

It's a

I agree with you, and I think that's the feature here.

The feature here isn't we can only do one or the other.

The reason why we're even speaking to this is because it has to be both in order for that slope

To eventually model out, like I'm a big fan of model at the end.

I think that's way more sophisticated because I'm prepared to let the order and the relationship hang for a while, breathe a bit, do some back and forth, scrap, UFC, punch one another, and then...

I get my model at the end.

Now, I understand why model at the beginning, but I don't think that's the only way to go.

I think if we can do model at the end, that's even more sophisticated because we have now included more.

It's complexity in play.


SPEAKER_02:
let's return to now v3 of our figure so these the colors are subject to change all right but red is realism blue is instrumentalism our favorite statistical instrument is the actinth process theory which is a corollary of the more axiomatic

more general less applied free energy principle and then this is another system and the system of interest in this paper was a bacterium so whether we're structural realists or pretty much any stance other than the most hardcore denialism we exist like if we're not alive then what is the conversation to be had

But when we ask, how did I get here, which is really happening, or when we look at another system that's also really happening, those are real events.

But both the reflexive question and the exteroceptive scientific modeling question are going to get filtered through instrumentalism.

I don't know if there's some way out of that,

It's kind of like the difference between saying, well, you can escape Plato's cave, but then can you escape like using your eyes or using your generative model?

It's like a whole nother level of cave.

And then we have like Act-Inf and the free energy principle, this classic figure, organism and the environment.

And then that is shown in the case of a brain as well as in a bacillus.

that particular partitioning about how we can think about the perception, cognition and action and impact of autonomous systems.

Once you're past the veil,

you're all within your instrumental model so that's where the question like well what were those priors in my bayesian bacterium and then the future is unknown because we can say well in my model the bacteria is minimizing free energy or i'm talking about this bacterium and i think physical systems minimize free energy it's a physical system so i think it's going to minimize free energy but as we established in this paper

free energy minimization isn't sufficient to be alive.

It's not sufficient to persist because the candle's minimizing free energy too.

So we don't know just because it has existed and is minimizing free energy that it will exist in the future.

So that's kind of the unknown.

And then once we're post partition, we're all in the instrumentalism world.

So even the framing of what is life

it's an implicit realist playing field versus how do we model life?

And then the answers that Schrodinger provides, look for the information rich, according to your information theory, quasi-crystal structure, or look for using your thermometers and your heat sensors, look for systems that appear to be locally creating order, but then creating disorder surrounding them.

I don't know if anyone really denies that those are good ways to study life or that those are heuristics that can be applied.

It's just like saying, well, your instrumentalism doesn't align with my realism.

Okay, but what is your realism and who told you about it?

And how'd you find out about it?

What are you going to do about it?

What instrument are you going to use to investigate it?

So it's interesting how the paper shines a light on how the entailment problem is really linked to some of the biggest themes that we talked about this year with realism and instrumentalism.

Because again, the entailment problem runs through and through.

What do you think, Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I would say that nails it because if you want to look at it as which is more important, realism or instrumentalism, fine.

But if you're looking at the relationship between realism and instrumentalism and how they relate to, that's going to make a fuller picture.

It doesn't necessarily make it a cleaner, simpler picture.

In fact, it makes it a messier, more complex picture.

Oh, well, sorry.

There's a relationship between those two things.

Get over it.

Grow up.

Time to grow a nice long white beard and smile because guess what?

It ain't going away just because it's more complicated.


SPEAKER_01:
So I have a problem with like, I don't know, realism overall because like what is even real?

Like I view the brain as just an instrument through which we, you know,

act and to infer like, like this is, this is it.

And, and every living system in my mind has like this, um, you know, kind of computational input output that they use, but, but it's an instrument that they use.

And like the idea of realism is, is very, um,

to me because it's so subjective like what is even real I just don't I can't buy into the notion of some kind of shared reality for anyone we all have different affordances different preferences like I don't even know if I see the same color when I see yellow that Daniel sees or Dean sees like well you know how I perceive yellow can be totally different from how you perceive yellow

And that's why we all have different colors, like favorite colors, right?

Different colors that we like more and like less.

So, you know, I mean, and people are colorblind.

And so we know that it's just not that way.

So I don't know.

Like it's all instrumentalism in my like world.

Like we're instruments.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
I think it returns to the unifying approach versus unified theory, right?

we've been really mired in the mix-up of realism and instrumentalism and it sometimes is very slippery like how things are but then that's the twist with the theory of everything and all the free energy principle for a particular physics and all of that it uses sometimes even some of the same terms like thing

but then by thing within the act-in fontology, we might be referring to this particular thing, so the blanket and the internal states, and this particular thing is a cognitive model of.

And then could we have a model of those kinds of things?

Maybe.

But could we have a model of the...

real things or would this always be a sort of blurry discussion because everybody would be talking about their model anyway and it's also a lot like um

the layers that existed in 32, which we'll return to in two days, where there was the Lorenz system.

That's like the realist system.

Now it's one that we define, but it's really that way.

The time evolution of the Lorenz system truly is defined by those equations that were granted to it.

So that's sort of the realism claim.

And then there was a first and a second order approximation to it, which are also things

but they got cleaner and cleaner and more tractable as we instrumentalized the thing we were looking at and then the question is always well how much of the attributes of the real system does the instrument retain

Do we retain false positives, like kind of things about the territory that end up not helping our map?

Do we have false negatives, like we simplified the map a ton, but we ended up missing really important features of the territory?

And if the territories are complex, as we suspect they are to have persisted this way in an agantropic world, well, if they're complex,

then how will we thread the needle with the appropriate coarse grainings as not to include false positives and false negatives in our map?

Because just having the full description of the system is not going to be useful.

And then anything simpler, we're going to be at super risk of dropping features that matter.

And so 32 showed that it was possible just at the mathematical level, for example, to make an approximatable Laplacian approximation, so tractable Laplacian approximation, but still retain the Lyapunov exponent characteristic of a chaotic system.

So we abstracted or we made approximations too, but we still retained one of the essential features of

And so maybe it's going to be harder to do that to a bacterium than a Lorenz system, because the reality of the Lorenz system is just numbers, whereas the reality of bacteria is something probably different.

But it's a similar kind of question.

And maybe we have some of the early versions of the tools that we would at least want to have in the future.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and I'm not defending either realism or instrumentalism, but I think

in this paper and that paper which we're going to go back to, if we use real or realism, what they both point to is we can get it really right or we can get it really wrong or some degree of that.

I think that's where realism as a concept comes in.

It's not an absolute.

It's not a truth.

It's the variable

as opposed to the instrument.

The instrument is trying to find out the precision, and reality is about imprecision.

So again, it's the relationship between those two things.

I'm not looking at realism in the classic definition of how other people see it.

I'm comparing it to the instrument, which is trying to gain the precise

So what's the not precise?

Okay, I'll just throw that under realism for now.

That's how I square it.


SPEAKER_01:
So, Dean, we're on the same page then because accuracy is relevant.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, exactly.

Exactly.

So I don't think you and I are apart or even remotely apart.

you know, distant, but it's how you see that relationship.

If you, if you frame it one way, something kicks out.

And if you frame it a different way, something else kicks out.

And I'm not going to tell people who frame it the other way that they're wrong.

They're relatively safe in, in their frame, but it's got to be two frames at minimum.

Otherwise we're, we're, we're lost.

we're a stone per se.

We're just going along for the ride.

And I don't know that that's, I don't know that that's fair to stones.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I don't know that we have any other choice, but to go along for the ride, honestly.

I mean, like, and this goes back to, you know, the discussions that I've had about free will.

And I discussed this with Mike Levin and I mean, really like, you know, if, if we are just the sum of our,


SPEAKER_03:
generative model like if that if that's just us we have no choice but to act accordingly unfortunately or fortunately for us blue how's your i just the confusion's built in sorry i just wanted to say i think the confusion is built in i think the uncertainty part of this is built in we know that we're eventually our demise is near we just don't know when

right?

And that's why I keep coming back to the, how did I get here is essentially asking when.

And that goes back to way back when we were talking about people with Alzheimer's and the hippocampus integrating where and when.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And the grid cells and the mirror neurons and all kinds of ideas that people have framed that are

instrumental takes that blur the line because they're about real systems, but then we can bring a little bit of an active flavor to it.

So just, I have one note, then a question.

So here, here's the red living system.

Now it's shrunk and turned into an image.

And then here's the orange person studying bacteria.

So now it's like the blue and the orange person, they can be having a conversation through the scientific literature or on a live stream or whatever.

Like this is where we start to go from that rock, is it alive or not, to here's a population of rocks, which ones are succeeding at being lifelike versus failing in terms of their dissipation.

So now here we have at minimum two people looking at the bacillus, each with their own auto-reflexive timelines.

And maybe the orange person doesn't like Act-Inf.

That's fine.

They're using some other framework, but they're not breaking out of the instrumentalism trap.

They're just doing some other instrument.

And then they're looking at the bacteria through their lens.

And then there's a conversation to be had

But it's almost like the more layers, the more super systems you add here, it starts to be like, I don't know, less and less about the bacteria.

And oh, well, in your culture, you were raised to think this way about this kind of scale or this kind of system.

And this is an interesting conversation, but it's still nucleated around that bacteria and the model.

And then, Blue, my question for you was, over 21, how has your feelings on free will changed?


SPEAKER_01:
So, like, you know, after – I'd say, like, the real –

like mindset change shift happens more like at 25, at least for me.

But I don't know, like, you know, I think that the whole experience of being a teenager is like identity seeking and like putting yourself under the illusion that you have free will or you have like such a desire to have free will that there's, I mean, like that's what it is to be a teenager is like you go through this like identity crisis and then you liberate from the parents, right?

And so I think that there's that, like, I definitely experienced that, if that's what you're asking.


SPEAKER_02:
So you already underwent the phase transition?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Yeah, I mean, the phase, like, I already, yeah.

I think, you know, as teenagers, we have, like, this illusion of and desire for freedom that is, like, what we're supposed to have and feel at that phase in life.

in order to break free and, and maybe the age is irrelevant.

I mean, maybe in some ancient prehistoric cultures, they felt that at 10, but the, the point is, is that the desire to, you know, um, is it physical separation or, or to solidify your own partition, right?

Like, um, the desire to be your own independent person.

So I think like, I, I thought that, you know, freedom and free will existed at that point.

And now like, um,

I mean, I feel like we're essentially enslaved by our generative model.

We're enslaved by the past and the future in the now.


SPEAKER_02:
I think that takes us to one of the last prepared questions we had.

One of the keywords of the paper was historical science.

And...

We talked in the dot zero about how there's all these historical sciences.

You won't see chemistry, biology, physics, not those STEM sciences, but history, and then all of these other sciences that draw data from records of past events.

as opposed to experimental or operational science, but asked it then and asked it now.

Aren't experiments in the past?

I don't see how merely having hypothesized and planned and then acquired data, when you're analyzing it, it becomes in the past.

So somebody who's studying heraldry could hypothesize, oh, in this library, on this shelf, in this book, I might find something important and I'll analyze it then.

and then that data is in their past.

So the historical sciences are contrasted with maybe what we could call the future sciences.

So not like the future of science, which we hope is awesome and participatory and accessible and whatnot, but sciences about the future, which range from the sort of speculative and almost metaphysical to the extremely applied

Where do we sit now with historical and anticipatory or future-oriented sciences in the now?

Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
So I'd like to try and take a first stab at that.

And let's use the free will question.

If we looked at it historically as...

Bring out the scrolls.

This is what happened.

Or we look into the future and say, oh, this person's thought a lot about what's going to happen tomorrow.

Let's build the scroll for tomorrow.

That's one way of looking at the question of what is free and will.

If we look at it as a relationship, we could look at it as free will or follow will, right?

meaning I can't break free, I'm entrapped or whatever.

And then what we could do is we look at the relationship as an ongoing exercise between free and follow.

Now, neither the free or follow are going to fall neatly and tidily into a scroll.

But they have a relationship, whether we scroll it out as a historical thing or we scroll it into as a projecting thing.

But the ability to do both, not just examine free will as a linear question, but also be able to relate it to, so what is non-free will?

It's like will follow.

and then now compare the follow and the free, it kicks out a different model, one that's messier, one that's up for debate.

And I think putting both of them up on a shelf and examining both is to look at philosophy, essentially.


SPEAKER_01:
So I think that I recently just learned that futurology is a science, which was super fascinating to me, like the study of predictive methods, right?

And there's so many ways that we have used to predict, but something that I thought was really, really interesting was they used to, before the internet was like trolled by bots,

you used to be able to take like message boards and chat boards and like, you know, essentially Twitter streams.

And I'm not sure how accurate this is anymore because there's so much like just artificially generated text.

But when it was humans creating the text, they used to actually do text mining as, as like a study of the future.

Like, so like a prediction analysis based on text analysis.

So it's, and was very effective.

So I hear.

But I think that this like study of future predicting, be it oracles or astrology or what have you, is really kind of fascinating because you can use all kinds of things, active inference for prediction or anything, right?

So I don't know.

I think it's interesting to compare and contrast the different ways and the ways that if you're open to accepting insight from tarot cards or the I Ching or the Oracle of Delphi,

or active inference or, you know, text analysis, if you're open, I think that all of the future or potential future avenues can be very insightful.

Like, that's a possibility, if only opening you up to the fact that that's a possibility.

I think that that's the real value in futurology.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Blue.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think you're right.

I think the law of large numbers and the fact that we now have the ability to look at much larger data sets and apply probability and statistics to those things should give us some sense of direction that we probably didn't have affordances to before.

And the messiness, and this is why a lot of times philosophers and scientists are in that same tension of relating to, is because that still doesn't collapse down to, I go and see my tarot card reader and he gives me an answer and I believe it.

Because that's not a law of large numbers.

So now, do I follow or am I free?

I don't know.

It's messy.

Right?

So, yeah.

Anyway.


SPEAKER_01:
And does history repeat itself, right?

Like there's the old adage, history repeats itself.

Can we use history?

Ooh.

Can we use history to predict the future?


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

That's where it sort of Mobius strips strange loops around when you make the model based upon the past

that's anticipating the future and then you start acting that way going forward in the future it's almost like the timeline has folded because now the past is influencing the future in a in a way that might start to diverge from not like what it would have done obviously any policy is going to diverge from some counterfactual but

starts to um potentially lose its model adequacy because events from the past whose context has changed like let's just say the correlation between two cryptos we look at the past correlation but the context is changing

So we're going to have a model that's fit on their correlation in the past.

And then especially action on that, but even without our action on that, that relationship may change.

And I think that's something interesting about ACT-INF that it puts perception, cognition, and action in the same loop, always unfolding, kind of like OODA, so that there always is the opportunity for flexibility

as surprises come in and then also what you were saying about like free will following will freeing following and then to bring it back to realism and instrumentalism like here's the free will module in my model it's like here's how it works here's what it does here's the inputs here's the outputs so does the thing have free will yep in my model it does what about the actual thing

I thought I told you we stopped talking about that a few years ago or something like that.

Like we're not talking about that or that's an interesting question, but now we're at square zero with what is real.

instead of, I made a hypothesis about free will module.

That's just what I'm calling it.

That's not a free will module.

That's a random number generator.

Or that's something that is doing its own prediction and then makes a decision based upon something else.

Or that's like a preference vector.

Okay, Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

And again, today, I don't think it matters.

I know most people would say it does, but I don't think it matters whether you start with a slide that has a blue silhouette looking at a gray rock.

Or you start with a slide that appears to be much more further along in terms of orange lines.

You can go both directions.

Yay, that's the thing that we should be celebrating.

It may appear from a constructivist point of view, which came first, that there's no way that you could have started with the orange and ended up with the much less informational 10.

But yes, you could.

And we oftentimes do.

Actually, if you go from 13 to 10 in the slide deck, that is free energy playing out.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, we could look at this one and we could go, okay.


SPEAKER_03:
That's minimizing.


SPEAKER_02:
We're talking about instrumentalism.

So we just know that when we draw an arrow of some agentic system, we know that we're talking about instrumentalism.

we know that the instrument that we're talking about is free energy principle active inference so that's how you step back from here to here and then just go okay so and then we know that models have their own internal time and that that's not the same as like real time so let's just simplify that and then let's just a little bit less academic not worried about which paper i should write let's just focus on the the motivation of that paper is it alive it's like we step back now

I don't know, is that it's like backwards and forwards in Kairos as we move forward in Kronos, Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
And that's where instructionalism, and I forget what that, it was a Hippolyta paper, I think.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, interaction.

Instructionalism.

Scopeful performance where the action is.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

That's where this, that's where those four slides prove out her paper, her at all paper, because the reality is

It's not simply constructivism.

It's disentanglement.

There's a product at the end of it that appears to be a construction.

Don't get me wrong.

However, what actually generates four versions, four iterations is a disentanglement, not an integration.

And we have to be able to hold up both

if we're actually going to get to a place where we understand how understanding emerges.

And that's where I find this stuff really exciting.

Because if it's about interaction, here's the proof.


SPEAKER_02:
In the last few minutes, where do we go?

Not where we came from.


SPEAKER_01:
Or when do we go?


SPEAKER_02:
um mom are we there then um blue we'll be working on some fun literature analysis the history of active inference literature and free energy principle half 22.

We hope to see many new papers coming in from authors that we know as well as from new authors and new perspectives and selecting cutting edge papers and recent papers that are coming out and preprints ones that might not be done.

See where the live stream can insert itself into that literature stigmergy.

Maybe go back to some earlier classics

for contrast and understanding how ideas change through time and where we are now, who we are now, all these other variants of the question that we talked about.

I mean, we're going to be doing it on Wednesdays next year, starting one hour later.

at I think 16 UTC at 8 a.m.

Pacific.

So for the weekly paper discussions or just any other system of interest, where are we going or what will we do differently in 22?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm curious to see.

We're going to have our 40-second live stream.

That's going to be epic.

We have to choose wisely, choose a paper wisely.

And also, our first paper of the year is going to maybe set the tone for what we're going to learn and do and be about this year.

What was our first paper last year in 21, Daniel?


SPEAKER_02:
It was Adam Saffron and colleague 13.1.

Let's look on the CODA site.

Um, oh, we haven't updated it yet, but it was 13 on the cybernetic big five.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, that was epic too.

That was really good.

And actually like, you know, the big five was, that was my first time learning about it.

And it was kind of, we covered all of those this year, uh, several times.

So we'll have to have to similarly choose like an all encompassing first paper.

Um, hopefully we go into more participation and, uh, more expansion and, um,

more broad acceptance or recognition of the FEP.

I hope that's where we go.


SPEAKER_02:
That would be cool.

Do we have any other comments or we can give sort of a yes, Dean, please.


SPEAKER_03:
One last thing.

I think I didn't come in.

I wasn't there a year ago.

But one of the things that has recently happened is that we've introduced another walnut shell, the potential for a 0.3, which I actually think for most people would be like, yeah, okay, so what?

You're going to stare at your navel longer.

But I actually think it's a really...


SPEAKER_01:
RIP, Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Dean, please, from the, oh, wow.


SPEAKER_01:
RIP, Dean.

Yeah.

But the .3 affordance is cool, so that's a really good point.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean, the walnut shell, the navel gazing, the .3, continue.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I just was going to say, I think it's actually a really exciting time because when we add another shell, we're actually practicing the active inference instead of just talking to it in different versions.

And that to me is, if next year means that there's more reveal, more queue unknown, then

And we actually have to play with that uncertainty space as opposed to walking into it and saying, well, we've now had this many live streams.

So now we know we should actually be doing more shells, one P and more options hidden.

That's when it gets really exciting.

So that's what I'm looking forward to.


SPEAKER_01:
So that's a super good point, Dean.

And so if people have other live streams that they wish that they were a part of or, you know, other authors want to come back for a revisit to do a .3 of any live stream that they've been on before, like, reach out.

We always have the affordance to make an anything .3.

So, yeah, like, we can revisit old things and move on to new things and do both of them together.

History, the weird folding, right?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, we can do guest streams, all kinds of fun stuff.

And then also just so people know, if you're ever part of the live stream, you'll see this slide asking you to go through a checklist.

This is our 21 version and we hope people go through it.

I think sometimes they do.

Lots of information on participation, on things to check before you start.

If you're a participant, so not like the author of the paper, but just somebody who's gonna be hanging out and giving any thoughts on a paper, there's some checklist for you.

For a presenter, like an author who's gonna be presenting a talk, there's information for them.

There's also the broadcast role.

So that's the person with a stable internet and a computer that can run a streaming software.

There's a conversational facilitator,

Yeah, exactly.

DeansGabin.stream.

We'll stream through a tin can.

Then there's the organizers checklist.

And then we're always growing and changing as Active Inference Lab because...

we're a participatory lab and that includes every single possible role, including many that are not listed here.

So if it's something that you're interested in, and if you're listening and your regime of attention has extended this far, then maybe you'd like to join a live stream or make a suggestion or play one of these other roles because it is a multiplayer game and I hope we're having fun when we get to do it.

So,

Dean and Blue and Steven from earlier and Dave from earlier as well today.

Always appreciated.

It was an awesome year.

I think we all learned a lot by doing and updated our generative models.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Daniel.

Really appreciate it.

Thanks, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, guys.

It's been a good
