## bXOAOqJxujs

Hello and welcome everyone. It's January 26th, 2024. We're here in Active Inference Math Stream
8.1 with Richard Sarajevon. And we're going to have an interesting presentation and discussion
today on Introduction to Bayesian Mechanics, Free Energy Principle, and the State-Based
Formalism. This is part one. So Richard, thank you for joining. Looking forward to this presentation
and discussion. So to you. Hi everybody. So yeah, my name is Richard Sarajevon. I'm French working in
Switzerland. I'm a PhD student at EPFL in Lausanne. And just to bring a bit of context, I'm not working
on Bayesian Mechanics. We are, we do have a physics background, but we are interested in
modeling bacterial evolution and ecology. And what happened is that something like, I mean,
the free energy principle was always in the corner of my head. And one year and a half ago,
I decided to really read about the free energy principle, especially if I wanted to transition
to the field and I do want to transition to the field after my PhD. And so I started to
ask many questions to the people from the FEP community. And I'm so grateful. Thanks for
them. And also on the discord of the of the Active Inference Institute. And at some point,
I said that I was preparing a lab meeting about the free energy principle. And Daniel proposed
to have this discussed on the live stream because there isn't such material to specifically learn
about Bayesian mechanics and the actual physics underlying the free energy principle. And so
here I am. So once again, I'm not an expert on the matter. So always refer to the original
papers. But hopefully I'm gonna I'm gonna do a decent job. So without further ado, let's let's
start. I'm not going to tell you what we where we are heading what questions we would like
to to address or whatever. I'm rather going to start building the framework right away.
And at some point, what we're doing doing will become clear. So as you may know, there are
two formulations or formalisms of the free energy principles, the so called state based formulation,
and the so called path based formulation. So today, we will focus on the state based formalism.
It's not like the old versus the new formulation. In fact, thinking in terms of path, or so called
generalized coordinates of motion, I've been around forever, but in the literature, but
it kind of came back to the front scene of the Bayesian mechanics literature, I think. Anyway,
today, we will focus on the state based from formalism. So the very starting point is to write
down a large my equation, a generic large my equation. So it's literally like saying, let's consider
a random dynamical system. Very briefly for the people not acquainted with such an equation.
X here is the state of your system. So it could be a simple scalar if you are considering a one
dimensional process. But in general, X would be a vector. For instance, if I don't know, you
want to model the 3D diffusion of a Brønian particle immersed in a liquid, X would be a 3D vector,
whose components are the coordinates of your Brønian particle. And you can see on the left hand side,
that we have dx over dt, the time derivative of the state vector. So that such an equation really
describes or specifies the dynamics of the system. So many things can influence indeed the dynamics of
the system. If I stick to my Brønian particle example, maybe it is subject to an external force.
So whatever is relevant here, you put it in F, the so-called deterministic term or flow. We will refer
to it as the flow for the presentation. However, in some cases, there is stuff you don't want to
explicitly model. For instance, if I stick with my Brønian particle example, it is constantly hit by
the molecules of the medium surrounding it, hence its Brønian motion, right? And it would be,
so if you want to take into account these thermal fluctuations, it would be mission impossible to
explicitly model every single molecule of the millions, if not billions of the molecules
surrounding it. So a convenient way to still take into account these fluctuations, which are literally
thermal fluctuations in my example. A convenient way to proceed is just to add a noisy term to the
equation. So Omega here is a random variable, which value changes with time with the appropriate statistics.
Okay, so two brief remarks before moving on. If you assume that the state of your system changes slowly
compared to the time relaxation of your fluctuations, you can write the autocorrelation function of the
fluid of the noise like that, where gamma is the diffusion matrix and delta is the delta Dirac function.
So what it means, it's just that in that case, your noise is super rough and it's not correlated in time, basically.
Also, second remark, you can, I mean, you can use the central limit theorem to argue that
that it is that that it makes sense to assume that omega is normally distributed. So that in the end,
the noise is a Gaussian white noise. But note that in the next live stream where we will
discuss the path based formulation of the FEP, we will relax the white noise assumption. Anyway,
the flow F is a vector. It has the same dimension than the state vector because each component of the state
vector has its own Lagrange equation, if you will. And you can decompose it into a solenoidal and a gradient
of the same direction. So, we will be able to see that in the second term. So, before telling you what this decomposition is all about, on a technical note, just notice that first Q here is the so-called solenoidal matrix.
Gamma is the diffusion matrix just as before. And the I here, with the Nabla I, this I of X here,
is a negative log of a density. So, it's a self-information or surprise. We will refer to it as a surprise throughout the presentation.
And the density at play here in this negative log density is the steady state or NESS for non-equilibrium steady state
density of the system. So, we assume that there is such NESS density that exists so that if you, from a given initial
initial state, you let your system evolve, it will reach at some point unique, well-defined NESS density.
And second remark before telling you what this decomposition is all about, note that usually in the papers, the divergent terms here and here are put together
on a, in a third term, which is, which is sometimes called the housekeeping or correction term. But actually, if Q and gamma are not state dependent,
these divergence terms vanish anyway, and we end up with the two remaining terms, which can be nicely factorized like that.
Also, a last thing I want to say is that if you, you consider the solenoidal term, the first term,
the first term, it is indeed a solenoidal term, you can indeed write it as the rotational of some potential.
I'm saying that because sometimes people get confused when they see a gradient in both terms.
Anyway, what this decomposition is all about is quite in fact simple. Let's consider this nice 2D
single modded NESS density. Okay, so the flow, and more specifically, the gradient component of the flow,
which is here, the vertical flow, will drive the system towards its mode while fluctuations kind of push it away.
But it's not the only flow, there is also the solenoidal flow, which is here,
the horizontal flow, which will make the system kind of converge to its mode in with ever decreasing cycles.
And so if you want to get some more intuitions on this solenoidal flow, what we can do is to remove the fluctuations.
So all the entries of gamma, the diffusion matrix, go to zero. And this means that we would not have any gradient flow anymore,
we end up with only the solenoidal flow. And if we do that, the system will just follow an isocontour circulation on the NESS density.
That's the bottom right panel here, where the solenoidal flow kind of drives the system on this circulation here.
So a small remark about this solenoidal flow, because it kind of drives the system in this simple example,
in either clockwise or anti-clockwise direction, in an irreversible fashion, irreversible in the statistical physics sense.
So it breaks detailed balance, and so on. People sometimes view this solenoidal flow as underwriting the symmetry breakings ubiquitous in living systems.
Anyway, okay, so before using this decomposition of the flow to do some cool stuff, I need to introduce some stuff.
So I will have to go through a couple of things, of notions, one after the other.
And afterwards, we will put everything together and actually derive the free energy principle.
So the first thing I want to introduce is the notion of sparse coupling.
So let's say that in my state vector x here, I have a subset of variables, this mu here we refer to as the internal states.
And they specify the state of some subsystem called mu.
So I mean, you get the idea, the idea is that we have like an organism, an agent, the bacteria in my schematic.
And these variables here literally specifies the internal states of my bacteria.
And this bacteria is in a given environment, niche, whatever.
So there is this other subset of variable we refer to as the external states, and which corresponds to the external world, the external states of the bacteria.
And the idea here is that these two subsystems are not connected to each other.
So when I'm saying that two variables are not connected to each other, I just mean that their respective flows do not take the other one state as arguments.
So they do not influence each other, basically.
In fact, they are indirectly connected to each other, thanks or through a third subsystem we refer to as the Markov blanket, so that these guys here are called the blanket states.
And we will see in a minute that it really corresponds to a Markov blanket in a statistical sense.
So we have this architecture, this path coupling architecture here.
And in fact, we can even go a bit further and assume that within the blanket, there are two more systems, the so-called sensory states and the so-called active states A.
So basically, the idea here is that the external states A, they influence the sensory states S, and these sensory states S influence the internal states mu, but not the other way around.
And the internal states mu, they influence the active states A, which influence the external states A, but not the other way around.
So it's really a sparse coupling architecture inspired by the so-called action perception loop.
However, you could ask questions like, why do the sensory states influence the external states?
Or why do the active states influence the internal states, etc.?
So we don't have really time to discuss this.
I guess you can think of some qualitative example in biology.
But I just want to point out that even though this architecture is quite canonical, it's not a definitive feature of the free energy principle.
And in fact, in the next time when we will discuss the other formalism, we will do a bit of zoology and we will look at other sparse coupling architecture.
Okay, so on a technical note, just notice that such sparse couplings are encoded by zero entries in the Jacobian matrix of the flow.
Anyway, so thanks to this sparse coupling architecture, we have this system of four coupled Langevin equations, which respectively describes or specify the dynamics of the external states eta, the sensory and active states S and A, and of the internal states mu.
Okay, so I want to say here about the Markov blanket thing that under some conditions, I'm not going to discuss here.
So for the people acquainted, it involves having no solenoidal couplings between autonomous and not autonomous states.
But anyway, I'm not going to go into this.
Let's say under some conditions, the external state eta and the internal states mu are conditional independence.
So they are independent when conditioned upon B, which makes sense because all the information kind of transit through B.
However, note that when I'm talking about conditional independencies here, I'm talking about conditional independencies in the stationary density.
So basically, if you fix P and you have this joint conditional conditional stationary density here for Xi and XJ,
if these two guys are conditional independent, it just means that you can write this joint density like that.
And so that such conditional independencies are encoded by zero entries in the ASEAN matrix of surprisal.
Okay, so now just a bit more of vocabulary before moving on.
Note that if we put together A and mu, so we consider the couple active states and internal states, we refer to these guys as the autonomous states alpha.
And the cool thing about the autonomous states A and mu or alpha is that they are conditionally independent of the external states.
So autonomous and external states are independent when conditioned upon sensory states.
And if you add the sensory state S to the autonomous states, so you consider the whole thing, the whole Markov blanket and the internal states,
we refer to these guys as the particular states pi.
And pi constitutes a particle, a particle in a generic sense, of course.
So an organism, an agent, whatever, a bacteria in my schematic.
Okay, so here I just want to make a point to make a bit more clear what we are doing, what this approach is all about.
So basically here we kind of define what it means for something, a bacteria, whatever, to exist in the sense that it has its own internal dynamics statistically separated from the external.
It does have a mark of blanket, it does have its own physical integrity.
So we have no clue of how it maintains indeed its integrity in the sense that if you're considering real systems like an actual bacteria or a human being or whatever,
it does survive in a given timescale.
Right, for instance, this playing, I don't know, like active processes, contouring dissipation, for instance.
Here we don't say anything about how it does survive.
It just does.
We do have this sparse coupling architecture.
And from there, from the starting point, we are going to derive the necessary consequences of such sparse coupling.
So basically, we kind of ask or answer to or try to answer the questions, if things exist, what must they do?
And so if you're a bit confused, don't worry, we're going to go back to this idea later.
But I just want first to show you this quote here, which tells you many theories in the biological sciences are answers to the question, what must things do in order to exist?
The FEP turns this question on its head and asks, if things exist, what must they do?
But once again, we are going to go back to this idea later.
But that's kind of the idea of this approach in a nutshell.
So as I told you, I still have a couple of things to present.
So I will have to go through each of them one after the other.
And finally, we will put everything together.
And finally, derive the free energy principle.
So the next thing I need to introduce is the notion of synchronization map.
So very, very generally speaking, I'm not specifically here talking about our random dynamical system.
If you have a linear map, G mu here, which gives you mu from B, and G eta here, which gives you eta from B, then if G mu here is injective, so that basically you can go back to the pre-image from the image, you can use the pseudo-inverse of G mu.
So that from B, you can go back to the mu, and from B, you can go to eta.
So the successive application of the pseudo-inverse of G mu, and then of G eta, is called the synchronization map.
And it basically allows you to directly go to eta from mu.
Okay.
So now let's try to use this idea in the context of our system.
So B here corresponds to the blanket state.
So if I fix the blanket state, I have a corresponding conditional densities for mu and eta.
I have P of mu given B, and P of eta given B.
And their modes are bold mu and bold eta.
So in virtue of this synchronization map, I can go back to the external mode from the internal mode, thanks to, once again, this synchronization map here.
And I'm going to give an example in a sec, which is going to clarify a bit more what we are doing here.
But first, I just want to say that in this nice paper by Lenz da Costa about this synchronization map, basically everything was Gaussian.
But sometimes, I mean, if it is not the case, a Laplace approximation, which is literally a Gaussian approximation, might be necessary to derive a synchronization map of closed form.
But don't worry, we will go back to this idea of Laplace approximation later.
Just remember that we have this synchronization map here, which allows you to go to the external map, external mode, sorry, from the internal mode.
So for instance, if given B, given the blanket state, the corresponding P of eta given B follows this nice normal distribution where bold eta here corresponds to the mode.
So then, in virtue of the synchronization map, I can view the internal mode mu as parametrizing a density.
I write it that way, which is equal to this nice normal distribution, where the mode is just the synchronization map applied to the internal mode to itself.
And by construction of the synchronization map, it is equal to the true external density.
So you can view the internal mode as parametrizing a distribution over external states, basically, thanks to the synchronization map.
That's why what the synchronization map is all about.
So just a small point, because maybe some of you are a bit confused here because we're talking about modes as opposed to actual states.
So we will talk about that later.
But indeed, I mean, if I take the actual internal states at a given time t, they are not necessarily equal to their modes just because of fluctuations or whatever.
So that if I apply the synchronization map on the actual internal states, it might not give you the true external mode.
But anyway, we will discuss this a bit more later.
So that was the notion of synchronization map in a nutshell, basically.
So last thing I want to introduce before finally putting everything together and actually derive the free energy principle is the notion of variational inference.
So very simply, let's say that you have some latent variables or hidden variable or some latent generative process.
So you have a prior P of eta over the state of these hidden causes of data.
And you are also equipped with a generative model, which just designates this joint distribution here, P of eta and S.
So you can view it as a model of how the latent variables cause the data.
So the idea is the following.
You sample some data S and you want to compute the posterior distribution P of eta given S.
So in a way, you want to refine your belief about the hidden cause of data thanks to a new sample data.
So it's very simple in principle because you just have to apply Bayes theorem, right?
So we need a method.
However, in practical settings, the denominator here, P of S, so the marginal density over sensory data usually requires a monstrous marginalization.
So it's just not tractable.
So we can't just apply Bayes theorem.
So we need a method which given some variational distribution Q, also called recognition density,
gives us, I mean, we want a method that makes it as close as possible, if not equal to the true distribution we want ultimately to compute,
namely P of eta given S.
And this two density, so Q, our variational distribution, and the true distribution P of eta given S,
are equal or are more or less equal if their divergence, KL divergence here is zero because this quantity here, the KL divergence,
basically measure the difference between two distributions.
So that's what I wrote here on the top of the slides.
Finding an accurate distribution Q in the sense of finding a Q as close as possible, if not equal to the true target density,
is equal to minimizing this divergence.
However, this divergence, I mean, there is the target density appearing here.
We can't do anything directly with it.
We can't compute it or whatever.
We need a proxy for this target divergence.
And there is a proxy called variational free energy F in green in my slide here.
So F is equal to this divergence here between Q and the generative model.
And the idea here is that you can decompose this divergence into the true, the target, sorry, into the target divergence in red here, plus something.
So it is indeed a proxy for the target divergence.
And note that, interestingly enough, the second term here is the surprise over sensory data or negative log P of S.
So that F can be viewed as an upper bound or lower bound, depending on how you define it, on surprise.
So what I just said here is that minimizing the target divergence just means minimizing F.
So that's basically what variational inference is all about.
And note that, usually, algorithms require Q to be Gaussian or require a mean field approximation or whatever.
And if Q is required to be Gaussian, even though the target density is not Gaussian, we would end up with the best Gaussian approximation of the target density, basically.
And in practice, it would mean working with a so-called Laplace encoded free energy.
Okay.
So before moving on, I just want to say that this quantity, the variational free energy, is in itself a quite rich and interesting quantity.
So you can decompose it in many ways, and each decompose provides interesting interpretations.
For instance, if you look at the second line here, you can see that minimizing free energy means maximizing this accuracy term here.
You basically want to explain the data, but at the same time, you want Q to differ the least possible from a prior distribution.
So that's an interesting quantity.
Anyway, now let's finally go back to our sparsely coupled random dynamical system and use everything we talked about.
And finally, let's derive the free energy principle.
So here is our system, and we have these four Langevin equations.
And the first thing to do is just to apply the decomposition we talked about in the beginning.
So basically, the flows of each of them can be written like that.
So I just directly applied the Helmholtz decomposition we talked about in the beginning.
Okay.
Okay.
So now let's try to understand how it works.
Let's talk about the dynamics of the system.
Let's say that there is a momentary instantiated sensory state.
And let's fix, let's say that the sensory state are fixed.
And there is a corresponding autonomous mode toward which the autonomous states are going to converge and stay in the vicinity of their mode, in the close vicinity if fluctuations are not too large.
Okay.

But in fact, sensory state with time changes so that the modes of the autonomous state move as well.
And in fact, it moves on its corresponding autonomous manifold.
So I'm not going to go into the details, but just have in mind that the autonomous mode moves on a so-called autonomous manifold, which can be viewed as a statistical manifold and which can also be viewed as a so-called center or center manifold.
So if I kind of rephrase what I am saying here is that the flow of the autonomous states can be decomposed into an off manifold flow and an on manifold flow, which corresponds to the path of the mode itself on the manifold.
Okay.

Okay.
So just to be a bit more clear, let's say in my bottom right illustration diagram here, the autonomous states are here.
And I'm interested in the off manifold flow.
So basically I have this component here, which corresponds to the gradient flow towards the manifold, towards the mode basically.
Here it's pretty much like what we discussed in the beginning.
And at the same time, there is here this orthogonal component, which corresponds to the solenoidal flow.
So that's basically the way the autonomous states are going to reach their mode here.
It can be viewed as this ever decreasing cycle towards the manifold on which the autonomous mode move.
Okay.
So that's a bit dense, I guess.
So I recommend to check the papers of free energy principle made simpler, but not too simple, which kind of discuss all this, this ideas about center manifolds and stuff.
So here, the interesting point is that if you assume a separation of timescale between the fast flow of the manifold, as opposed to the slow flow on the manifold, basically the autonomous state always are always in the vicinity of their modes.
And if you want to characterize the overall dynamics of the autonomous states, you can focus on the autonomous mode and the path of the mode.
And in the next slides, we will indeed focus on the autonomous mode.
And by definition, as we already discussed, the autonomous mode is or corresponds to the autonomous states, which minimize surprise here in the last two large-var equations, because the autonomous mode corresponds to the least surprising autonomous states.
Before moving on, I just want to say something we can maybe discuss afterwards because I'm not sure to fully understand.
But basically, if I'm here in my bottom right schematic, and so I have this gradient flow towards the manifold and this solenoidal flow parallel to the manifold.
And if I remove fluctuations, so the corresponding entries in the diffusion matrix go to zero.
As we saw in the beginning, it means that there is no gradient component anymore.
And what the system will be doing is kind of orbiting or oscillating around the point which moves on the manifold.
So that's interesting.
And I guess that if we do the exact same reasoning, but starting already on the mode, then the world flow reduces to the on manifold flow.
And I guess that in that case, the autonomous states follow and in fact coincide with their mode.
But anyway, maybe we can discuss about that afterwards.
So, okay, so let's use the various things we talked about, and especially the notion of synchronization map.
As we said, the internal mode parameterizes indeed a distribution over the external states.
So mu here parameterizes a distribution which by construction coincides with the true distribution P of eta given B.
And in fact, thanks to the conditional independence between external states and autonomous states, you can just drop the condition upon A and you just have Q mu equal P of eta given F.
And equivalently, you can write it P of eta given P.
And the idea here is that you can view Q mu as a variational distribution.
If you want, you can write its associated variational free energy.
So you have this formula here, the free energy.
And because Q mu is already coincide with the true posterior distribution, if you will, the first term here goes to zero.
And so that F here reduces, if you will, to the surprise over particular states.
And surprise over particular states, they appear here in the equations of the autonomous states.
So we can do this identification and we realize that the autonomous mode not only minimize, not only minimize surprise though, but free energy in general.
And the way mu, the internal states will be updated when the sensory states will change will always be so that this divergence here is zero.
So that mu is always keeps track or synchronize with or in fact infer the external states.
So that you can interpret that under a generative model, which is here P, the nest entity, the internal states can be viewed as performing inference over external states.
And so in fact, it's not only this divergence, which is minimized, but it's also surprise.
And it's not only, only the internal states which minimize free energy, but also the active states.
So let me give an example.
Let's say that the actual instantiated sensory states are likely sensory states or unsurprising sensory states.
And by definition, in general, the instantiated sensory states will be likely sensory states.
So mu will, the corresponding mu will be so that this divergence will be zero as we just discussed.
And at the same time, the corresponding active mode will be so you can see composition with the first term here, I of A given S and mu.
A, this active mode will just be the one the most consistent with this in intensiated sensory states.
And in fact, you can view it the other way around and say that the active mode is the mode which gives unsurprising sensory states.
So that the particle can be viewed as actively sampling unsurprising or likely sensory states.
Or equivalently, you can say that the particle kind of accumulate evidence for its own generative model.
And I'm going to say something about the generative model in a sec, but I just want first to, so yeah, this sentence here just sum up what we said.
Mu is updated so that q mu is always the best distribution of our external states.
And we refer to this as perceptual inference.
And the idea to, in addition, trying to minimize surprise for action is called active inference.
So a brief note, we said earlier that in order to have a synchronization map of closed form, it could be necessary to work under a Laplace approximation.
So that in that case, q mu is just the best Gaussian, for instance, of the target density.
So that's the divergence here would not be zero, but it still would be minimized.
So that the identification here between the two gradients still hold and nothing change.
Nothing changes with respect to our discussion.
So here I just want to say something about this, what we are doing here.
Basically, we assume that we have our agent or organism that survives indeed, exists or persists in a given environment, let's say, at a given time scale.
And we end up with the fact that our particle must be equipped with or must be must embody a generative model, which may or may not exactly coincide with the true generative process, and which encodes the causal structure of the world under which it tries to perform inference and to minimize surprise to perform perceptual and active inference.
But the interesting thing as well is that, and I think that's something fundamental that people tend to misunderstand.
And what we are going to understand is that, and that's something that we are going to do with the generative model.
And what we are going to do with the generative model is that the generative model also encodes the preferences of the system.
And let me explain why.
And let me explain why.
If I tell you that an organism manages to survive, to exist, to persist, etc.
And so it means that such an organism manages to stay in its homeostatic, life-compatible states.
You would be, of course, it almost sounds like a tautology.
Survive equals staying in its homeostatic states.
That's obvious, right?
And that's exactly what we are doing here.
We assume existence, survival, so that the likely state in which the particle will persist are preferred states per se.
So that, for instance, if I'm considering the prior of my generative model over sensory inputs, P of S, sensory outcomes as associated with high P of S, so likely or unsurprising sensory states, are preferred sensory states.
Hence, when I'm saying that the active states try to sample unsurprising sensory states, it means trying to sample preferred sensory states.
And so basically the particle appears to kind of actively accumulate evidence for its own existence in a way.
It kind of sample life-compatible data, if you will.
And that's exactly the definition of self-evidenting.
So I think we touch here something fundamental about agency is that agents are self-evidenting creatures in that sense.
Okay.
Anyway, so basically, I think that's the most interesting thing of the free energy principle.
We start from existence, and we end up that such a particle, which is coupled to the world in that way, must embody a generative model, which encodes the causal structure of the world, and which encodes its preferences in terms of what is life-compatible, if you will.
Okay.
Okay.
So just to sum up what we did here, this idea that free energy is minimized, you can write it that way.
And this is in a way a variational principle for self-organization.
That's a free energy principle.
So here I just wrote what we just discussed.
The agent keeps tracks and acts on its external milieu through perceptual and active inference.
And note that interestingly enough, you can write such a principle as a principle of least or stationary action where the Lagrangian, which is constantly minimized the longer path, is variational free energy.
So here are some concluding remarks.
I'm not going to through all of them.
But the first one is basically what we just discussed, this idea that the generative model encodes preferences.
If an agent maintains existence, its likely states are its preferred ones per se, hence the notion of self-evidencing.
And I just also want to point out that this new approach or chapter of physics, let's say, consisting in describing physical systems as encoding probabilistic beliefs is called Bayesian mechanics.
Okay, so having said that, thank you very much, and especially thanks to all these guys who helped me so much, especially Len.
And yeah, thank you for your attention.
I'm coming back.
Thank you, Richard.
Okay, well, while we're settling back in, and anyone is asking questions in a live stream, what is your PhD research?
And if this is your side project, what is your main project that this kind of relates to?
Yes, so, well, in fact, I kind of read about the free energy principle in my free time, whenever I had some time.
And what I'm doing in my PhD is, so we have a couple of projects.
The first project we did was really modeling bacterial evolution through, so basically we model bacterial evolution as a bias random work on genotype space, with successive mutations and successful fixations.
So that's what we are doing.
So that's what we are doing.
It's not related to the FEP at all.
And the second thing we have been doing is modeling.
So basically, we had a system where you have bacteria which can kill each other, thanks to a system which is called the T6 secretion system.
And they kind of have needles with which they can go through the membrane of other bacteria and liberate toxins.
And they can also bind to each other.
So there is like a prey predator kind of dynamics.
And we did like a lattice gas modeling of such systems.
So basically, that's what I'm doing in my PhD, which is not related to to Bayesian mechanics, but I would like to transition to the field afterwards.
So yeah, we'll see how it goes.
Awesome.
Awesome.
I remember when I thought my PhD wasn't related to active inference.
Okay, cool.
Well, the work built to an amazing crescendo that in its simplicity, even though you highlighted it, it's easy to fly by, which is the coincidence of the preferences and the expectations.
So could you maybe give a little context?
How else has that nexus of preference and expectation been approached?
And is the FEP only and simply and always that coincidence?
Is that coincidence upstream or downstream of some other commitment that we make?
Like, what are the commitments that we really make?
And is that alignment the commitment or a resulting commitment?
Yeah.
So, so first of all, I think the notion of self-evidencing might be a bit refined with the next formulation.
But anyway, it's, I think that's a crucial point about the FEP.
And usually it's kind of confusing because when you're reading the papers and people are starting to write that the system sample evidence for its own existence, you're like, what?
I mean, I'm not sure to understand what's going on here.
But in fact, yeah, it's, I think the way I introduced it, this idea that by definition, a living thing is a thing which, which managed to sample life compatible.
So, I think, you know, sensory data is really what allows this alignment between surprise and preferences, basically.
And this idea that actively sampling unsurprising data is in fact, and it's not like a tricky wording, in a way that's really what's happening.
It is sampling, it is sampling life compatible, or preferred in that sense, data, hence the notion of self-evidencing.
But, yeah, I think the whole idea here is that we start from existence, we start from the sparse coupling architecture, where the particle managed to maintain its physical integrity, managed to display a Markov blanket, which allows the agent to have its own internal dynamics separated from the object.
So, somehow, is the ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
all about and actually last remark um in a machine learning street talk interview of maxwell ramstad
he it was titled the fvp as a physics of survival if i remember well and i think that's that's very
very much what what it is all about in a way awesome how would you relate what you just
describe to reward or to reinforcement type learning schemes yeah so i i mean i'm not um an expert at all
i could not uh make the bridge here but i know that um lance dacosta made several uh works and interviews
about the subject and actually i think there is a very new paper called active inference as a model
of agency you just shared actually today um so i yeah i recommend the viewers to to check them out
and as far as i know but here i'm just i'm just uh saying what i heard is that um any reinforcements
learning algorithms can be um can be framed in terms of active inference so i think active inference is
is a very um uh fundamental scheme but yeah yeah it's all good like the reason i ask just with how
you presented it is what kind of observations do we want to sample that could be the sensory embodied
interface between the agent and the environment or you can take more cognitivist approach and sample
internal observations but those are just external some other internal so what do we want to really
sample well if you're even in a position where you're talking about sampling from like a utility
or a reward distribution you've already specified a distribution why not just specify the existence
distribution the actual attractors and stationarities of the measurements and then um
it's simpler because there's no proposal of a secondary intermediate between the temperature and
how good different temperatures are by going and just saying it's not rewarding to be at 37 homeostatic
temperature it's just expected and likely and the ball rims downhill it's actually a lot simpler and more
general yeah i and i i think that um it's way more simpler to i mean the idea here is that the agent has
a kind of world model which as you said uh specified what are the the expectation uh with regards to
just existing in a way and as opposed to uh designing explicitly um um um uh objective functions um
with the which incorporates the notions of utility and so on so yeah i'm very much agree
um earlier when we were looking at the flows and we had the breakdown of a flow um could you maybe just
um
what animal are you thinking about or what scenario can help us understand like what's the solid black line
what's the small red line what's the spiral what's like a physiological setting that we could associate
here to help us understand that kind of complex movement yeah so uh generally speaking the first thing
i could say is that this notion of solenoidal flow so it's like in the schematic schematic in the first
slide where you have you had this either contour circulation on the nest density or here the the
the component of the flow which creates this sort of spiral here it can it so that um it's this sort of um
oscillations are i think uh the sort of oscillations or cycles that are ubiquitous in living systems um i mean i'm not
a biologist but you can uh or not really a biologist uh but you can think of the circadian cycle or or
anything in any sort of systems there is this thought of of of um attractor where you're circulating along
and so here specifically to this to this um schematic here i think the idea is that um
um um you have so you have you you basically let's say that uh for a given sensory states you have a
corresponding autonomous mode and the when the sensory state change the autonomous mode mode uh changes as
well and in fact move on its so-called manifold so basically i guess here you have the mode moving
uh on its manifold and now if we take uh the perspective of this autonomous states here we uh converge to the
the manifold to the mode uh and because of the solenoidal uh component of this flow the way we will um reach it
uh and uh and um i really recommend here the free energy principle simple paper you have the the flow on the
manifold it's just the path of the mode itself let's say and you have the flow of the manifold
the flow of the manifold was gradient component is the flow towards the manifold in fact um so basically so
that's basically how autonomous states kind of um react to to to sensory data which change the autonomous mode
and i think the world uh an important idea here is to assume that the flow of the manifold is fast as opposed to the flow
on the manifold so that basically the sensory state are always uh in the vicinity of their mode and move with their mode
and um sorry and um and um and yeah i think that's pretty much the the idea here okay so let's just say that the black line
is um our homeostatic body existence life compatible ph oxygen blood sugar and yeah we are that light blue dot
that's off that manifold of course if we were far enough off to be dead it would be a moot question but
we're off but within a life um scaffolding a compatible zone and now as time pushes us down into the right
um there are different slices that we can trace um we could take the shortest path
the gradient flow directly towards the manifold so as that plays out through time it would look like a linear line
converging to the thick black line or
pure solenoidal flow would just stay equally far away from the thick black line and continue to spiral so that would look like a corkscrew
uh through time and then here when you have the combined character
of the linearized convergence towards the manifold and the corkscrew out through time
we get this kind of winding spiral so it reflects on me that the gradient flow is pragmatic
the gradient flow is a pragmatic value in that it aligns future observations with preferences and the solenoidal flow has
an almost epistemic character in that it circulates amongst a set of equally valid outcomes
the same factors yet here we're not looking at the pragmatic plus epistemic decomposition of the expected free energy
policy selection strategy like equation 2.6 in the 2022 textbook so is that just a concordance or where do you see some of those topics connecting
um i'm not sure maybe uh but having said that on this on the the meaning of the solenoidal part here
i know that on the on the uh i don't remember if it's in the free energy principle simpler paper or
or someone else but there is an analogy i mean they discuss the meaning and the role of the solenoidal flow
where they say that it it it kind of help um it kind of helps mixing systems uh the systems and you can
view and they discuss the metaphor with where you want to dilute your um your um your coffee for instance and you're going to have
this sort of uh motion in order to reach the the as fast as possible the steady state where everything is diluted but i
i i um i'm not sure i didn't think enough myself to provide any sort of interesting insight
all good just to have composed it is very insightful um well you made choices assembling things like what
do you feel like would have been background maybe a course or a skill what background do you feel like
like you kind of conditioned upon that somebody might want to check out and then what do you feel like you would have
wanted to include in the state-based formalism
um because to bring it into a under one hour timing is very
concise so where do you feel like somebody could
fill in some background to pick up with you at the beginning and then what else do you think would make
a fuller presentation
i think i mean there are a few aspects and details i didn't really uh like fully uh discuss um
well first of all all these um things which in here which involves like center theory
a center manifold theory and stuff like that uh we we kind of played uh qualitatively with it we didn't
really go into that and also if we want to be like full really full formally speaking um
let's see maybe um
um uh well there are a couple of things where we that we kind of accept without really checking all the
assumptions and also the revive derivation and i'm especially thinking of the of the helmer sauer
the composition of f because of course you need um a steady state an s density to exist to in order to
have such uh a decomposition so here i think it's it's there is a lot of stuff to to check and i mean
there is a nice uh i think it's in the appendix b of the bayesian mechanics of stationery process
paper by lance where it he he derived the helmotts decomposition uh so yeah there are quite a few
things we kind of state without um derived so it can if people are interested in in going further i think
that's kind of interesting formal uh directions um
um and um um um yeah cool i think it'll be a really fun collaborative project to axiomatize and
formalize and modularize using the act in fontology and understand a lot of these um relationships and
then the other piece that that made me think about is like what work is any of this math
doing at all just kind of like the ultimate existential question here um and when we condition
upon existence we've kind of like off-sourced a lot of cognition we don't need to make the jump or the
walk or the miracle from axiom to embodied existence or to even measured hypothetical existence so that
is left unaddressed the margin was not big enough but it wasn't even addressed and maybe there are even
advantages to leaving the um what happens before the conditioning
you don't want to take it with you after you condition upon it that's the whole markov like
concept like if you're like well i'm conditioning on five years ago
in the present but also i'm carrying five years with me today well then it's like well then it wasn't
conditioned upon so to really condition upon measurements is an extremely radically simplifying
maneuver that may change the scope or the applicability of the framework
relative to a conception in which what the free energy principle does is describe how things come to be
however yeah this rather conditioning upon it opens up that discussion and more circumscribes
this very analytically tractable setting of the agent and the environment across a conditional interface
yeah but by the way about about the conditional thing there is now the notion of you know weak markov
blankets that dalton introduced which cannot lose the the the approach let's say and and um because indeed
there is a question on uh i mean does it apart from the the the the formal setting we have here can we
really apply it to real systems and stuff like that and um and also i think it's the physics of survival
uh in itself uh at a given survival at a given time scale there is uh at if i have at a given time scale we
survive indeed in the sense that there is indeed this partition or conditional independence between the
internal and external here is the physics you have to comply with but we it didn't tell you tells you how
the mark of blanket uh rise or whatever it's it's it's it's just not what it it is designed to um to explain um but um
i think generally speaking it's it's really informative uh because for instance if you are considering the
um i mean just the sort of approach in general i mean for instance if you consider the pendulum
um effect where you put pendulum oscillating on the table and they are going to synchronize with each
other and i think that kuya isomura did a paper about that recently um in order to understand what
is going on and why the pendulum synchronized at some point you just have to recycle all this line of
reasoning with the synchronization maps that's very what is at play and what explains why the pendulum
synchronized when they are both on the same table so yeah i think it it really it is really informative
to in order to understand what is going on when we are talking about synchronization phenomena across
uh sparsely couple systems and also it gives you i guess the sort of recipe to understand what it what it's
um what it takes to be an agent if you want to design your uh an intelligence system um and uh
uh but uh yeah the question of how much useful it is uh beyond the fact that it's just some nice formal
framework it's it's an interesting uh interesting discussion yeah and i i i um i i just two things
first i would like to go back to your previous question about what sort of things could be could be
uh discussed further i think an interesting uh point we didn't really uh discuss fully is the notion of
synchronization map because uh we didn't necessarily really discuss the the the hypothesis and stuff uh about
the synchronization map and i in fact i think there is um much things that can be said uh for instance
because we assume injectivity thanks to the rank nullity theorem uh it's kind of constrained the
dimension of the internal manifold here with respect to the blanket manifold here and it kinds of
constrained in order to have injectivity thanks to the rank nullity theorem and so it kind of constrains the
the the the in order to say it in a qualitative fashion it kind of constrains the complexity or richness of the
internal states uh which speaks nicely to uh other frameworks like um uh like ashby's laws of requisite
various variety where you want the regulator system to to be as um as sophisticated or as rich to the
regulated systems and here you need the internal states to be enough uh complex to uh or to constitute
the sufficient statistics let's say to parameterize the sufficient statistics let's say to parameterize to be able to
parameterize the density indeed um and this um and this uh richness let's say is constrained by the the cardinality of your
uh uh the cardinality of your sensory uh uh channels if you will uh because basically you need the internal
manifold to be to have the same dimension than the blanket manifold or the sensory manifold to be to have the
the same dimensions that the autonomous manifold um so i um i mean i think there is many things to discuss about
this um this aspect here um and and the last thing i i would like to say about your uh about your last question
about the applicability of the framework and how much it's useful as opposed to be a simple elegant
formal framework i think so you know there is this um these papers about um uh about like the mark of
blanket trick and stuff like that uh about how much difficult it is like to identify what states
corresponds to the mark of uh blanket or whatever um and and i i'm personally i'm not really convinced
by this um these critiques um because to me it's like to me it's like saying to newton yeah i mean it's um
i'm not sure that i can do anything with your framework it's it's complicated if not impossible to model
systems with clearly identified and separated roads and masses let's say uh okay fine but we're talking
about newton mechanics here so i mean i think it's the the same here it's if you have a sparsely coupled
random dynamic systems that's the sort of behavior it will display it tells you fundamental things
about the nature of living systems and the idea that when it comes to a specific system it can be
quite tricky to to model it that's another question um um
um and indeed when it comes to the art of modeling complex systems it's it's it's interesting and and
we can discuss about how much complicated it can be to apply the framework um yeah awesome i love that
it's like the art of the science and the art of the modeling and and the and the craft especially in the
kind of early hand-built largely custom stage like one thing i even wondered looking through these slides
um what fraction of these representations and formalisms exist only analytically and do or is
there a code representation of this exact scenario or you know are some of these areas
known as equations that is known as equations that don't have
code realizations they're just pure existing equations
so i mean i think um more or less everything here can be um
can be simulated even this synchronization thing here you can perform simulations where you can really literally see within the simulations the synchronization.
And I mean the whole thing here can be you can simulate such particle random medical systems and kind of interpret the dynamics indeed as the way we frame it.
But yes that's also an interesting aspect.
It could be cool like in the github repo in the journal for this transcript or something like that to curate together the simulations that demonstrate or a minimal specification for it.
Yeah.
Because it's actually there is.
Yeah, and actually there is a, I mean, I think it's in the in lens paper about synchronization map, the Bayesian mechanics of stationary processes paper.
There, there are some simulations where he shows that.
I mean, he shows that.
I mean, he shows the synchronization map at play, and it shows that basically you can't go back to.
I mean, if the map between the blanket states to the internal states is not injected.
And you apply the synchronization map to the actual sensory, to the actual internal states, it gives you like some natural oven things and there are some nice plots from simulations.
So that's definitely a paper to check out.
Cool.
So where do we land?
And then how do we leap, exercise, relax to prepare for part two?
Yeah, so I think here's the world point was, I mean, this world formulation is in a way about the momentary, the short term, and the momentary response to autonomous states to sensory stimuli, let's say, if there is this, this, I mean, the kind of instances of the
differentiated active states are so that outcomes, whatever.
But in the next video where we will look at the path based formulation of the framework, the world idea would be to ask what about path and what about future path and what about the long term behavior?
And what about planning?
And what about planning?
What about higher order cognitive abilities?
And we will kind of extend the scope of what we are doing in that sense.
So, yeah, I mean, I think from a formal point of view, here, I kind of introduced many things, variational inference, synchronization map, etc.
One after the other, before actually deriving the free energy principle.
Next time, I think we will, it will be more straightforward.
But the main concepts to which will be at the core of the of the framework and which can be confusing if it's the first time you you look at it is the notion of of generalized coordinates of motion when you relax the white noise assumption.
And that's something that can be confusing, especially for the physicists, because when you're starting saying, yeah, the generalized Lagrangian, it plays the role of an action or whatever they are like.
No, but Lagrangian is not an action.
What are you talking about, etc.
But when you get acquainted with the world construction is very elegant, but that definitely something people can start to look at before prior to the live stream.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Yeah, well, it was excellent.
You brought a lot together and a lot of trails leading off this trail and the citations and previous papers that that also brought things together.
Lance's work and others.
And it's going to be awesome to see part two.
So thank you, Richard.
Thank you very much, Daniel.
Thank you.
All right.
See you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.

## S-6qpCNq4uA

Hello and welcome everyone. It's February 2nd, 2024, and we are returning for Academies Math
Stream 8.2 with Richard Cervajon, Introduction to Bayesian Mechanics, Free Energy Principle,
and the Paths-Based Formalism. Thank you, Richard, for joining for this part two. Looking forward
to your presentation and then discussion. I have a weird echo. Wait. Are you in general
synchrony with yourself on YouTube? Wait, let me see. Okay, perfect. Sorry.
Okay. Great. So, hi everyone, and thank you again, Daniel. So, today I'm going to present
the Path-Based Formulation of the Free Energy Principle. And I'm going to start by a brief
reminder of a couple of things we discussed last time. However, if you're not acquainted
at all with the notions of synchronization map, of variational inference, or longitudinal equations,
it can be a good idea to watch the first video. And if you do so, please check the comment I
posted below where I precise and correct a few things. So, a quick reminder of where we started
and where we... So, basically, if you consider such sparsely coupled random dynamical system,
where mu corresponds to the internal states, eta to the external states, and a and s, the blanket
states, to respectively the active and sensory states. And they form together the so-called
Markov blanket. And just a bit more vocabulary, A and mu form together the so-called autonomous
states. And finally, if you add the sensory states to the autonomous states, so you consider
the whole Markov blanket plus the internal states, you end up with the so-called particular states,
pi. And the particular states defines or constitute a particle, an agent, bacteria in my schematic,
for instance. So, if you consider such sparsely coupled random dynamical system, you can interpret the
dynamics of the autonomous states in terms of perceptual and active inference. More precisely, you can see here,
in the bottom of my slide, that the autonomous mode minimized a free energy function, which is defined under a
generative model, which is typically the nest density, the non-equilibrium steady state density of your system.
So, more precisely, the internal states, mu, parametrizes the density, q mu over external states. And if you look at the path of the internal
mode, it is so that the free energy associated with your variational density is always minimized. And this licenses an interpretation in terms of Bayesian inference.
And about action, because you can see here that the active mode is also minimizer of the free energy. In fact, it minimizes the surprise term within free energy, so that you can see the particle as actively sampling unsurprising or preferred sensory states, sensory inputs, which is active inference.
And yeah, if you remember well, we saw that the generative model encodes the preferences of your system. So that was basically where we started and where we ended last time. And today, I want to relax a couple of hypotheses. So, first of all, no steady state is assumed.
We could be a steady state, we could have a well defined nest density. But we do no, we don't do any assumptions here, there is no steady state assumed.
So it extends in a way the scope of free energy principle. The second thing we do is to relax the white noise assumption. This means that we don't deal anymore with infinitely rough fluctuations, but we have
fluctuations which are smooth. So basically we deal with colored or correlated noise. And this means that the fluctuations become differentiable up to a certain order.
So basically, instead of dealing with x and x prime, let's say, you have x prime prime, and so on and so forth. You have higher dynamical orders, if you will.
Note that this vector x here, which precisely corresponds to x, x prime prime prime, and so on, is called the generalized states. And the shifted vector, this one, where the first component is x prime, we refer to it as the generalized motion.
And we also say that we work in so called generalized coordinates of motion, not to be confused with generalized coordinates in analytical mechanics. So a lot of words, but we just, we are just saying that the fluctuations are smooth now, and we can differentiate these fluctuations up to a certain order.
And this order. And this order is the order of generalized motion. And it tells you how large the correlation length of the fluctuations is basically.
I also want to introduce the notion of generalized state space. So basically, you can augment state space with generalized motion.
So instead of just looking at x, the state of your system, you look at x prime, x prime prime, etc. And so basically, we consider the so called generalized state space.
Okay, so a lot, once again, a lot of words just to say that fluctuations are smooth now. So if you look at the equation below, it seems that there is a dots and primes here, which and it seems a bit redundant.
So in fact, what we call x dot here, you can view it as the actual time derivative that you can evaluate anywhere, for instance, at t equal to, and the x prime here is just the second component of the momentary generalized states of your system, for instance, at t equal to, so that if you evaluate your time derivative at t equal to, it equates indeed x prime.
But the distinction between the two will become more clear later in the context of generalized filtering.
So the cool thing here is that if you perform a Taylor expansion of the state of your system, so you have an equation like that, you can see that generalized states constitute the coefficients of your expansion.
Indeed, indeed, you can see that you have x, x prime, x prime prime, etc. So basically, you do a Taylor expansion around equal to, basically, and the coefficients of your expansions are generalized states.
So in a way, you can see generalized states are as encoding a path, as encoding the future of your, of the state of your system, thanks to this Taylor expansion.
And that's basically what I wrote here. A point in generalized state space corresponds to a path. That's exactly what I just said, in virtue of this Taylor expansion here.
So the consequence of that is that if you look at the surprise of our generalized states, the negative log p of vector x here, and we call it the generalized Lagrangian.
Lagrangian, it plays the role of an action, scoring the likelihood of a local path over the correlation length of fluctuations.
So let me break down a bit this idea. Once again, here, the, the, the order of generalized motion depends on how smooth the noise is.
So basically, when you look, you do this Taylor expansion, the, the time scale considered here corresponds to the, the correlation length of your fluctuations.
The more correlated your noise is, the more dynamical orders you have, in a way, the larger the path encoded by generalized states.
And the corresponding surprise, the corresponding generalized Lagrangian, negative log p of vector x, is a quantity that scores the likelihood of this path in virtue of the correspondence between points in generalized state space and paths.
So a last, a last remark I want to, to do in order to be sure that everything is clear here, is the following.
You might be a bit confused, especially if you have a physics background, because Lagrangian's and actions are two different things.
So let's take a, let's take a step back and ask, I have a path, trajectory in state space, if you will, and I want to compute a probability density associated with a path.
How should I do?
So the first thing to do is to discretize time.
So basically you discretize your Langevin equation.
So for the people acquainted with stochastic calculus, just notice that it means choosing your alpha discretization, either Ito or Satanovic, let's say.
And from your discretize Langevin equation, you define an infinitesimal propagator, just like for path integrals in quantum mechanics.
An infinitesimal propagator is just a transition density between one state to the next during a time window dt.
Then you multiply the infinitesimal propagator.
And then you go to the continuous time limits.
And so in a nutshell that how you proceed to compute, to write down a density associated with a path.
And if you do that, for instance, in the simple case of a Vener process where the noise is the Gaussian white noise, you end up with the density of a path being proportional to the exponential of minus something.
And this something we call it the action.
So the smaller the action, the more likely the corresponding path.
And this action, in fact, corresponds to an integral over your path of something.
And we call this something a Lagrangian.
So a Lagrangian is defined at any point in time while the action characterize the path as a whole thing.
So conceptually speaking, Lagrangians and actions are two very different things.
But here, the key move is to kind of leverage the idea that a point in generalized state space encodes a path.
So that the surprise over generalized states, this negative log P of X, which is defined as a generalized Lagrangian, plays a role indeed of an action.
Once again, scoring the likelihood of a local path over the correlation length of fluctuations.
So that's really the core idea underlying the path based formulation of the free energy principle.
So basically, now that we have introduced these ideas, let's look at the generalized Lagrangian over autonomous states.
So I just want to point out that throughout the presentation, in virtue of this correspondence between points in generalized states and paths, I will call generalized states path.
For instance, here I would say the Lagrangian of autonomous path.
I use these words in an interchangeable way.
And similarly, when I am dealing with an autonomous path minimizing a generalized Lagrangian, I will be talking of the path of least action because Lagrangians play the role of an action.
So be aware of this terminology.
So if I'm looking at this generalized Lagrangian of autonomous path.
So negative log P of alpha.
The cool thing here is that if I remove fluctuations noise on particular states or path.
So basically the particle respond deterministically to its environment.
I can rewrite this Lagrangian like that.
And this formula coincides with unexpected free energy.
So what this formula is all about?
Well, we can reorganize it.
And if we do so, you can, for instance, write it that way.
So what it means is basically that the path minimizing this Lagrangian.
So the most likely autonomous path, average over all possible sensory path, has to minimize these two terms.
And these two terms are very interesting because the first one, if you look at it, is it is an expected Lagrangian over sensory path.
So minimizing this Lagrangian means this expected Lagrangian means following an autonomous path, which yields unsurprising or preferred sensory path.
And therefore it can be viewed indeed as an expected cost you want to minimize.
And if you minimize also the second term, this negative expected information gain, you can see that it is just an expected KL divergence between two density.
And these two densities, the difference between these two densities is just that the first one here is conditioned upon S.
So basically these two densities are different if the sensory path is informative.
So maximizing this expected information gain means following an autonomous path yielding an informative sensory path.
For instance, let's say you are in a dark room where there is an ambiguous mapping between the hidden latent, the hidden external states and the sensory stimuli, let's say.
You can turn on the light and then this action would yield informative sensory inputs.
So that's the idea underlying the maximization of this expected information gain.
So this quantity is very rich.
And in fact, you can do connections and links with many established ideas.
For instance, you can speak of optimal Bayesian decisions and optimal Bayesian design or of pragmatic value and epistemic value, etc.
The whole idea here is that this quantity entails the preference seeking imperatives of the particle, that's the first term, and the information seeking imperatives of the particle, that's the second term.
So the path minimizing Lagrangian kind of constitutes the best direction of travel, the optimal direction of travel for the particle, so that you can view the particle as constantly engaging in an optimal behavior.
Okay.
So now, having said that, I want to go back to the whole idea of synchronization map we talked about last week.
So, in fact, in this setting, everything is exactly the same.
We just augmented state space, if you will.
But you have mu parametrizing the density, everything is the same.
And if we consider the internal path of least action, so the internal path minimizing this Lagrangian here, the corresponding parameterized density over external path coincides with the density over external path given sensory path.
So that if you write down the corresponding free energy, you have the first term which vanishes in virtue of this above equality here, and free energy reduces to surprise, if you will, to this Lagrangian over particular path.
I'm going to, so before using this to derive directly the free energy principle, I need to briefly introduce the notion of generalized filtering.
So, in a nutshell, let's say that you have some data, you have the vector s here, a sensory path, let's say, and you want to compute negative log p of s.
That's the quantity you ultimately want to evaluate.
But it's intractable.
Let's say that computing this p of s would require a monstrous marginalization and you can't directly compute this guy.
Instead, you define a proxy, you define an upper bound, this variational free energy, which is parametrized by mu, by vector mu.
And you just want to minimize this free energy so that it coincides with what you ultimately want to compute, namely, once again, negative log p of s.
So in order to minimize, indeed, this free energy, you just follow a recognition or filtering dynamics, which is, in fact, a gradient descent on free energy.
In fact, the exact dynamics at play here is this equation here.
So you could ask, but why don't we just have the gradient term here, nabla f?
Why do we have a second term here, this d mu?
By the way, about this d mu here, what is it?
Well, the matrix d here is just this matrix with ones here in this line.
So basically, if you have a vector x, let's say, x, x prime, x prime prime, and so on, and you want to get from this vector a shifted vector x prime, the motion, if you will, you just have to apply this matrix d here and on x, and it gives you, indeed, x prime.
And so basically, you can use this d mu here as being equal to mu prime, basically.
And the idea is that you, when, once you, the gradient term here is minimized, when free energy is minimized, so we look at the stationary solution of this equation, if you will, mu dot coincide with d mu.
And let me just explain why we don't just have the gradient term here.
If we only had the gradient term without the d mu here, we would go down on free energy until a minimum is reached.
And basically, we would have the first component of the vector mu being non-zero, but all the higher dynamical orders would be zero because we are at the minimum of free energy and we don't move anymore.
But here, it is a wall vector mu, which parameterizes free energy, and we don't want all the entries to be zero.
And we want an equation which guarantees that, so that we add an additional term in the equation.
So that's basically, in a nutshell, what generalized filtering is all about.
And by the way, note that if you consider the path of least action of some process x, you can write it in a very similar fashion.
The only difference is that here, the quantity minimized is just the generalized Lagrangian here, whereas it was free energy in the context of generalized filtering.
And by the way, we just saw before that if we consider the path of the internal path of least action, the corresponding free energy here associated with the density, the internal path of least action parameterize, it reduces to the Lagrangian.
So that's when we write down the equations here, verified by the autonomous path of least action, you can directly identify free energy to the Lagrangian.
And we basically have the same equations that in generalized filtering.
So basically, if we look at the autonomous path of least action, you can interpret the dynamics of the internal path of least action.
So in terms of Bayesian inference, which takes the form here of a Bayesian filtering scheme.
And note that if we remove fluctuations on particular states or paths, that's the definition of dealing with a conservative particle.
The autonomous path will coincide with the autonomous path of least action.
And note that ignoring fluctuations might be relevant when it comes to very large particles, where you can.
So to very large particle, you can coarse grain.
You can coarse grain.
And you can check these papers here where they try to average out fluctuations using a renormalization group approach.
So in the end, we find the free energy principle just as before.
But the difference is that here, the Bayesian inference takes the form of a Bayesian filtering scheme.
But otherwise, we still end up with a variational principle accounting for the perceptual and active inference that the particle do.
So, okay, now I want to do a bit of zoology, of typology, let's say.
I said last time that this sparse coupling architecture here was a canonical sparse coupling architecture, but it was not a definitive feature of the free energy principle.
And that we could look at other sparse coupling architecture.
And I want now to look at various sparse coupling architecture.
So the most simple ones you could imagine is one like that, where you don't have active states.
So basically, the Markov blanket is only made of sensory states.
In the end, you can still write down the internal path of least action like that.
But it will the idea that the particle encodes beliefs about its external environment, it will not manifest to an observer, because by definition, an observer has only access to the Markov blanket.
And that's what this quote is all about when it says that whether internal paths of least action parametrized beliefs about external paths, and therefore minimize operational free energy, can only manifest via active states, that is, in active particles.
And, of course, no one would attribute any form of agency or sentience to a simple piece of rock, for instance.
So if we move to the realm of active particles now, we basically have the equations we studied before.
But the difference here with this sparse coupling architecture is that the active states do not directly interact with the external states, and the sensory states do not directly interact with the internal states.
This sparse coupling architecture is quite interesting because it reminds, I would say, it reminds the way a bacteria is coupled with its environment.
Because you would have, like, the outer membrane with all the transmembrane proteins, the receptors, whatever, which would correspond to the sensory states.
And then you would have the underlying cortex filaments which mediate many aspects of biotic actions.
So I like very much this architecture here.
So I like very much this architecture here.
But we can even go further in the sophistication and consider the so-called strange particles.
The only move here is that we don't have any arrow from S to eta, but more importantly, we don't have any arrow from A to mu.
So the active states do not directly influence the internal states.
And this is interesting because it means that now the internal states alone are independent of both the active and the external states when conditioned upon the sensory state.
So from the point of view of the internal states, the active states become a latent cause, just like the external states of the sensory states.
So basically everything is the same.
You can write down a variational density parameterized by the internal states or path.
But now it is over both the external and the active path.
And so we have this free energy here.
We call it the generalized free energy G, but everything is the same.
It's just a variational free energy associated with our recognition density, which is over both external and active path.
So that's in the end, we have this equation here where you have in the equation of the internal path of list action, the gradient on G here.
So it's very interesting because it basically means that the internal path.
In fact, in fact, cause the its own action, the its own action, which then cause its sensory inputs.
So, and I'm quoting here, the paper, which introduced the notion of strange particles.
You can view the active particle, the active path, sorry, as realizing the sensory consequences of the inferred action.
So basically such a particle kind of author its own action, its own action.
action.
And so the idea here is that the particle kind of infer its own course of action, which will yield preferred sensory outcomes.
So it's really a form of planning of inference.
Strange particles do planning as inference.
So that's, that's quite cool.
And in fact, we can even go a bit further and assume a certain level of sparsity within internal states.
So you would have this mu one here, which influence mu two, but not the other way around.
So from the point of view of the world internal states, everything is the same.
You have a, it parametrized altogether density q mu.
And by the way, under a mean field approximation, you can write it that way, where you would have q mu one and q mu two here.
But the very, very cool thing here is that from the point of view of mu one alone, well, mu one is independent of mu two, a and eta when conditioned upon s.
And you can view mu one alone as parametrizing the density over mu two, a and eta.
And we call it that way with the over script M.
So basically q mu one is a density or a belief about mu two, and therefore about q mu two, so that you can view this q mu one M as a metacognitive belief, because it constitutes a belief about a belief, because it's a belief about q mu two.
So that's just by assuming this simple architecture within internal states, we end up with a minimal Bayesian mechanics, let's say of metacognition.
And it also introduces the notion of metacognitive particles.
So I think that's what Bayesian mechanics is all about meaning translating cognitive abilities in simple physical term.
It constitutes in a way a physics of cognition, if you will.
So having said that, thank you very much.
And especially thanks to all these guys here, which who helped me a lot understanding the free energy principle and especially the path based formulation of the free energy principle.
Thank you.
All right, awesome.
Great.
A lot of ways I could start, but it's so interesting that.
Um, how smoothly the path based continues on.
So maybe, could you give a remark on just the timeline in the literature, which one of these state and path based were developed just roughly like in which ordering was one first or how did that happen?
Yeah.
So I'm not an expert on the story of the free energy principle, but I know that thinking in terms of path and in terms of generalized filtering has been around for forever.
In fact, in the literature, but about the most, I would say, definitive formulation in such terms, I would say that the most important paper is
well, I have it here.
It's called path integrals.
Well, where it is.
I can't see it.
Well, first in physics of life review, 2023 B.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
This paper here, path integrals, particular kinds and strange things, which is also the paper.
So we, which introduced, um, all this typology of particles and it kind of really, uh, formulated the free energy principle that way.
Um, so I think that's pretty much a very, very important paper.
And actually the one which introduced the notion of metacognitive particles.
So one of, uh, Lenz and Lars, um, this one towards the Bayesian mechanics of metacognitive particles.
The last one, it is actually a commentary, a short commentary, very easily readable of the path integral paper.
We just mentioned, um, and also I would say that in the 2022 paper, the free energy principle made seem simpler, but not too simple.
Uh, published in 2023, actually.
Uh, it is mainly, it mainly focused on the state-based formulation, but it's, it also, uh, talk about, uh, paths and generalized states.
Um, so it, it, it's, uh, also a very nice, um, very nice papers and it kind of derives the whole thing from scratch.
So I think this paper is also very, very important.
Um, and yeah, I think basically in the last two or three years, there have been many papers, uh, reformulating the free energy principle or grounding it in, in, in, in solid math and so on.
So it's, I think currently, and let's say the, the few years, which followed from the 2019 monography of Carl Freiston.
It has been very important.
Yes.
About, uh, when it comes specifically to Bayesian mechanics and the actual physics underlying the free energy principle.
Thank you.
Yeah.
I'll just restate that.
I think there's a few great points to explore.
So even as early as the early two thousands, there was the notion that there was like physics of consciousness, physics of cognitive systems, a free energy principle for the brain.
There were physics based equations in the 2010 Friston paper.
There's a big tree with all these different inference algorithms.
However, they were all just kind of branches on that tree, little bit more evocatively or, or aspirationally, but not formally.
Then dot, dot, dot, dot 2019 free energy principle for a particular physics and the reading group and all the work around that.
And then, especially in the last year since then, um, I think that the, the decision and the move that you made to lead with the state based.
And then almost nothing had to be said today.
Of course, it was a great presentation, but you said it all that we point to find the path.
We make paths into points in a given space.
Um, and so I was thinking about like being in a car and then there's one path where like my first derivative is one for two seconds and then it stops.
And then that was that path.
And then there's another path where my first derivative is one for four seconds.
And then I stopped.
And so all of those different paths, which do take the car to different locations, they are also just points in this generalized space.
And then there's this interpretation of those coefficients as the Taylor series expansion, but it just shows how versatile the formalism is because it can take points in arbitrary state spaces, which means, yes, you can imagine arbitrary state spaces that correspond to Taylor series expansions or potentially other kinds of constructs.
What do we get from paths?
So in fact, I think there are, um, a couple of things which, uh, motivated such a formulation because when, uh, I mean, about the usual, uh, state-based formulation.
We talked about last time, there was, uh, many critics, many, I mean, it was, there was many debates, for instance, about the question about the nest density being a steady state.
Is it really, uh, relevant when it comes to real system to real biological systems, for instance?
So there was many, uh, things which are now, um, addressed by the path-based formula formulation.
Uh, because as we saw, we relaxed a couple of hypotheses.
And also the second thing, which is very, very much at the core of the path-based formulation, as you said, is, I mean, the, the, the fact to move from, um, states to path, to path, which are in fact encoded by generalized states.
It allows you to, to, to, to speak of the future, uh, to the, in, to speaks to the future path, so that you can develop a physics of particles planning, for instance, which was not at all, uh, the case with the previous formulation.
So having such extension of the scope of the free energy principle, it allows you to, to literally describe the Bayesian mechanics of particles planning.
Uh, and, and so it's, the fact to think in terms of path as opposed to states, it allows you to develop a physics of, let's say, higher order cognitive abilities, I would say.
Uh, so it's, it's, it's definitely very, very cool and, uh, uh, a great achievement.
Let's say.
Responding to that.
Um, I would say planning is possible in the state-based formalism.
It's just more of a brute force tree branching engineering problem.
So it's almost like in the state-based formalism, there was a physics of the perception action loop.
And then there were classical computer science ways to deal with the branching of planning, just like a chess algorithm, like how many depth deep in the time horizon.
And then there's all these secondary strategies for branching, uh, and pruning that search tree.
But there's kind of like few to none in terms of the guarantee of the, um, time horizons of policy.
You just kind of had to enumerate all the possible options.
Um, but the real time kernel was physically grounded and beautiful.
And then planning had to be a little bit enumerated, but when we have the path as a atomic entity, um, then we can kind of extend the, the elegance or the simplicity that we were dealing with states in the moment.
But now our state in the moment is like a Taylor expansion.
And this comes up a lot in the distinction between the discrete time and the continuous time models, like figure 4.3 in the textbook, where in a discrete time model,
if you want to plan a hundred time steps in the future, there's some variable, you know, T sub 100, like you literally are making a prediction and, but you have no prediction for T sub 99.5.
You're just making discrete predictions.
Whereas a Taylor series, even a Taylor series for a super complex function, and you're only going to go two levels of differentiation in, you will have a prediction even for any points.
It might be radically wrong, but you get the whole support from negative to positive infinity, basically for free without guarantees of it being accurate.
But it's like, you've kind of pinned yourself to the timeline.
And then every single derivative that you take is giving you a better handle on that path.
For sure.
You'll never do worse.
And so that is like, so similar, yet also very different setting.
It's true that I said that the timescale considered was basically the correlation length of fluctuations on the number of the order of generalized motion.
But in principle, your Taylor expansion applied to, I mean, it's infinite.
But of course, above, beyond the correlation length of fluctuations, it becomes wrong.
And I also want to say about what you said in the beginning about the state-based formulation.
Yeah, it's true.
And actually in the papers of energy principle, simpler, but not too simple.
They, so you can write down the action of a path.
So here we have a Gaussian white noise.
Everything is, is, is, so we are really in the state-based formulation of the FEP.
You can write the action of a path.
And you realize that it coincides with an expected free energy as well.
So you don't need to be in the path-based formulation to, uh, go to, to, to get to the expected free energy thing.
Um, which equates the action of autonomous path or here in our path-based formulation, it equates a generalized Lagrangian of, uh, autonomous path.
So, so yeah.
Could you come back to where there was the generalized Lagrangian?
So this is a, um, okay.
Maybe a, uh, one before this.
Yes.
Okay.
Okay.
Thank you.
Yes.
Okay.
Thank you.
But those of us outside of the non-active physics world, how is action used?
What does action correspond to in physical systems when we're talking about action as generalized Lagrangian?
Is this the same thing as what we're talking about with policy selection and movement and embodied action?
How is this physics concept of action being used?
Okay.
So first of all, I would say that there is, I mean, it depends on what we're talking about.
Um, when it comes to actions in Lagrangian, we are, we usually think of, um, analytical mechanics, but here it would be more in the context of stochastic calculus.
And in the context of stochastic calculus and path integrals in stochastic calculus, the action is just a quantity which scores the likelihood of the path.
So if, for instance, the density of the path is, uh, the exponential of minus something, you would call by identification, this, uh, thing, the action.
And basically the smaller, the action, the more likely the path, because the higher the density of your path and vice versa.
So, by the way, when we were saying, for instance, here that the action is equal to, I mean, we define it as negative log density of the path.
In principle, if the density, I mean, when it comes to the usual definition of the, of the action, if I write my density as a normalization factor times the exponential of minus the action.
Then, if I take the negative log density, I would have the regular action plus something.
And usually this, uh, constant is, this is, this guarded.
We, um, we just don't consider it so that the action reduces to negative log density of a path.
But conceptually speaking, this action is very different from the idea of Lagrangian because basically the act, I mean, usually speaking, the action is the integral over time, over your path of, um, of, uh, a quantity called the Lagrangian.
So at every point in time, there is a quantity defined, and this is the Lagrangian, which is defined at any point in time, while the action is a quantity which characterizes path as world thing.
So conceptually speaking, actions in Lagrangians are very different things.
Lagrangians, once again, are defined at any point in time, while the action is the quantity.
Lagrangian was defined at any point in time, while the action.
Okay, I'll wait a few seconds for Richard to rejoin.
If you're watching live, please feel free to write questions in the chat and we'll look at them.
We'll look at them.
You're back.
It's all good.
Yeah.
Lagrangian is defined at every point in time, and then the action.
Yeah.
And basically, um, so in order to just, uh, answer what you, well, uh, here.
Yeah.
When you said that, is it different from the notion of action when in the active infrastructure, for instance, and so on.
Here we use the word action, uh, but it has nothing to do with the notion of action, like acting in the world, etc.
So yeah, for the people who never, um, meet this concept.
So it can be super confusing.
I guess when you, uh, when he, when you read patient mechanics papers, you, you don't really know what action is, uh, we are talking about.
But yeah, they are very different.
I know it's funny.
Like each path has an action value, the negative log density that in a way summarizes what we could say are the actions that that path entails.
But yet the actions are the affordances that are taken on that path that are summarized by the physics action.
Um, so there's, yeah.
Um, also, yeah, very, um, cutting edge with reviewing the typology of particles and the DaCosta and Sanved Smith metacognitive particle.
Um, that shows, I think a few things.
One that often there are implicit concepts and qualitative concepts that are built up.
Like long have people said that there is a continuity of modeling between rocks and societies, for example, popes and plaintiffs and plankton, all these other funny things that, that Fristin et al say, but not until this paper.
Um, did we see the simple, the conservative and the strange.
And then with that target article, just with the DaCosta and Sanved Smith work, they kind of take that in another level and like compose off to the side.
And now we can go into a metacognitive depth, combining back to like the hierarchical nested meta awareness work of Sanved Smith from 2021.
So it's just very cool how there's like a kind of earlier first pass qualitative intuition.
And then the empirical research question is like, where can we build the high speed rail lines?
And this is like the blueprint for the high speed rail now.
And then the next level will be like actually making the simulations or whatever it is to kind of show that this is not just something that you can make in PowerPoint.
But this is actually something where the rabbit is going to be evincing some kind of behavior that it couldn't otherwise.
But it's kind of like, that's like, in a way, it's not the only way, but it is like an agenda between the intuitive to the sketched.
And just it builds forward in these ways that are being reviewed pretty clearly and changing on a month by month.
Yeah, and I think I mean, this agenda of translating concepts like cognitive abilities and stuff in simple physical terms is quite interesting.
And I mean, we discussed it on by message on Discord, but it's it's it would be cool and it's it's coming, it's happening, but it's it could be cool to for this patient mechanics, this field to be more known and recognized by the physics community.
Because if you meet like regular physicist working, for instance, in the physics of complex systems or in biological physics or biophysics and stuff like that.
It I mean, you have like a 0.999 probability that he never heard of Bayesian mechanics.
While we have a world agenda to to to to to to following is that I think there is way more to to be done.
It's like the the down of this field of this agenda, let's say.
So I think the next years are quite exciting in that regard.
I totally agree, like one meme or theme on that for me is like the base graph on the screen on the table.
It is what it is.
And then there's the second level where we annotate or assert that graph with cognitive phenomena like, well, this graph.
Reflects attention or awareness of attention or metacognition or regret or whatever we're modeling.
We kind of make an assertion about the base graph.
And like you said, it's the dawn.
This isn't the answer on metacognition.
This is like one very snappy, very following in line way of modeling metacognition.
Yeah, there is no end.
There is no end to that question of how do you model metacognition?
And so then it's just like every time in a psychology paper or any we see like a cognitive phenomena, which can include everything from anticipation, you know, past, present, future.
That's like our keyhole to bridge with this generalized unifying perspective on cognitive systems.
Yeah, I totally agree.
This work is really, this work here on the slide is very like a first work.
But I mean, when it comes to metacognition, for instance, I mean, I'm not an expert at all, but there are many concepts.
I don't know, mental actions, cognitive effort, whatever.
There are many things, many layers.
And the, I think, like translating all of these concepts of these phenomena processes, whatever, into natural Bayesian mechanics is really like what's coming in fact, I think in the next years.
So, and yeah, we'll see.
And, and as you said, beyond the analytical work, there is also the simulations, worked examples, whatever.
So, yeah, I think there are many, many works to, to be done and which are coming in the, in the next years.
I totally agree.
Yeah.
A kind of analogy that brings to mind is like early in the periodic table, not saying that we're studying, but we're not going to be able to do that.
Not saying that we're studying material phenomena or even like elements or material phenomena, but it's kind of like, well, the rabbit has vision, taste and hearing.
So if we've identified a memory in vision and taste, there's like a missing element for maybe it's not there.
Maybe the memory for hearing is zero, or maybe it's something very complex, but it's like, but there's a space there.
It's like, there should be a rare earth metal in the fourth row.
There should be an attention variable on this.
And so it's kind of like a higher dimensional periodic table where, because we know about certain patterns that are either kind of convergently arising in the real world because of what is life.
Or they're convergently arising because we choose to model things a certain way.
So then that brings a huge amount of concordance and juxtaposition, like to the field of chemistry.
Whereas previously there might've been air chemistry and water chemistry and fire chemistry.
And then there'd be like, oh, but what happens when you throw water on a fire or what happens when the air in the room burns out?
There'd be like these edge cases where it's like, oh, we don't do that.
But that's what's happening when we don't have the unified model for cognitive systems.
People will kind of study one phenomena or character of a system to its limits, but the limits of any phenomena in our highly woven life forms, like you don't chase it to the end.
If you're studying foraging in the ant colony, it's not like there's a, okay, that was the end of the rainbow.
So foraging is over.
Foraging is over.
It's like, oh, well, foraging is related to nursing.
And then that's related to this and the weather.
It never just simply terminates with the inquiry.
And possibly that could reflect the extremely early stage of this formalization.
Possibly there are fundamental unknowns and adjacencies in our epistemic situation.
Yeah.
And I think, I mean, a few years ago, the idea of kind of extending physics to, in order to have an actual physics of cognition, it would be like crazy, like the Holy Grail.
And the fact that we have these early works is quite an achievement.
And I would also say that what's interesting here is that we already do have formal models of many cognitive phenomena.
For instance, you were talking about the paper of loss about metacognition.
So we have very precise and formal active inference models, for instance, of many different phenomena like metacognition and so on.
So in a way, we kind of already know what we should end up with.
And the idea is how to do, how to play, for instance, with the sparsity within internal states in order to go to get back to re derive or refine what people are already modeled in a different literature earlier.
So that's kind of the dynamics, I think.
So yeah, we'll see in the next year how it goes.
Yeah, that's a great point.
A few more thoughts on that.
Like a lot of the adjacencies and generalizations, mathematicians and physicists and statisticians, they're experts in this.
Like if it was a fixed number, see if it could be variable.
If there wasn't a variance, see if you can add a variance.
If it was this kind of distribution, swap it out for like, there are these kind of syntactic moves that barely require much more than just like, yeah, these are the swaps.
We make like this is what it looks like to generalize a theory.
It's like we could add a variance on it, you know, all.
So those kinds of familiar moves.
And then so much can be explored on this topic.
But when we think about a physics of cognitive systems or a physics of cognition, sometimes I feel like I have one foot like is it's like I'd or somehow trailing with the reductionism.
Like it's hard to escape the material basis.
And it's also not clear if we want to escape the material basis because of physics of cognitive systems.
On one hand, it might address this kind of like thermo, info, negantropic, Schrodinger, what is life question about persistence and order of kind of quasi crystals.
So, or leave all that mess separate mess and beauty.
The pure Bayesian mechanics, if we just say, okay, now we're in the map, we're leaving the territory behind.
We're not going to talk about the actual calories and the thermodynamics.
We're just on the map and a massive prior with a little attention is like a piece of sand hitting a mountain.
And a very loose prior with a highly attended to data point is like a bowling ball, you know, smashing through a small little heap of sand.
So, it's like there's a physics to the collision of incoming data and prior, which is the Bayesian setting.
So, it's interesting that there's a sort of map, Bayesian mechanics, that kind of non-controversially describes the collision of priors of different mass in a way.
And then the tantalizing question or connection is whether that is like one in the same or an enabling factor or a downstream factor of this actual thermo-informational autopoiesis for living systems.
If I may add something, I think here, I mean, an interesting point is that if you have, for instance, I mean, I don't want to go there really, but if I have a software which can be implemented by many sort of hardware, for instance.
And this idea was actually a lot debated when it came to functionalism and stuff like that.
But anyway, here, such Bayesian mechanics, in a way, it's the physics of how the overall system should behave.
So, there is, for instance, the minimization of this free energy functional, but we are not saying how the...
Here, we do not explicitly say how the system actually does the computations.
We just say that a sparsely copper random analytical system has somehow to do that stuff.
And in a way, it is neutral about what the actual system is made of.
It's like when we say that the free energy principle is more a framework than a process theory or stuff like that.
But, I mean, I don't know very much about these questions.
I think that's a great point.
It's like that's why a program or an operating system can be run when a different processor is brought in, just within a kind of classical computing setting.
As a cognitive mapping or cognitive modeling framework, like, we don't know if that rabbit is a real biological rabbit.
That rabbit might be a deepfake rabbit.
And we're interacting with it through a video channel, and we think that we're doing behavioral research on a real rabbit, but it's just a really convincing synthetic data rabbit.
We don't know because we're only getting the observations that we're getting, and then we can tell any number of possibly compatible stories or interpretations about the data we're getting.
And to say more or to go further, like, that's stepping past the boundary of the actual observations we're making, which is great.
Like, we want to propose hypotheses for what we're not directly observing.
That's the whole point of latent states and everything.
And yet there is this line where it's like you can kind of falsely push the known knowns beyond where they really are.
And it seems like one example of that is going down and specifying the actual mechanistic basis of a given computational function.
And that that's, if that's important to specify, then the work itself is to specify it.
However, at the framework level, the framework's absence of that kind of a material substrate, like, that's the feature.
That's not a lacuna in the framework.
That is like, there's the USB stick, and then there's where you can plug it in.
That is the plug-in to any system.
And if there was something already pre-plugged in there, like, well, it has to happen on Turing computer, or it can't happen on Turing computer.
That would have just hobbled the scope of applicability by welding together what doesn't need to be welded.
And I mean, if anything, this is a journey and a challenge about proper articulation and about how sparsity and nuancing, which are connected to what, brings us cognitive phenomena.
So it's like, many things to learn and reflect on.
Yeah.

And if I may add a related remark about the question of having a top-down approach, as opposed to bottom-up approach.
I think, sociologically speaking and historically speaking, it's very interesting that the people who started developing Bayesian mechanics are people who are not, like, supposed to be professional physicists.
Because I think, when it comes to super-emergent kind of phenomena, like cognition, whatever, the people who were training is precisely to learn about cognition, about agencies, the people who kind of know everything about what it takes to be an agent and so on.
These guys are neuroscientists, basically.
So they, because they know what agency entails, they can be the good ones to propose an actual Bayesian mechanics, which is a very top-down approach.
Whereas, if you go to the labs in physics of complex systems lab and stuff like that, people are pretty much bottom-up.
They will, for instance, oh, I want to study the brain, so I'm going to write down the upfield model, for instance.
So a kind of Ising model, where up is an activated neurons and down a non-activated neurons.
And so I will have this very, this very much bottom-up approach, and I can, which is super interesting and super important.
But when it comes to this very much emergent behavior, the very emergent phenomena of the brain, metacognition, blah, blah, blah.
I can study for like five centuries the upfield model.
I will never get any insight about the emergent behavior of the brain.
And so I think here, you have to have a top-down approach.
You have to write a very generic Langevin equation.
And because you're a neuroscientist, and because you know what it takes to do an inference, to be an inference machine,
you're like, ah, conditional independency is very different, is very important, sorry.
So let's try to inject in my Langevin equation some level of sparse coupling.
And then, boom, you have the free energy principle.
So even though, sociologically speaking, what's happening here might be super weird.
Like, these guys are not supposed originally at least to be physicists, and they are supposed to, like, kind of generate the next chapter of physics.
How weird is that?
But in fact, in fact, I think there were precisely the good people to do that.
So yeah, it's quite interesting.
I think there might be, oh, that's a great point.
There might be a fun history with physician, physician heal thyself, and the alliance of medicine and physic.
That's one point.
Another point is low road and high road.
And sometimes the disciplinary or the in-group conversation is, like, very low road.
And then the idealistic and aspirational is, like, high road.
It doesn't exactly map to those, but I'm thinking of, like, somebody says, like, I want to drive somewhere.
I want to travel somewhere.
There is no material basis for that travel yet.
They're not there.
There's no path.
There's no car.
Again, in the mechanic shop, it's, like, we have this tool, this object, we're so surrounded by the low road that it supports this incremental research agenda using the tools and approaches that we have and their materiality.
Whereas someone from outside the field comes to the ant researcher, it's like, have you had the ants build this new thing?
And it's like, well, we weren't even on that path, but now that's like a new North Star and that can now draw work in that direction.
And so it's kind of like the low road building out and then like the kind of the draw of the adjacent possible and the imagination that the high road kind of grounds in.
All right. I'll ask a question from the live chat.
Susan asks, what can one equation contain?
I'm imagining how to interpret and translate self-modeling, how to approach foraging resources and opportunities.
Can you repeat, please?
Yes. It's an open-ended question. So feel free to however you like.
What can one equation contain?
I'm imagining how to interpret and translate self-modeling, how to approach foraging resources and opportunities.
So I could not answer the second part of the question, but if I can pick up on about the question of what these equations are all about, which is a bit what you asked last week, like what works, does the framework do, what these equations contain or whatever.
If you actually simulate a sparsely coupled random dynamical system.
And actually there are already are examples out there, for instance, in the 2021 paper called Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blanquets, if I remember well, with Thomas Pohr and Carl Freesten and others.
They simulate a sparsely coupled Lorentz systems, if I remember well.
And if you do simulate such systems, which verifies such sparsely coupled architecture, you observe the behavior which is described by your equations.
And if, for instance, you remove fluctuations on particular states.
So, well, your simulation, which follows the path of list action, which is given by your equation.
So it's it's it's it's it's it does really work in the sense that it does describe indeed something.
It's really a physics, in fact, of such sparsely coupled systems.
Great question.
I think we can explore more on what an equation can contain.
But I'm just kind of struck by that.
There's like a latent large set of.
To be clarified, axioms and conclusions and so on.
And when we see like one equation written here, it's kind of like we're just seeing like one glimpse or one facet.
It's not like the other equations aren't in effect, but sometimes it's a little unclear which equations are relevant.
But in an equation.
And.
We see a symbolic expression.


Within a given quantum reference frame.
Other.
Otherwise, the Q and the A wouldn't mean anything like within a semantic reference frame.
The equation is just kind of like a check.
It's like if it's like it's there's probably many ways that we can kind of explore what it does.
But it's true that, I mean, I think many peoples who.
In addition, don't necessarily have a mathematical background or whatever they have been.
I mean, I'm not an expert in the history of the free energy principle, but a lot of people have been confused, especially in the early steps where it was.
As as Lance say it many times worried when it was even more nutrition than solid framework properly grounded in solid math.
So people.
Did get a bit confused, I think by with the math, but now it's we have more and more worked examples simulations.
Solid math, etc.
So it's it's quite quite nice.
Okay, in closing, we have explain it like I'm a 10 year old.
Now that that response may reveal more about what somebody thinks 10 year olds are like.
But now that we've been on this two part journey.
You know, dot zip it and close it, Richard.
So explaining you mean about what I just said like before.
So just both sections or just our whole projects.
Now that now that we can look back at all the incredible quality summaries that we've provided.
How do we just cap it and move forward with a child?
Yeah.
So I think everything we did here.
So both in this presentation and the previous one is.
So basically, we can.
So if I, I, I would.
So in order to say it in the most intuitive and simple ways, I would say that.
Very simply put, a system is just.
It's just.
It's just some things interacting, let's say.
So it's literally corresponds to a system as we use this for you know, in a daily basis.
Pen is a system.
An organism or any piece of any collection of things interacting with each other.
So I can say this is a system.
I just have to precisely delimitate and say what are the boundary of my system.
And given a system which has a certain dynamics, certain laws, physical laws telling you how your system behave, how the things move around and so on.
And now, so my system can be alone, like an asteroid in space, let's say, or it can be connected to each, to other things I recognize as other systems.
Two things can collide to different things.
Systems can collide with each other, etc.
For instance.
And now, if I assume several systems which are connected, meaning that they causally interact with each other in a certain sparsely way.
So basically, in my schematic, you would have, for instance, a system on the right, a system on the left and a subsystem in the middle.
So you have many subsystems causally interacting in a sparsely way.
For instance, mu doesn't interact with eta.
If I take a bacteria, for instance, it does move around and interact with other things outside the bacteria.
But at the same time, within the bacteria, under the outer membrane, there is also stuff which do not interact, cause they interact with the outside, let's say.
And so if you have such sparsely coupling architecture, as we say, and in a more technical term, we would say that the inside is independent of the outside when conditioned on the intermediate system, let's say.
Okay.
So if we have such sparsely coupled system, we see mathematically speaking, we derive the fact that your system has to behave in a certain way.
And in fact, when you do have such sparsely coupled dynamical system, you realize that everything appears to, I mean, if you look at, for instance, internal states mu here, the dynamics of this system can be interpreted in terms of Bayesian inference, meaning that this system can be viewed as encoding a density over its external states, for instance.
And if I had to define in a very simple way, what it means to parameterize or to encode a distribution, I would say that the various parameters which define your system, for instance, I said earlier that a system could be anything.
A pen, a pen, an asteroid, whatever, there are variables which specify its state, for instance, temperature, pressure, shape, whatever.
I have a set of variables.
I can view these variables, these numbers, literally, as I can take them and manipulate them as parameters of a mathematical quantity I can deal with.
And yeah, so I'm not sure if I failed in trying to put it in a very simple terms, but I hope it makes sense.
It was awesome, Richard.
Thank you for working to bring us these twin gems in the distillation work and really helping consolidate and sediment on one hand, a long history of dynamical systems and physics.
And on the other hand, papers coming out two weeks ago as well.
So hopefully we'll continue the adventures and see you around.
Yeah.

And thank you for the chat, the questions on the chat.
Cool.
Peace, everyone.
Bye.
Bye.
Thank you.
Bye.