SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello and welcome everyone.

This is Active Inference Guest Stream 83.1 here with Susan Hasty and our guest Simon Wardley.

So Susan will say a few words that will lead us in.

Simon has many resources prepared and exciting perspectives to share.

So thank you both for joining.

Susan, to you.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Are you ready for me?


SPEAKER_00:
Go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Okay.

Thank you so much, Simon.

I was been looking so forward to, uh, to introducing you to the Active Influence community, um, and, uh, and Wordly mapping, uh, and what you have been able to, um, uh, accomplish.

And, you know, it, uh, is, uh, is amazing how much admiration

that people have shown you there.


SPEAKER_02:
And so I'm going to just- Oh, I'm British.

You can't do this to me.

You can't do this to me.

We're not American.


SPEAKER_01:
So is that, you know, that actually there's a connection between being the most strategic, brilliant minds that people know and the humility you bring to it along with the the jovial.


SPEAKER_02:
It's a cultural thing.

So there we are.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'll turn it over to you.

And but we would like to I would like to share how you came about, you know, the

the um moving from the you know the experts on a stage to how do you how did you tap into the need for worldly mapping what was that where did that where did that arise from well it was obviously some fine day in the uk and i was sitting down there with my enormous mind


SPEAKER_02:
uh thinking about these problems and uh and actually the pure genius of myself i i no it was complete random accidents and everything else i hadn't got a clue what i was doing so i um i was running a company at the time um and uh well actually i've got a

I've got some slides.

I can give you a bit of the sort of formal history.

I can show you the horror of it if you wish.

Daniel, is it possible for me to show my slides?

Thank you very much.

So I'm not going to go through this whole 127 slide deck.

I'm not going to do that.

But what I will do is just talk about a couple.

So I'm going to talk about the origin of mapping.

And then we'll get on to, I may as well explain what a map is and what it isn't.

And then I'll mention a little bit about patterns.

And then we've got these other topics, change, gameplay, how you identify value, but we won't go down that path.

We'll get into a different style of conversation.

I can show you something called Miro.

And because Susan, you were part of my education group, which I really, really appreciated helping us map out that space.

So let's start with the origin, since you asked me that question.

um this is a company uh called for tango uh that i used to work for i got a photo of this off the website i'd seen the ceo um and it was a very uh sort of successful company at the time uh very very profitable uh rapidly growing uh but it had a problem and that that problem was the ceo uh the fat captain charge had absolutely no idea

what they were doing.

They were just making it up.

I mean, they were totally and utterly clueless.

And I know this for a fact because I was the CEO.

I mean, I used to come up with all these wonderful statements about what our future was.

So this is 2004.

Our strategy is customer focused.

We will lead an innovative effort in the market through our use of agile techniques and open source.

And it's become a leading provider.

Horrible.

But I literally pinched these words from another company and just changed a few things.

And I sort of was, you know, I had no idea what it was doing.

I used to go around listening to other CEOs talking about strategy and I used to record all the words they would say.

And I started aggregating these words and I called these aggregations, business level abstractions of a healthy strategy or BLAs for short.

And I used to publish these common BLA lists

where things like these are the words that people are using digital disruptive innovative collaborative competitive advantage ecosystem open source network blah blah blah and so then what i did was i created what's called the blah template our strategy is blah we will lead a blah effort of the market through our use of blah blah to build a blah by simply grabbing all these sorts of visually statements and smashing them together until i came up with a generalized form

And then I would just combine the BLARs and the BLAR templates to auto-generate strategies.

So, you know, last time I did this, I created 64, things like this.

Our strategy is customer focused.

We will lead a disruptive effort at the market through our use of innovative platforms and data to build a collaborative ecosystem.

Well, it sounds, it's complete garbage, but I used to send these around to people.

I get three basic responses back, which are the form.

Well, here's another example.

Our strategy is innovative digital business and we load a growth effort of the market through our use of customer.

I can barely read it.

Is that painful?

The three basic forms I used to get back was this is the exact wording from our business plan.

I've seen two of these used already.

And my favorite one was argue for life, which I didn't want to tell the people, but I just auto-generated this garbage.

So I was no idea at all what I was doing, completely clueless.

I hadn't done an MBA.

And of course, I assumed back in those days, you learned all the secrets of how to understand what a business was.

I'm from doing an MBA.

I now teach a couple of days here and there every year at different business schools and I've realized the delusion that I had over what you actually learned.

So, you know, I knew I was clueless.

I started to think maybe other people were struggling.

A friend of mine, by the way, if you ever want to... I don't think it's available anymore.

This is a little bit of an old presentation.

He actually just automated this.

There was a lap that was built that would create you one of those generic sort of... It's much easier these days.

You just go to chat GPT and just say, give me a scratch in.

It'll give you some garbage and you're away.

So I...

I ended up reading every book I could find.

It was getting nowhere.

And by pure luck, I was in a bookshop in Charing Cross in London.

And I was talking to the bookseller and I was talking about all these strategy books I'd read and how none of them made sense.

And she asked me, had I ever read The Art of War by Sun Tzu?

And I hadn't.

And so she persuaded me, being a fantastic bookseller,

I had to buy two different versions of the book because they're all translations.

I've got to say, I am so grateful for that because it was in the reading of the second version I noticed a particular pattern.

So Sun Tzu talked about five factors that mattered in competition.

Now, when we talk about competition, competition is the act of a group of people seeking something.

um whether it's knowledge resource or whatever it happens to be and there are many different forms of competition so sometimes we will conflict with each other let's fight each other over something sometimes we will cooperate with each other helping each other sometimes we will collaborate so laboring with each other so sometimes

Fighting, working or labouring.

So those are multiple different forms of competition.

They're all competition.

They're all part of the act.

And normally we will possibly collaborate with one group over here.

in order to cooperate with another group over there, in order to conflict with another group over there.

So you can have many, many different forms, combinations of this.

I often hear people talk, try and create new words for this.

I mean, mostly because they want competition just to mean conflict.

And therefore they can have different words like collaborate, which is no longer competition.

because they define competition as only conflicts and then cooperate and so then they get to things well if we collaborating and conflict but we don't call it conflict we call it competition we're co-competing collaborating and then you get into these large horrible spaghetti words just meaningless but it's really simple though competition

It's the act of seeking in multiple groups and in multiple different forms.

So when you look to the Sun Tzu's work, talk about five factors that matter.

One, have a purpose, a moral imperative to what you're trying to do.

Secondly, understand the landscape that you're competing in.

And then third, understand the climatic patterns of the heavens, the weather.

So how the landscape is changing.

And then you get into principles of how you organize yourself, doctrine.

And then you get into the sort of gameplay and leadership.

And I was like fascinated by this.

And then I came across John Boyd, the mad major, famous for creating the OODA loop,

And so the first O of the OODA loop is to observe the environment.

So that's what landscape and climactic patterns are about, the observation of space.

Then you orientate yourself around space.

That's what the principles are.

And then you need to decide where you're going to act.

And this is where we get into the gameplay and all those sorts of leadership choices.

And at the heart of this are fundamentally two why's.

The why of purpose and the why of movement.

Why do I make this decision over that decision?

So this became for me the strategy cycle because it sort of made sense.

I remember I hadn't done the MBA, so I didn't know the official things to talk about.

And I got really fascinated by this idea of observing the landscape.

And so that's what brought me into maps because I used to read everything I could find on sort of military history.

And one of my favorite battles is the Battle of Thermopylae.

So the ancient politicians, well, Themistocles, ancient politician, Greek general, had a problem.

The Persians were invading.

We don't know quite the number of Persians.

There are about 100, well, we think somewhere between 100,000.

170,000 roughly.

And so the Greeks were independent city-states and Themistocles was I believe Athenian.

And so what they decided to do was, you know, how are we going to cope with this invasion force?

What they decided to do was to block off the Straits of Artemisia.

force the Persians along a coastal road into a narrow pass called Thermopylae, where a smaller number of troops could defend against a larger force.

And in fact, the number of

troops there.

There were about 4,000 Greeks there and they were independent city-states but they came together at times and within those 4,000 were 300 slums and this is where we get the story of the 300 from, the 300 defending for a considerable amount of time against a much larger force.

Now, my fascination with this map was I could use it as, you know, we could use it as a way of discussing what we're going to do.

What do we need to move?

Where do we need to defend?

Who do we need to work with?

It's a vehicle for communication.

And I started looking at my own business and thinking about how do we communicate and make decisions.

And back in those days, I was using something called a swap dial.

strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats.

I used to think, oh, fantastic, you know.

So I created a SWAT diagram for this battle.

So strengths, a well-trained Spartan army, a high level of motivation not to become a Persian slave.

Weaknesses, the E4s might stop the Spartans turning up.

A truckload of Persians are turning up.

Opportunities, get rid of the Persians and also get rid of the Spartans, where we happen to be Athenian.

We don't actually like the Spartans, as I say, independent city states.

And the threats, the Persians get rid of us.

And the Oracle says a really dodgy film might be produced a few thousand years later.

Obviously added that one a bit later.

But I simply put these against each other.

And I asked myself, you know, what would you communicate and use to communicate and determine strategy in battle?

In the same case, what would you do in competition?

You could either use position and movement through an understanding of the landscape that you're competing in, or you can use some sort of magic framework like a SWOT.

I was thinking, well, cranky, it would be obvious.

You would try to understand the landscape before you make a decision.

And here I was making all these decisions using a magic framework.

So at that point I said, right, I need to understand the landscape that my business is operating.

I need a map.

I went looking for maps of a business and I couldn't find any.

Well, interestingly, I can find, well, I found lots of things called maps.

So I asked, for example, in my company, everybody to send me any maps they had, and they would send me loads, like things like systems maps or business process maps and mind maps, lots of stuff like that.

But when I took one of these maps, and this is a map of, a so-called map of the online photo service,

And I looked at one component CRM, which stands for customer relationship management, and I simply moved it across the screen, but kept the links the same.

So I went from there to there and asked, how has the map changed?

Well, the answer is it hasn't changed.

And for me, that was immediately odd.

Because I know if I take a geographical map of the world and I take Australia and put it next to the UK, that has fundamentally changed the meaning of the map.

So why is the meaning of the map not changed here?

Well, it's because it's not a map, it's a graph.

And that's what all these maps that I had in common.

None of them were maps.

They were all graphs, business process graphs, mine graphs.

They're all nodes and connections between nodes rather than maps of the landscape.

So just really spell that out.

These are three graphs, and they are identical.

There are three places in the UK, Nottingham, London, Dover, connected by two roads, M1, M2.

Now, the thing about a graph, all that really matters in a graph is the nodes and the connections and the weighting on the nodes.

That's it.

The difference between that and a map

is the reason why the three maps at the bottom are all completely different, while the three graphs at the top are identical, is in a map, space has meaning.

You can't actually just move a component without changing the fundamental meaning of the map itself.

So that's the distinction between a graph and a map.

And everything I had which was called a map was, in fact, a graph.

So I sort of assumed at that point, well, this must be what you learnt at MBA schools, because obviously you learn how to do the mapping and there are no books on the subject.

So it must be like really secretive and really useful.

or maybe completely useless and had been abandoned long ago.

I sort of didn't know.

But nonetheless, I had no access to those resources.

And I couldn't find any examples.

So I thought, well, I've somehow got to create a map.

So I looked at a map.

And there are basically three components you need.

You need, in order to give landscape the space meaning, you've got to have an anchor, such as magnetic north.

You've got to have position of pieces.

So this is north, south, east or west of that.

And then you've got to have something known as consistency of movement.

So if I'm going north, I'm going north.

I'm not going south.

There's no sort of teleportation.

There's got to be some sort of consistency.

So, right, let's try and map something.

And so I did and I mapped my business, but I'll show you a tea shop.

Only because my business was a bit dull and tea shops I find more fascinating.

Don't know why.

So what's my anchor going to be?

So I thought, well, I'm going to focus around the users.

And immediately, well, who are the users?

I've got my consumers and I've got the business.

I've also got regulators.

I've got many users.

Okay.

Well, first we better identify who the users are.

So we'll start there.

So we'll start off with the public and the business.

Okay.

Well, they have needs.

Hopefully the public has a need for a cup of tea if I'm doing a tea shop and the business has a need to sell cups of tea because that's where it's going to get its money from.

All right.

So my anchors are going to be public and business.

I can put regulators here.

Okay.

So what?

What next?

And I was thinking about this when I thought a cup of tea.

has needs itself.

It needs a cup, it needs tea, and it needs hot water.

And of course, hot water needs cold water, needs kettle, and a kettle needs power.

So what I've got is a chain of needs.

This needs that.

And the further I go down that chain, the less visible something becomes.

So if I'm a member of the public drinking my cup of tea, the power that went into the sort of kettle, that's quite far removed from me.

So I've got this notion of position through how visible something is, and it's described itself in the chain.

Okay.

But this is a graph.

How do I turn this into a map?

Well, it turns out, because I was looking at this stuff and thinking about, well, kettle and power, I realized, you know, power hasn't been uniform.

It's changed over time.

Well, the kettle,

The electric kettle, for example, obviously it's now a commodity, but at some point somebody invented it.

So all of these components turned out to be different forms of capital and they all seem to be evolving.

And so I did a piece of work

looking into how things evolved.

And I eventually stumbled in the British Library after six months of working on this problem.

I had a whole bunch of data and it came together and it just fell in place, a lot of accidents.

And it turned out there was a fairly simple process by which things evolved.

You start off with the genesis of novel and new items.

Then you get custom-built examples of things.

Then you get products and rental services.

And then you get commodity and utility services.

Now, these are just labels for different stages, one, two, three, and four, because it turns out you can map things like data, knowledge, ethical values, all sorts of things.

But what I've got on this map is I've got the anchor at the top, business and public.

I've got position described through a chain of needs.

And I've got this concept of movement or evolution in terms of how evolved the forms of capital are.

So this was the sort of first map that I produced back in, well, actually, it was

because I'd actually mapped my own business.

I was just finding a way of explaining to somebody else how to do mapping.

So it wasn't quite the first, but one of the first maps that I produced in 2005.

And I was looking at this, and I realized what I'm actually doing is I'm exposing my assumptions about how to make a tea shop.

in a way that other people can look at those assumptions and challenge and question what I'm doing.

Because you might go, why is kettle in custom built?

Surely kettle's more of a commodity.

You might go, we're a staff.

You might go, hey, we're a business.

We've got to take payment.

And we're missing tills.

We're missing somewhere for people to seat.

uh you know we to sit sorry we're missing um you know what about cakes um there's all sorts of things um what i'm doing is i'm exposing my assumptions in a way that people can see the sort of knowledge i have around a space and they can add to it and there's something bizarre i realized is that in most of the organizations i'd ever worked in

We were all very much story-led organizations.

And in fact, there's an entire industry which tends to go around telling people that to be a good leader, you've got to be a good storyteller.

Well, the problem with that is if I give you a story and if you challenge my story, you're challenging my ability to lead.

So I tend to get very defensive.

But if I put my story in a match,

You're not challenging me.

You're telling me there's something wrong with the math.

So suddenly I found a lot of their sort of tensions, which we would have around discussing something, just disappeared because we could discuss the problem.

through the medium of the map.

And I've done this with things like Brexit and remain in the UK to all sorts of really thorny issues, getting quite difficult groups to find ways of actually talking to each other through

the medium of a map and it's it's it's not it's an old architecture trick it's why they use models uh models of buildings as a as a way of getting people to to to look at and describe that you know their feelings about things and their assumptions about things um so i started using these maps and i used to go into all sorts of uh

organizations and i was working with these maps and i ended up doing all sorts of interesting things in government as well so this is a friend of mine liam maxwell we wrote something called the with several others the better for less paper francis maude which led to a whole bunch of transformations in uk government um and just simply by mapping out one particular project this was back in about 2014

I mean, they saved about $425 million.

They estimate about $1.5 billion in its lifetime.

Now, this might sound, well, it's a ridiculously huge figure.

How can this possibly be true?

I mean, my maps have been used to put up a NASA and Planet work together through my full mapping.

Used it to put up the, interestingly, Carbon Mapper satellite.

And just to show you why this sort of stuff

These big impacts become possible.

This is an insurance company.

This was back in roughly 2011, 2012-ish.

This is a business process flow.

for putting servers into their data center.

So they needed compute, they'd order a server, server would go into goods in, modify mountain racket.

And they had a bottleneck in this process flow.

And so they'd invested time, about six months, got various vendors in and worked out a way of using robotics to get rid of this bottleneck.

So it would accelerate the speed at which they could, you know, rack servers, basically.

And it was quite impressive work, return on investment calculations of one year, several million of capital expenditure in terms of the robotics.

They're just about to go for it.

I was asked to come and have a look at this problem.

It was a friend of mine just asked me to just go and have a look, just make sure it makes sense.

And so the problem is they'd spent six months working on the problem.

They got all their vendors, they got all their business case, they got all their calculations.

I mean, I'm just turning it up.

I'm nobody.

If I challenge the story, it's game over.

So I said, well, I don't really know what you're doing.

Do you mind if we just map it?

And they were like, oh, we don't really want to map it.

And I think we spent about 20 minutes arguing about whether we should map it, and then about 15 minutes actually mapping it.

And so this is the map they came up with.

There we are, 2010.

Slightly earlier than I thought.

User needs compute, which they put in product.

Order server, very commodity.

Servers, bizarrely enough, they thought servers were commodity, but compute was slightly less.

Okay, it's 2010.

um it's surprising only because of cloud it's 2006. uh goods in very commodity and then they had rack mount modified i was able to look at this map and simply go why have you got rack in custom built and they said oh we have custom built racks ah so what are the modifications you're making to service well the servers don't fit into our custom built racks so we have to take cases off drew new holes add new plates

And that's the bottleneck, and that's why they need robotics.

And somebody in the room simply just went, why don't we use standard racks?

Now, what you've got to remember, of course, when somebody said that, everybody's looking at them.

Yeah, why don't we?

Why are we doing all this customization?

It just doesn't make any sense at all.

Now, what you have to remember, these people aren't daft.

These people are simply trapped by a story.

um so at some point in the past it made sense uh to have custom built racks because there was no such thing as standard racks but they never evolved from that point so obviously what you want to do is evolve that component what they'd actually been doing all of this time is improving the process flow

so you often see these people focusing on process flow rather than evolutionary flow so you know they literally do the wrong things i i mean i had one organization well actually i've got another one actually this is another particular organization they were they had weighing scale so we this particular group had so many paper forms

that it was actually cheaper to weigh the number of paper forms that used to come in pallets, to calculate the number of paper forms there were, than to manually count them.

And they needed to do this to quickly report a specific number to another group.

So they literally had weighing scales for this, and they had some mathematicians who worked on algorithms that determine how much weight went to how many paper forms.

And so simply maps it out at the top.

And of course, then you look at where the paper forms are coming from, Goods Inn.

You go and talk to people in Goods Inn and the paper forms are coming from distribution sites all over the country.

And they're in this sort of digital program.

They want to basically make the weighing scales connect to their computer systems.

So that's their digital transformation.

you go down to a distribution site and ask them what are they doing and then they've got big printing presses because they're printing out paper forms and you go well where are you printing them out from so you map that out and it turns out that users are filling in an online website to which they print out these forms and then they ship them to this other group and they don't know why they ship them but they ship them to this other group who then weighs the forms to work out how many users

filled in an online website.

So the entire process, because no one understands the whole picture, makes no sense whatsoever.

So this sort of stuff is typical.

People don't think about evolutionary flow.

And one of the things, once you start doing this, you start discovering, you start using maps before we do something to do what we call pre-mortem challenge.

So before we start an act like,

investing in robotics we'll map out the space and then we'll ask ourselves you know does it make sense we're challenged and then we'll go and do something and then once we've done something we'll do post-mortem learning using exactly the same vehicle at the back and from that we learn pants now there are so many patterns um which uh there are

What we call climactic patterns.

There's about 30 of these principles.

We found about 40, about 100 different forms of gameplay.

Most people are oblivious to all of this stuff.

And I've used it myself.

So I used to run strategy for a company called Canonical.

They provide something called Ubuntu.

In 2008, we were 2% to 3% of the operating system market up against Microsoft and Red Hat.

They had all the money, everything, all the people.

We had half a million pounds.

And we had 18 months, and we went from 3% of the operating system market to 70% of all cloud computing.

So if you understand that landscape, it can have a devastating effect against those you compete with.

But this is James Finley, a good friend.

He used to be the CIO for HS2 High Speed Rail, big heavy engineering project.

And James had a problem, I think this was about 2012, that he, well, they wanted to build a virtual world of the railway because it's cheaper to dig up a virtual world and go, whoops, we've got that wrong, than it is the English countryside.

So this is a systems graph for the system building a virtual world of the railway.

And James's problem was he wanted to know how to manage this.

So typically in government in those days, we used to break it into small contracts like lot one engineering, lot two user experience.

We'd group common things into those contracts and then would outsource it to some supplier.

and the net result was almost always the same massive cost overruns massive delays and this sort of stuff so james wanted to find a different way now i'd been mapping from 2005 and some of the patterns i'd learned directly applied to this model so um i was very fortunate in that james had spent sunday afternoon um creating a map

And I said, well, send me what you've got.

So this was the map, and this was in 2012.

I said, well, it's quite easy now to work out how to manage this sort of stuff.

The reason why it's quite easy is that as things evolve, their characteristics change.

So on the left-hand side is very uncharted, chaotic, uncertain.

And on the right hand side, it's very industrialized.

It doesn't matter whether it's money, penicillin, computing.

It all evolves from that sort of genesis to more commodity.

And because of that, we've learned back in 2006, there's no such thing as one size fits all management methods.

So things like agile extreme programming.

were very good on the left-hand side, where your focus had to be about reducing the cost of change because change was normal.

Where on the right-hand side of the map, you want to be all about reducing deviations, so things like Six Sigma, outsourcing, good.

And in the middle of the map, you want to be about lean, off-the-shelf products because you're all about learning and reducing waste.

So we simply took that and you apply it to the map

And you go, right, we're going to build in-house with Agile techniques over here.

We're going to use off-the-shelf products in the middle.

And we're going to outsource to utility providers on the right-hand side.

And if we want to, we can now break it into small contracts where we bring together things which are similar in terms of nature of how we manage them rather than just random grouping of words because they sound similar.

So that's what James did, and that project delivered way ahead of schedule, way under budget, ended up in front of the Public Accounts Committee.

Quite an exceptional thing.

But one of the patterns we learned, in this case a principle, was use appropriate methods.

It didn't matter whether we were doing financing or project management.

There's no such thing as a one-size-fits-all.

fits all method because the characteristics change and therefore the way you treat it has to change as well.

Of course, there's a world of difference between using agile and extreme progress.

and being agile being agile means basically using appropriate methods i mean if you try and use six sigma across the lot you'll be good on the right hand side you'll suffer on the left if you try to use agile across the lot you'll go on the left and suffer on the right so if we go back to the original contract structure and i take one of those contracts lot one engineering

I simply take that and look at the mapping format.

So exactly the same contract, but now I'm looking at the map.

I can tell you this contract is going to fail before we even sign the paperwork.

It's going to fail because the stuff on the right hand side might be officially treated.

We can define it in a contract.

But the staff on the left-hand side will always incur excessive change control costs.

We've doomed ourselves by trying to define that which we're still learning about.

So, I mean, that's a gentle introduction.

I'm not going to go through all the patterns and everything else, but even at this stage,

mean the most common problems i find with business is one they don't actually understand their users which of course you have to do in order to map that's the anger secondly they don't understand their user needs um which is fairly terrifying thirdly they don't understand their components either supply chain of all the things which go into making up what they're actually doing and i think that's become extremely clear over the last

10 years that so few companies actually understand its supply chain.

But worse than that, you can't just treat every component of the same.

So they don't even understand how evolved those components are, which is why we always end up with these fads of one size fits all, let's agile everything, let's Six Sigma everything or whatever it happens to be.

None of them work because you have to use appropriate methods because

the components evolve, so their characteristics change.

So along with not understanding users' user needs, not understanding the supply chain components, not understanding how evolved components are, using inappropriate methods,

It turns out that most organisations, their structures are fundamentally flawed because, again, that is the change with the context.

And they also don't have any mechanism to effectively challenge each other without landing in that dreadful world of stories, which is highly political.

And so you learn the lesson pretty quickly.

You don't challenge the executive story.

Well, we want to, but there is no mechanism to do so without causing that confrontation.

So I learned those lessons probably about 2007,

And it's just grown since then.

And as I say, there's about 30 common economic patterns which are useful for anticipation.

There's about 40 principles like use appropriate methods is just one.

And then you start to learn you can manipulate the space and there's about 100 different forms of gameplay.

So I suppose that's my as easy as I can make it introduction into mapping.

At that point, I'll stop.

I won't stop sharing because Daniel can do that for me.

There we are.

Susan, was that a good enough entry?


SPEAKER_01:
Absolutely.

Actually, I was actually in three of your projects, education.

And so despite actually being in the midst of it, what you've showed me today is that

When we talk about components, that may need some clarification to be able to translate that into active inference.

But this is also showing the internal representation, the resource utilization, which is very important in active inference.

We refer to that as free energy.

so it's not just about you know what is out here what i'm trying to you know either avoid a threat or go after an opportunity exploration exploitation but it's also about how i'm i'm actually organizing

or how to look at the organization, the internal composition or configuration in terms of that utilization.

So utilization of opportunity and how do you actually think about that?

So help me bring that home for active inference, Daniel.


SPEAKER_02:
So there's a couple of points I can run off that.

Um, and cause I, I love the practical examples actually.

Um, because that's where I sort of come from.

I, um,

I mean, we can talk about organizational structures.

I developed a cell-based structure, which used to be called Pioneer Settlers Town Planners.

Those words are very problematic.

Some of these days we call it Explorers, Villagers, and Town Planners.

It's basically a structure.

Using a map, you break into small groups, very much explorers on the left-hand side.

It turns out that people have different attitudes and work well in different areas.

They have...

um also different aptitudes so you get explorer engineers explorers marketers explorers in terms of finance and it's good to bundle those people together um and what we do is then we introduce villages in the middle and town planners they have different characteristics we allow people to self-select and then we create what's known as a system of theft

So the town plan is still from the villages, which forces the villages to still the work of the explorers and the explorers therefore have to get on with exploring.

And this enforces evolution into a system.

So I introduced that in all 2006, 2007.

There's a wonderful paper by GCHQ, which is our intelligence services, which called Boiling Frogs.

You'll see a lot of those concepts within that paper as well.

I'm excited.

Yes.

But I can talk about organization, but I wanted to talk about the sort of value and how you use maps to ask questions.

So let me just jump to something else.

Hang on a second.

Miro.

All right.

So.

This is a group.

They built a system.

And like many groups, they built the system.

The system had gone live.

And then somebody said, you know, asked the question, what's the return on investment?

And, of course, at some point in the past, somebody created some sort of plan which had a return on investment calculation.

But if you dig into it, what really happened?

is an executive read an article in some magazine or talked to a friend, thought this was a good idea, we should do some AI or whatever, had commissioned a group internally, who then gone and talked to another group to find out how much would be the cost of implementing this, then taken that figure to another group to work out what the return on investment calculation needed to look like,

and finally gone to marketing and say, look, can we have some evidence to justify building this?

And so the entire exercise was an exercise in justifying building what the executive wanted on a whim.

And that's probably normal, as in the vast majority of things that go on.

Terrifying, because there is no process of challenge.

And so eventually somebody said, you know, we've spent all this money on this thing.

What is the value?

And there is obviously some business case which gives a bloody blah.

And of course, it's meaningless.

So they asked me, well, how do we work out the value of the system?

So I simply said, and this took two hours in total, first of all, tell me what you think the system provides.

And what do we mean by what is the value?

And so creating opportunities to add value quickly.

being able to provide synchronized environments that's apparently what this system was doing being user-centric okay cool out-of-the-box solution for developers management of complicated all right fine so you get a whole bunch of words and then what you do is i normally get them to group those words into your themes or perspectives so some of these words were about speed

Some of them were about cost and value, some of them about removal of heavyweight assurance processes, some about simplification, some about confidence in the environment.

Now, I often do these with research groups of, you know, sometimes fairly small, 20, 30 people.

More recently, there's usually 80 or 90 people.

So we'll get huge amounts of words and also these themes as well.

And then we'll choose a number of themes.

In a small group, we might just pick one.

If we've got a large enough group, we can break into smaller groups to look at many.

So in this case, they picked the removal of heavyweight assurance processes, which was not something they'd been thinking of beforehand, but something which came up in this discussion.

So we immediately went to mapping out

from the perspective of our common platform for assurance and dated 2023 so a couple of things maps have no concept of time on

any more than geographical maps, what happens is that over time the map changes.

Secondly, all maps are imperfect representations of space.

A perfect map of France would be, or Paris even, would be the size of Paris, which means as a map that's useless.

So all maps are imperfect representations in order to be useful.

But they are representations of the landscape.

They are not the landscape.

The third thing is that all maps have a perspective.

So if no one had mapped Paris and you sent a group of people to map Paris and they came back and you asked them a question, like what's the most important thing in Paris, they might go Pierre's Pizza Parlour because they mapped it from the perspective of nice places to eat pizza.

So if you want to map a space, you send normally multiple groups to map from different perspectives.

And then what you can do is aggregate those perspectives together.

So you basically ask the same question on each map and you aggregate the answers together.

So in this case, they built a map with a common assurance platform.

They talked about what's involved, engineering teams, end users.

And once they have a map, we simply ask the question, you know, value assumes we're going to be able to measure something.

What is it that we're going to be able to measure with this map?

And so they came up with a whole bunch of things like bugs between environments, cost per transaction, time for a new service, decrease in negative press stories, speed of assurance approval.

And once you've got those answers, you simply say, how easy are they to implement and what's the value to the sponsor end users?

and you they just put them on here of course it's done in mirror this entire process takes about two hours and now they've got a whole bunch of you know fairly easy to implement high value things that they can actually go and build metrics for and they had no idea beforehand what the cost per transaction or percent of uh policy implemented or time to fix for bug issues these are really simple things which they can now go and fix let's show you a slightly more

uh demanding one so let me have a look agriculture let's look at sustainability sustainability okay yes um are you into sustainability or health care or whatever do sustainability so this is a slightly larger one

this takes a long time this took 10 hours um which you know in business terms is not huge something enough people spent months writing strategies which is quite funny so they started off by you know what matters in sustainability and you get this

splurge of words, things like modularity, energy security, protecting biodiversity.

Great.

So this is the list here.

Apparently it all matters.

So you've got to do all of this stuff, green skills, middle impact on resources, loads of things.

So the next thing you do is you get people to group it into themes.

And so the first bit takes about

an hour, this bit takes about an hour.

So they create a whole bunch of themes or perspectives, say policy standards and legislation.

Some were connected to secular economy, some connected to leadership and governance, organizational, government, social, all sorts of things.

And then what they do is you self-organize into small groups.

And each of those groups now goes and maps out the industry from a particular perspective.

so this one is doing uh sustainability uh oh that's just the example sorry now this one is doing modeling and complexity there's different people in the group and tiani and ben have taken the role as lead mappers and modeling and understanding complexity um

within the sustainability field.

So they start adding components and then they usually start shifting to a tool like online maps.

And so they're going through having a discussion about what components matter, where they matter, et cetera, until they end up with what they think is a good enough map.

And the next question you ask is, well, if you've got a good enough map, which is all you can ever have, where could you invest on the map?

Not where should we invest, but where could you invest?

So they come up with a list of different areas that we could invest on the map.

And you do that for each of these maps.

You can see they're picking different areas.

Great.

And then what you're doing is you aggregate this all together.

So you ask them a question.

So once they pick the different areas, you ask them to highlight in their groups what are the most important areas for, and it could be improving society or return on investment, making money.

And so they highlight, in this case, it's for improving society.

They've got different ideas.

So you've got one group, collaborative finance, pattern and characterization.

One's all about measurement, unsurprisingly, supply chain, orderable chains.

And what you find is on the different maps, similar themed areas have come up.

So now you can aggregate across all the different maps.

And what you end up with

something that looks like this.

So when we ask people, and this took 10 hours to get to, starting from, you know, what do we need to do about sustainability?

It turns out, and these are all people who work in the sustainability industry, and there are about 60 of them from all sorts of different parts.

It turns out the things that we really need to focus on are civic engagement, compliance and auditing measurements.

And then after that, manufacturing practices, government policies, financial.

Now, interestingly, when you ask the question or you go and do analyst reports, so you aggregate analyst reports, you tend to get the answers on the right hand side.

So the high priority is technology innovation.

We're always in the sustainability field, investing in, looking for.

We've been doing it for 40 years, looking for the magic technology that will solve sustainability problems.

At the same time, of course, CO2 has gone up through the roof.

Or it's going to be financial instruments like carbon offsets or whatever.

Again, we've been doing this for 40 years, getting nowhere.

And again, the marketing message or the markets message is the stuff on the right.

and but you see a real difference once you once you map a landscape and ask people to focus on from the purpose of improving society where would you focus it's very different from where would you focus in terms of making money and you see that across so many different industries healthcare agriculture defense and all the rest of it um if you look at something like health care

Oh, there we are.

You end up with this.

So if you get a whole bunch of doctors and nurses together,

and you get them to map out the space and everything else and um of course they have to break into small groups because you only have eight people are mapping a group at most usually so we try and break into small groups and then you aggregate them together what you discover is that if we want to improve healthcare

from the focus on benefits to society.

It's all about measuring health outcomes, auditing against prompts, patient reported outcome measures, which we don't do.

We measure against ClinROs, which is clinician reported outcomes, so symptoms.

We don't really have a healthcare system.

We have a sick care system.

We're very good at treating symptoms, not making people healthy.

So we should really focus on measurement health outcomes, sharing medical data, and that's the list over there.

But if you look at it from the market,

it's all about personalized do it yourself medicine education well-being uh industrialized ai not that's quite a high priority thing where of course you know and things like measurement of health outcomes is right at the bottom of the list so you often find those sorts of things so one of the things i do the maps is um it's not just when you want to look at a landscape if i can i will get a large group of people together

We'll come up with some general themes by asking the question of what matters and then consolidate it.

And then we'll break into small groups like multiple sensors and we'll go and map out the space.

Then we can ask each group what's important.

And then we can take all those answers and we aggregate it together.

And this is what gives us a signal for what matters.

So if you go back to the Paris example, if you sent out a dozen groups to map from different perspectives, rather than getting Pierre's Pizza Parlour, if you aggregated, you're likely to find the Eiffel Tower, for example.

At that point, I will stop.

Did that help?

Oh, and Susan, you did the education one, which was always great because the mapping exercises themselves were always fun because the education group had a bunch of people who worked in the education profession, obviously, and they always started from a focus of whenever we were mapping, it was a benefit to students and opportunity.

And every time we mapped, we were forced

to basically recreate the map because there was the realization through the process the entire education system doesn't work for the students it works for the benefit of government and social cohesion and the educational institutes i mean it was the same with the the sort of um

healthcare everybody thought wow healthcare obviously is there for the benefit of the patients if you look at most of the maps it's actually there for the benefit of medical institutions and pharmaceutical companies and patients are right down the bottom of the list so yes we could expand that one i will i was also on the gaming one oh yes what was interesting was that i think you mentioned that that was the only one


SPEAKER_01:
that there was symmetry between what was good for culture and what was good for industry.

It was a wise investment as well as that, which I want to come back to because I think this kind of pulls us back into the free energy.


SPEAKER_02:
If I look at the map for the gaming one,

Daniel, I don't know if you've popped up the map, but just to go through it, we start off with this huge amount of noise of stuff that matters.

We go and go through this process of categorizing into themes and generating the maps, breaking into small groups, mapping out the areas, identifying on each of the maps what matters.

I'm not actually showing you that.

I can show you it.

It's the stuff above.

oh here we are that's all the groups doing their work identifying different themes and everything else it's even more messy than that there we are um but basically what we end up with if i can find where it was there we are we end up with all this noise and we end up with this little table at the end

And it turned out, yes, you're absolutely right, they're quite aligned.

I mean, probably the only example I've ever found where if you focus on what's important to society, and if you focus what's important in making a return on capital, there's pretty good alignment between the two.

I mean, obviously AI content,

quite high in terms of making a return on capital but not too bad community is quite important for both a slightly more important it's the highest priority for uh benefit to society um but it's not bad alignment at all certainly healthcare defense agriculture are way different really distorted


SPEAKER_01:
Well, and I do want to point out that all of this is in GitHub.

It's all open source.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Results of the maps.

It's all free.

Yeah.

And so that speaks to what, you know, I'm going to point out what was top of mind, and then I want to hear what Daniel has to say.

But specifically going back to what you said about the,

the value versus the ease of implementation.

And so when you're aggregating collective intelligence, then that's actually giving you predictive power in terms of where is the likelihood things are going to move.

And

And so the tapping into that, the self-organization, the power in self-organization to enable that emergence of what is going to be the most powerful, least variational energy that we're going to be able to mobilize.

So it's mobilization, whether,

you're in the midst of it.

Now, with active inference, we're talking about an ecosystem with very, very diverse different professions.

And so they organize chaos, but I'm kind of seeing some routes in how to actually orchestrate those to find that sweet spot.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_02:
I think there is another form of mapping, which is created by a friend of mine, Dave Snowden.

So Dave and I, we meet up regularly, like every week.

And we were talking a few hours ago, actually, before this event.

So, of course, Dave's taken a sort of long interest in sort of mapping stuff that I've done.

He's got a different way of looking at it.

It's something called esterine mapping.

And that really looks at...

Because his focus is on, you know, if we've got a whole range of things we can do, what are the things which are within the realm of what we can possibly do?

What in terms of energy input in terms of time becomes possible?

And so he's got some really interesting stuff about S-drive mapping.

I mean, there are very few forms of mapping that I'm aware of.

There's another one called Berger mapping, which is really interesting.

If you're looking at stakeholders and political play in an organization, there's S-drive mapping as well.

And then there's my form of Walkley maps, which

This stuff is almost 20 years old now, ridiculous.

And this stuff, by the way, is all Creative Commons.

So it's interesting, because once you create a map of a space and you use the map to identify where you could invest, and then you aggregate to see, in this case, we're aggregating them in terms of what should we, what is a high priority?

This isn't actually answering the question

Can we actually do this?

So if you go back to them, if I go back to the value.

So that was to do not education gaming.

Let's have a look.

I don't want to open that one.

It's just common development.

Here you've got, we're actually having identified different areas.

We're now asking that question of ease to implement versus value to the sponsor.

So this is the point where you use the maps to identify different areas.

And you're now asking, these are things

We could easily change.

This helps you make that decision of what you should change.

I think SRI mapping is a better form of doing that a bit here.

I mean, I would use the maps to try and understand the landscape as much as possible and use the maps to sort of, my form maps to identify the areas you could change, help you develop the questions.

But then in day's form,

which is esterite, which is not this, really ask that question about the energy and the time.

I think that's a really interesting way of looking at the problem.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And compare that to the typical cost benefit analysis.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, God, no.

Which is like... You might as well use a SWOT diagram.

Okay.

Remember, I've been doing this for 20 years.

So, I mean, I see, well, it's almost 20 years.

The insurance example is a typical example that I will see.

group of people who've spent six months working on a problem with no actual understanding of the landscape and they've come up with a plan to invest millions into robotics and they've got all the business case all the calculations all the vendors they've had in they've done all their due diligence the whole thing's ready to go

And beyond once we got over the 20 minutes of arguing, it took 15 minutes of mapping and about five or 10 minutes of discussing the map to realize the entire thing was a waste of time.

That is incredibly common.

I, you know, look before you leap.

I am always stunned.

um it's a constant source of merit of amusement of how many people make decisions without understanding the landscape and i do get myself into hot water so i better warn your listeners um mapping will tend to get you fired

The reason being is that whilst I say it is possible, once you understand a landscape, you can challenge and ask questions and all the rest of it, you do get these moments where you map out the environment and you realise the entire strategy of the company is to walk the people off the edge of a cliff.

And you want to point out that's really bad, but it is something the executive have been totally sold on.

And so they, people get, you know,

despite the fact they can see it clearly in front of them now, it's almost they go into a sense of denial.

And the solution is obviously you're a troublemaker.

So I've seen loads and loads of people, well, not loads, quite a few people get fired as a result of mapping, pointing out the insanity of something that is actually going on.

So I have to give you a big healthy warning.

But on a personal note, I am seeing,

I've seen so many projects and I have got myself in trouble.

I had one particular project and they'd asked me over to the US and I was sitting in this boardroom and this was about 2010.

And they'd taken me through their $1.2 billion plan to build a private cloud.

And

I'd mapped this out during this meeting.

In the end, I'd turn around and I said, I can build the entire lot for you with the same effect for 25 million.

And they were like, how is that possible?

How would you do that?

I said, it's very simple.

You pay me 25 million.

I will sit on a beach for five years drinking margaritas.

Then you phone me up and I will say we failed.

And that way you'll save all the rest of the money.

Now, this went down like a lead balloon.

I immediately got kicked out of a meeting and all that sort of stuff.

It's spectacular.

But what I most remember about this story is about seven years later when the execs phoned me up and basically said, we wish we paid you 25 million.

Of course, I wish they'd pay me 25 million as well.

But this stuff is frighteningly common, I'm afraid.


SPEAKER_01:
i think that's actually where we can help because what you just said is what we're modeling it's called belief updating and so just look instead of instead of um focusing on behaviors you know we're actually looking at the justifications um and it's quite revealing


SPEAKER_02:
Well, that's an entirely different thread.

It leads into, I should say, an entirely different thread, which is the whole sort of, because you can map culture as well.

I mean, I get into, so I keep a lot of my maps on GitHub.

They're easy to find, they're sad.

worldly mapping or repository there's a tool called online water batch you can just take the code and throw it in there again this is all creative comments open some stuff you just help yourself um but i also um do a lot of mapping of uh different environments so if you think about uh the concept of defense so mapping out the defense space um there are multiple landscapes

on which sovereignty has a meaning.

And the one that most people know about is territorial sovereignty.

So this is our land.

But there's also economic sovereignty, technological sovereignty, social sovereignty, and political sovereignty.

And they're all important landscapes which you can map.

Now, most countries, I say most, not all are the same, shall we say, do a reasonably good job of territorial

a pretty poor job of economic, actually understanding their economic landscape.

Very few actually understand their supply chains.

There's a wonderful piece of work in Hungary, which was looking at

used VAT records, sales tax records, to basically graph out, not even map, but graph out the Hungarian economic system.

And of course, they discovered there were these checkpoints with these companies within that.

It's pretty terrifying.

It was a very small number of companies, which if they failed, would take out 25% of the GDP of the entire country.

It's just like terrifying.

um but because most people are oblivious to this and of course technological i mean we're now finally talking about spons but these are just graphs that's a software bill of materials but they're not even maps of the space so we still don't have maps of our technological landscape and political and cultural i mean most people are nowhere i mean um and and now on political i should say associate

And of course, that matters from the point of view of sovereignty.

I mean, if we cut back on foreign office aid and all this sort of stuff, you have to buy more bullets.

The two are not independent.

They are correlated.

What you do in one landscape can affect another landscape.

So if you decline, you reduce soft power, you might have to exert more kinetic force in a territorial.

But this whole sort of area led me to discussions where I was looking at how to map culture.

And that was fascinating.

Mostly because when I looked into culture, I was thinking culture, I mean, well, you know, it's a really simple concept.

Foolish, foolish man I was.

And I found, I think it was Kroeber, he basically said anthropologists who are the experts on culture have been arguing over what culture means for over 150 years or something.

It was a ridiculous length of time.

And of course, there was no actual agreement on what culture meant, which was, for me, quite shocking.

And then I came across a really, really wonderful anthropologist, Margaret Mead, really incredible stuff.

And one of the statements of Margaret Mead was that language was part of culture.

And that's interesting because

If language is part of culture, and we therefore probably can't describe culture in terms of language, that's something called Godel's incompleteness theorem.

So no model can be true and complete within itself.

So if language is part of it, we've got to find a different way.

So what I started doing was, well, can we map out cultural systems?

So when I use a map, I better just show you a couple of bits.

The axis at the bottom, I normally say Genesis Custom Product Commodity when I'm looking at activities.

But really, it should say stage one, two, three, and four.

But that doesn't mean anything to anybody.

And this piece of work came from a whole bunch of text analysis of 9,700

no, 9,231 documents back in 2005, 2006, very manual process back then.

And it turns out there's these different stages and they have different labels, different characteristics as well.

So the different labels are when we talk about practices, novel, emerging, good and best, data, model, divergent, convergent, modeled, knowledge, concept, hypothesis, theory, and then suddenly comes acceptable.

I can pick any label from stage one and mix it with stage two and three and four.

So I started mapping out things like ethical values.

So looking at, you know, was it a concept?

Was it an emerging concept?

Was it sort of converging?

Was it accepted?

So I was doing a lot of stuff on sexual identity and mapping out in that space as well.

So when you look at, turns out, you start looking at our collective,

And you will have various beliefs in a collective.

It might be universal basic income, paid holiday, unionization.

And those beliefs themselves will have different stages of evolution, and they will be based upon underlying concepts, workers' rights, anti-discrimination, civil rights.

Both of those extend from the abolition of slavery, and underneath that are concepts like reciprocity and fairness.

So you can see how these

these components themselves have evolved.

We have a fairly good idea, or used to, I should say, a fairly good idea of concepts like reciprocity.

That's being a little bit challenged at the moment.

But if you take this map and you just say, well, okay, so we've got some values, beliefs.

And we start off with this point here.

I don't know if you can see my mouth.

It's the values in the middle.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
So what I did was I had a blank map with concept emerging, converging, accepted at the bottom.

Uncharted industrialized and put values as, you know, there's this map of values in the middle.

Put that as a square box.

And then I got a group of people who couldn't agree on anything.

These were Brexiteers and Remainers in the UK.

Brexiteers were like, leave Europe.

Remainers wanted to remain.

These groups were incredibly hostile to each other.

So if the Brexiteers said, we'll have a cup of tea, the Remainers would go, we're having coffee.

And if the Remainers went, we'll have biscuit, the Brexiteers would go, no, we're not having biscuits, we'll have cake.

I mean, these people would just not agree on anything whatsoever.

So I had them in the room and I said, well, look, I'm trying to explore the concept of culture and I know I can't do it through the use of a word.

or words alone.

So I've got this concept of values, and that's a map itself, and I've put that in the middle.

I want to think about what are the components that make up culture?

And they were able to discuss this rather complicated issue through the meaning of the map, and this is where they end up with.

So at the very top, the anchors are we and me.

We're all a bit we, we're all a bit me as the individual and collective.

uh the we is all about control of the environment and me is all about individuality which is about agency which is connected to concepts like power and control of course is uh you know connected to the collectives that we belong to we belong to many forms of collectives and all collectives want to succeed in the spread of their values a church a football club a family or whatever you know they all want to succeed

um and of course our behaviors are a combination of the values that we have and the doctrine or the principles we apply so for example um

uh principle is focus on user needs well that sounds good but if your belief is that people with blue eyes and blonde hair are somehow better than everybody else then the behavior of focusing on user needs and the belief that blonde-haired blue-eyed people are somehow superior is not a very appealing behavior

But then you get into concepts of safety, which depends upon behavior and sense of belonging, which depends upon behavior.

And so you start getting cycles within this.

And you can actually use this to form groups and also destabilize groups as well, because that's one of the things you can do with maps as well.

That's how many, many moons ago, gosh, this must be about eight years ago, I got into mapping, or maybe less, seven years ago, mapping into cultural systems.

And this turns out to be a very imperfect but interesting definition of culture.

So when people say, what is culture?

I go, well, that's culture.

My particular interest and the reason why we did the video gaming one is because if you want to change the behaviors of a collective, well, the principles are universally useful principles.

So as long as people are aware, there's a list of about 40 of those.

What we need to really do is change the values and the beliefs.

And one of the ways of doing that is through memory.

So symbols, rituals, and heroes.

Or in other words, art.

Art is one of the most powerful forces there is to changing the values and beliefs in a collective.

And the single largest form of art today is immersive video games, which is why we were doing that research project, because I have a particular interest.

If we want to change the behaviors of art and national collectives,


SPEAKER_00:
the best way of attacking the problem is through a lesson video games that all makes sense yeah thank you i mean there's so many places to jump in but i want to respect your time perhaps we can close the session there and then susan and i could stay for a few minutes and read some of the thoughts that we had about active inference

Oh, my apologies.

I didn't see what the time was.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, sorry.

I've talked for far too long.

I have a terrible habit.

I can do this for days.

I hope I haven't bored you all rigid.


SPEAKER_00:
You said what you wanted to say.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, no.

It was fantastic.

Fantastic.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I thought...


SPEAKER_00:
would you like to continue a bit longer or yeah I can just mention a few of the points that Susan and I had like thought about and prepared just more to footnote it for just thinking about it more in everyone's own time um yeah there's so much here that uh that yeah there is so many different crossovers between uh these these two directions yeah um and uh


SPEAKER_01:
And so, yeah, that, I mean, I've got so many that I'm going to let, turn it over to Daniel to kind of pull these, thread it all together so we can mine this, the brilliance.


SPEAKER_00:
This is just going to be reading from the document that we already prepared, so...

not just to connect and notes being taken so it's not in any order this isn't any specific synthesis um but the the ideas of cognitive mapping worldly mapping as a cognitive activity strategy or behavior being separated from the landscape this is like the agent on the niche the pheromone distribution and the nestmate

and the pheromone distribution can't be changed instantly that's actually something happening that's separate from the control of like any navigation path and landscape and so being able to have real specific practices

And all of this fractal diversity and practices as well, just like there's tools in a workshop in the pathfinding, wayfinding areas, this is mapping technique.

And then underneath cartographic technique is cartographic research and measurement and signal processing, control theory, all these other areas.

However, more specification or formalization is not always the rate limiting step.

or the step that's aligned with any particular outcome that's kind of like the recognition that actually i think just from what i have heard helps the participation go beyond just sourcing information and words like if you just wanted all the words you could download a dictionary but there's actually something in the process

and the the time and the attention as that feeds back upon itself that is is qualitatively different than just like the playbook the playbook in the kitchen you know is different from the restaurant changing through time so like those are just the kind of general then just a little bit more on the specifics with active inference

Really interesting how this is like a snapshot that has position and then a first derivative or second derivative, like how fast is it changing?

What vector is it changing in?

How fast is that changing?

That could be taken very far formally with active inference.

That's basically Bayesian mechanics.

then separation of consideration with the OODA loop and a connection to the principles also previously we've connected the OODA functions and cycle to action perception basically describing the same territory they're different maps

so having a pluralism of approaches and actually mapping them at a higher level like systems engineering maps or active inference ecosystems of shared intelligence complex systems all these being recognized as maps helps have the epistemic humility and the pluralism and it's also like arguably a correct formalism that takes mapping to like its logical

completeness as a method of pragmatic inquiry and then um separation of the sense making of the landscape from the actions that can be taken and then in active inference like the equations have all those kinds of considerations like how the world states change through time that the perceptions the actions the affordances like all these different terms um

However, that equation is very silent on how to do it procedurally through time with a group.

Obviously the equation could be used in every single possible way.

So even if like this were more accurate,

that you could make a decision with this or that consequence on this map or you could have chosen the other way on a different one and so then that brings in some really interesting considerations of inquiry which i think just to kind of conclude speaks to the different ways that some of the theory

of cognitive systems and all of like the connections that people will see who study the formalisms and act in that theory and how that co-informs and co-creates with the practice and the methods and the use of maps all these different areas in a new domain in time now i definitely think we should end there because that was fantastic great

Thank you, Simon.

This was really awesome.

Thank you again, Susan.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I look forward to- Thank you.

This has been remarkable.


SPEAKER_00:
Seeing what people think and how they get involved.

So thank you.

Bye.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Bye-bye.