## hOto96Q8sYQ

Hello and welcome. It's July 29th, 2023 and we're here in session three discussion of the course
Physics's Information Processing at the Active Inference Institute. We're having a follow-up
discussion on Chris Fields' third lecture on Quantum Reference Frames and we're looking forward
to your participation. So if you're watching along live and you've been invited to the calendar event,
it's not too late to jump in. If you're watching on YouTube, you can write any questions or comments
in the live chat with Dean and Ender here. We're going to be looking at some of the key points
and taking it in a few different directions, sharing our reference frames, making a shared one.
So, Ender would be awesome to have you zoom in a little bit on the slide and then feel free to
take us through some of the key points so that we can see a little bit how you're seeing it. Thank you.
That looks good? Yep. Okay. So let's start by reviewing the last lecture from a couple weeks
ago and then we can open up the discussions if there's any questions that appear in the live chat.
We can address those. All right. So in lecture two, Chris introduced this idea of the information
processing between system A and B, you know, where they interact via qubits on a boundary and they have
reference frames that give meaning to this communication. You want to think of information
processing as a communication channel, the way Shannon thought about it. So that was in lecture two.
And lecture three, a couple weeks ago, tried to make this more explicit by emphasizing the idea that this
has to be physically embodied somewhere. Okay. And I think that because we are so used to
information being fungible, in no small part because of the internet and everything, it's a little hard to
understand that first when the claim is made that you have a QRF that it's non fungible, or you have a
piece of quantum information that's non fungible or things like the no cloning theorem. We're so used to
information being fungible to it being zeros and ones that it's a bit of a change in mindset at first, but
that's exactly what lecture three introduced. This was all, all stuff, right?
Could you maybe just unpack that a little bit? What would it mean for information to be fungible or what's
that stance like? And then what does it mean for information to be non fungible? And what is that

stance like? Yeah, I'm out to get there. So let me let me scroll down the slides. Because that's
addressed here. So I was maybe I should have kept this in the beginning. But anyways, session two talked
about how information theory makes this simple and obvious. Okay. And in session three, we talk about
reference frames, and mechanistically how all of this works. So yeah, let's address that question of the
difference between between, hold on one second, let me use my mouse to scroll down here. Okay, so that's,
that's a little faster, right? Okay, so can you restate your question, Daniel? Yeah, what would it mean for
information to be fungible or non fungible? People might be familiar with that in the economic setting,
with non fungible tokens and all of that. But what are we talking about with informational fungibility?
I think it basically comes down to whether you can replicate, I mean, it's basically the difference
between classical and quantum information, as far as I know. Fungible information is everything that you
can basically turn into a message of zeros and ones. It's, you know, how you transmit it may be different,
you know, the channel, the physical hardware, and so on. But, but at the end of the day,
it's something that you can write on a boundary, and something that you can transmit as zeros and ones.
Whereas quantum information, you literally have to send the hardware, the piece of hardware,
the QRF. At least that's how I understand it. So, a simple answer might be
that it's information encoded in a piece of software versus a piece of hardware, but I don't,
I don't think that analogy is perfect.
But what do you, yeah, Dean, what do you think?
Dean Mitchell- Well, here's what I'm curious about. And again, you guys can help me with this.
Dean Mitchell- As opposed to reference frames, I oftentimes default to frame of reference. And I
know that in one of the live streams, what I tried to bring out was the idea that there was an ice cream
cone looking at an ice cream truck. And the question was always whether or not which, which one of those
two entities is that one is in the foreground, and one is in the background. And in this slide that
Anderhazza, the question is, is the non-fungibility because only A and B can decide whether the A,
the VA as seen by B, the A is deeper into that image, based on our frame of reference, and the B is
closer, or is the B the one that's actually deeper, and the A is the one that's in the foreground.
And I was wondering whether the idea of non-copyability is because of that depth of field aspect
that cannot be determined, unless it's literally handed over the way that Chris was describing it.
Dean Mitchell- I think that's basically accurate. I think, I'm not sure I can answer the question,
but I think, I have the feeling that Chris, well Chris said this in the lecture that, I mean, at the end
of the day, the QRF is somewhere in your nervous system. And here, whether, I mean, you bring up a
good point, right? It looks like this slide is a bit of an optical illusion. Whether you see A or B deeper,
I guess it depends on something going on inside your head. If you, this picture is so symmetrical that
if you focus enough on it, you can change your opinion.
Dean Mitchell- Well, just to even connect that to what we're talking about, the classical fungible
information on the holographic screen, on the blanket, and then the quantum cognitive rotation,
is those two images are on the screen identical. And then whether it gets a quantum rotation such that
the three points of the axes are closer to us than the intersection on that kind of tetrahedron,
or the other way around, whether the ballerina is rotating one way or the other, that's not on the
boundary. So the information about the depth of field is part of the QRF or part of the enactment
of the QRF, and it's not written on the boundary.
Dean Mitchell- And that goes back to the preparation question and not just the measuring.
Dean Mitchell- Yeah. Like in the preparation, if your whole enculturation or the last five minutes,
it was entrained or you were holding an object that predisposed you to think that the vertex
of the intersection was further away, that's the preparation that sets your prior so that when
you get this ambiguous artifact, you rotate it into the most natural position cognitively.
And that's the preparation that sets you up for measurement. No measurement can happen
without a preparation. What do you think, Andrew? Andrew
Andrew Pérez- Sure. Yeah. Everything you said makes sense. So perhaps let me
let me recall what was said around the slides. There was a, in this whole spirit or philosophy of making,
emphasizing that information is physical, you know, from qubit, this whole thing.
Andrew Pérez- One of the glaring omissions in physics was the embodiment of the reference frame,
which was treated as an abstraction, you know, in classical physics, such as by Galileo.
But maybe even Einstein, even if he, my hunch is that he did have more of this instinct of,
you know, particularly in all those thought experiments of trying to chase the light ray,
you are chasing the light ray, right? So at the end of the day. But I mean, this is a whole process of
making the observer and the reference frame more and more explicit and more and more physical. Because at
the end of the day, it has to, right? If you start with this assumption, that solipsistic assumption,
almost that, you know, all you see and, you know, it's part of the same material ether that you are,
then, you know, then you are part of the universe that you're observing something that is out there.
Andrew Pérez- So you need to make, include a theory of what it means for you to be observing that,
right? And at the end of the day, the observer has to be physical. That's what was emphasized by
Chris at the beginning of this lecture. So this jump from treating the reference frame as an abstraction
to a real physical entity. And yeah, these are, these people have
Andrew Pérez- talked a lot about in these papers that are quoted there. But I should also remark,
Andrew Pérez- if folks want to see this, it's coming up in high energy theory also in recent work of,
in recent work of Sasking and others, where they talk about quantum reference frames, very explicitly.
So I don't, I don't have the citations off the bat, but it's definitely becoming an important thing
in the last 20 years. This attempt to really explicitly treat the reference frame and the
observer as a quantum entity, as a physical entity. Okay, so this, that's what I just said. Okay,
the jump from treating things, reference frames, as abstractions to the physical objects.
Okay.
Andrew Pérez- And because we cannot make a perfect copy of quantum information, we say that these are
unique and clonable and unfungible. So in order to recreate an experiment perfectly, this is the, this is
addressed as a part of fungibility or not, right? Can Alice, if you have some sort of quantum experiment,
and Alice and Bob are, you know, it's the usual EPR, thought experiment or whatever. Alice and Bob are
separated by light years. Is it enough if they want to recreate the same, exact, the same experiment
for Alice to send a string of zeros and ones? Well, if you had an experiment where that's enough, then you can
recreate it with fungible information. If not, then you need to somehow send non-fungible information, which
really implies sending a piece of hardware.
Andrew Pérez- Can I, can I add another, another piece here? Look on the previous slide. So this looks
really technical and scientific, but let's think about Alice's laboratory is Alice's brain, mind, and Bob's
analogously. Alice is thinking about what to say, and then says it. And that information might be written in a
chat form, it might be said verbally, it might be transmitted through digital or analog signal. But at some point, it's going
through this classical informational interface, and then Bob's laboratory is like perceiving and unpacking
it. And the question of semantic alignment is such that if Alice gives a shopping list of 10 items,
if there's semantic alignment, Bob would be able to go to the store and then find those 10 items.
And it made me think of the dictionary definition of left and right. So this gets back to our discussion
of whether the vertex on these axes is coming towards us or away from us. So I looked up the
dictionary definition of left. On, towards, or relating to the side of a human body or of a thing
that is to the west when the person or that thing is facing north. So that's, I guess, one attempt to
anchor what it means to be left. The second definition is the left-hand part, side, or direction. And you
could imagine there's an analogous definition for right. The point is, you can't describe verbally
leftness and rightness or chirality in general because its reference is an embodied perspective.
And so if Alice said, okay, you're going to go down the street and then turn left at the stop sign,
stop sign. How would Alice communicate to Bob what leftness meant at that stop sign versus rightness?
And that's this question of flipping and the way that the quantum formalism accommodates that
is through the wick rotation and the quantum cognitive events where the fungible, transmittable,
holographic information gets rotated into the imaginary axis with the formalisms that enable it to be
rotated at all. But that means you could rotate it left quote or rotate it right.
Yeah, I think that's, that's a very good explanation. I don't know if I have much to add. Dean,
you wanted to say something? Well, so, but I can't, I don't know the answer to this, but to take what
Daniel just said, to take the basic concept of being able to take something that for all intents and
purposes can appear one way or another, and then turn that into how Chris closed the last lecture with,
we are, we are seeing ourselves as both being entangled and also being separatable. How did we go
literally from a three dimension vertex to we're both entangled and we're, we're not living in a paradox.
That's just the way it is. We're also removing ourselves or separating ourselves at the same time.
That's what I would like to know because somewhere between three arbitrary lines and complexity is not
a paradox. Something has to be happening and I'm not exactly sure how that transition plays out.
Anybody want to enlighten me? Can you repeat your question please? Well, how do we, how do we go like
from the, at this point of the reference frame description of saying it can't, you can't copy it,
all you can do is pass it. Because we think things could be flipped based on internal
internal reference frames, internal meanings and internal models. The thing we choose for context,
yada yada yada, goes all the way out to the conclusion of Chris's conversation with us in
number three, where he said, bottom line is, is that it's not a paradox that as things become more and
more complex, then it wants to be able, it, it, it wants to get to a place of entanglement, alignment,
a sense of agreement, and at the same time wants to remain separate. So between those two things,
a whole lot has happened. But I don't think we've skipped over it. But we certainly haven't
opened it up and really looked at it closely. And I'm just curious, what's in between those two scales?
I agree. I think we're, we're gonna cover that towards the end of the, of the talk. But I agree.
I mean, I don't know how you see this related to QRS, or the stuff we just talked about. But I think it's
the big question in this, in this lecture, right? That was like, where was this tension between
increasing complexity and, you know, wanting, wanting to predict what the environment is doing?
One requires entanglement, and the other one requires separability, at least colloquially speaking.
I think this tension is basically what the free energy principle comes down to, right, Daniel? What do you
think? You have the free energy, and you have the E minus TS? One is prediction error. I mean,
not exactly E minus TS, right? That would be thermodynamics. But you know what I mean? One is
prediction error, and the other one is, what was it? I can't remember.
Daniel Schrapp
I'll definitely look forward to the technical unpacking that you'll get to soon. But I was
reminded of the William Blake quotation, do what you will, this life's a fiction, and is made up of
contradiction. So let's modify that. Project what you will, rotate what you will, space times a fiction,
not that it's false, but that it's a projected fictionalization, that it doesn't have the ontological
primacy that the topology of communication does, and is made up of contradiction. Yes, and it's made up of this
tension between
fitting and not overfitting, between aligning and the principle of unitarity, and differentiating and
becoming through others we become ourselves, and that type of articulation, and recognizing that two
complementary forces like convex and concave come into existence at once, like a zero to two jump
is not an issue or a stumbling block, it's that we wouldn't have it any other way.
Couldn't have it any other way.
Daniel Schrapp
Yeah.
Daniel Schrapp
Sure, we'll get that towards the end. You can almost even call it a duality, it's not
far-fetched. I mean, it's the sort of thing that I think most people will be happy to take for granted,
such, you know, supersymmetry, like you have two kinds of particles, but the same amount of them,
and, you know, dualities that are all over the place. So I think it's fairly, it's not unreasonable
to just accept that there are, there is a tension between increasing complexity, which you want,
you want AMB to be separable for, and accuracy prediction. Now, how this is related to
emergent space and this KRF stuff, you know, I don't want to make very hard-fetch claims. We'll talk
about emergent space later in the course, but for now, let's say a few more words about KRFs, and then
we'll get to the, you know, complexity stuff towards the end. So, so, KRFs are almost building blocks,
if you want, for information processing. Here, it's very useful to recall the definition that I feel. I
think we, we have mentioned before of information as being differences that make a difference.
That's probably the best definition of information I've heard, and I think, I think it does a lot of
work. I mean, it's almost mathematical, but anyways, we need to unpack it a little more and see. So,
for a difference to make a difference, what do you want out of KRF, right? And surprisingly, I mean,
not surprisingly, but reassuringly, I think would be the word. You need a KRF to have sensory,
action, and a default state, right? This is sort of like where your Bayesian prior distribution is
encoding. These three things will give you a building block for any information processing. And that,
you know, ties together with all the work in the pre-energy literature and perception, action,
loops, and whatnot. So, before we see mathematically how KRF is defined, I think it's more
illustrative. And I think Chris went exactly on the right order when he presented this a couple weeks
ago, seeing examples from nature. These are actual pieces of hardware that are effectively QRFs. And
it's remarkable how they map to... Well, I'll skip ahead a little bit. But when you get to the
to the mathematical definition of a QRF as a quantum system that, you know, you can specify with this
category theory diagram, you know, you have incoming arrows into a node that then expands, right? And this
roughly corresponds to measurement and preparation degrees of... Not degrees of freedom. The degrees of
freedom would be the same, right? When you attach it to the boundary. But measurement and preparation
stages, I guess, would be the better word. But anyways, let me go back to these examples, right?
And Daniel, you're the biologist here, so correct me if I say anything wrong here. You have a cartoon
picture of a bacteria, I think. And this is a very simple sort of thing, right? It navigates in the direction of
food. And that's it, right? So it is a very simple rudimentary example of a QRF. You have the sensory
stage here, I guess, the degrees of freedom. I guess the degrees of freedom...
So it's not obvious here what the boundary is, that's one thing. But it is a good enough picture to see the resemblance to here. We have the measurement, which in this case, you're trying to measure concentration of food. You have your node here,
C, which is your prior distribution for concentration of food. And finally, you have the output, the preparation stage, which is your...
you know, the rest of this chemical network that will control and steer this bacteria, right? So there's
here, you want to call it the action degrees of freedom that will steer this bacteria in the direction of food.
And likewise with cell division, this I understand even less, the network appears more complicated.
But I think it's fair to say that at the end of the day, all these chemical networks that appear super complicated
somehow have to be mapped to this
category theoretical diagram. That's all there is to it. You're going to have the sensory input and the action
output. And you're going to have the default chemical concentration, which amounts to this node over here.
You remember this from last lecture, right, Daniel?
Daniel Kahn Yeah. And the cone-co-cone we explored also in Livestream 17 on the Bayesian semantic
information flow. But I'll kind of add a point about these biological systems
in relationship to artificially specified systems and what that helps us understand about perception,
cognition, action. So the cone-co-cone diagram has this bow tie architecture,
or this kind of like two pyramids touching point to point, where there's a preparation and a measurement,
which can be different dimensionalities or different scopes. Like it could be multi-input,
multi-output, or multi-input, single output, vice versa, and so on. But they come through this
eye of the needle with C prime here. Now contrast that kind of architecture
represented here abstractly with what we see in the bacterial process and in the cell division process.
These have that kind of a bow tie perception, cognition, action architecture, or measurement,
cognitive integration, preparation architecture. In contrast, we see, for example, an artificial neural
network where the input and the output layers are usually lower dimensional, maybe an image coming
in with several hundred pixels and a single output, like a classifier coming out the other end, but a
dimensional explosion in those internal cognitive layers. But in biological systems, it's actually
exactly the opposite. For example, many, many, many receptors on the cell surface, on the holographic
boundary, the sensorium of the cell. But then there are these common secondary messengers that many
pathways converge upon. So that reflects the kind of radically different architecture that a QRF embodies,
as opposed to the approach taken by disembodied intelligence frameworks, which use dimensional explosion
internally to try to categorize and classify and find find edge cases versus this dimensional winnowing that is
reflective of these embodied intelligences.
And if I may make a tangential comment here also, I think the good thing about these two examples is that they also
showcase the fact of how, you know, the deep implications of a scale-free biology, if you want to call it this way, we
tend to think of these sorts of processes, right, of such as here, only happening at the level of the nervous system in animals,
or as you said, neural networks, right? We tend to associate this with neural networks.
And perhaps evolution has steered us in a way that's endowed us with nervous systems to make these things, maybe these are higher up in the
in the, in the, in the layers. But really there is, you know, that's a bit of an arbitrary distinction that we make, you know,
the processes going on at the cellular level, even if they don't appear to have anything to do with the nervous system,
my understanding is that they are, there are, there are some generic properties that are the same and everything that has to do with
information processing, you know, it manifests maybe slightly different, uh, when it comes to explicit nerves,
but at the end of the day, it's the same generic process going on. Would you, would you say that's right, Daniel?
The, the ontological claim is that it's the same generic process happening,
whereas the more instrumentalist claim is that we can model it with some shared abstractions.
Yeah. Okay. So we can, we can continue, right? Um, so, uh, from, you know, I, I don't have a whole lot to say, Daniel
said quite a bit about, at the end of the day, QRF is, is, you can visualize it as this diagram, and,
you know, you can think of it as, uh, if you are more familiar with the picture of a neural network and ways on a neural network and so on,
that's the way to think about it. Now let's continue with explicit embodiment, if you wish. Uh, so QRFs in, in the
formalism have to be attached to, uh, a boundary, boundary degrees supreme. And I, I should add another
remark here. I think, and personally to me also, like the, the hard part about, uh, this quantum
pre-energy principle formalism, if you wish, is, is what you said at the beginning is the fact that it's
topological, right? So, so very often it's not clear what the boundary degrees of freedom are,
right? Because we tend to think of boundaries as, you know, geometrical and, and certainly the classical
FEP treats them as geometrical. Uh, but that's not the case here in the quantum pre-energy, uh, formalism
and where we have emergent space, as will be talked about in later sessions. But that's just like one,
one quick remark to make. At the end of the day though, even if it's topological, we're going to
have real degrees of freedom that, um, this QRF is attaching to, this cone-cocone diagram. And
you're going to have measurement operators that yield, um, classical outcomes, um, plus and minus one.
And, uh, and then you can think of this QRF, um, or more abstractly, this cone-cocone diagram as,
as a neural network, if it was, uh, acting on those boundary qubits. And then back propagating, uh, some
sort of action signal preparation. Um, okay. Then let's not forget that, um,
land hours principle and so on, uh, requires that we are mindful of energy constraints on computation.
And that gives us the following picture.
Uh, number one, we're going to have to
use energy, uh, from the environment to fuel our computation, to fuel our observation.
So that means that right away you cannot use the entirety of your boundary to gather information.
You're, there's, it necessitates a, uh, an allocation of resources, right?
Um, here E is the observed environment and the blue portion is a thermodynamical sector
where you extract free energy and, and, and dump heat in order to run this computational process.
And then furthermore, you can have, uh, a memory sector where you write things on the boundary.
Okay. And this takes up energy, also, right? Writing information on, onto the boundary by
land hours principle will take up information.
And, uh, Chris called this the minimal interest in observer because it has a memory sector and why
minimal here, uh, implies that we have at least a minimal interesting implies that we have more than
one layer here. The process of writing things into the, into a memory sector requires us to have a clock
so that we can label those memories, um, in time.
Okay. So we do have time as part of this formalism, just not space yet. Okay. The time has to be internal to the observer.
Just, just one piece on that, that, that Chris mentioned, um, as, and as you echoed, time here
is an attribute of some cognitive systems in terms of their internal understanding so that they can sort
memories and understand what came earlier or later. It's not something that's a priori defined externally,
which is the case in the kind of space time first. Now, how do we fit communication into here?
We flip that we're talking about the topology of communication as ontologically primal. And now
certain kinds of sophisticated agents, it's not like necessarily true of a rock or a metronome or a
particle of a gas, but some kinds of cognitive systems are such that they are able to generate an
internal clock concept. And that doesn't have to be the same thing as what's happening on the wall
with Kronos. This can reflect a purely internal time, Kairos, that enables observers or interactors
that have different clock structures. And then Landauer's principle helps us arbitrage or connect
the informational demands to the energetic or the metabolic demands. Dean?
Dean? So when I, when I first listened to the lecture, I thought when the, when the term or phrase
trade-off was raised, I, I traditionally have thought of trade-off as kind of a binary.
If I'm picking this, I'm trading off against all the other things that I didn't pick. So one or,
or the other, or others, plural. But when I saw, when I saw this, and especially when I heard it in
the context of things like degrees of freedom, I began to wonder whether it is, because it could sit on
either side of that boundary. It could be a priori, or it could be ad hoc or post hoc, a trade-off.
Which prior to this conversation, I just assumed that a trade-off was one or the other. But essentially,
what this implies is it, it isn't even, it's still a kind of a degree of, of how much weight you put
into it. And then it, you kind of cross a threshold and then you've made your pick. You've,
you've completed your trade-off. Or did I, again, did I misinterpret what I was
hearing if it's, if it's topological as opposed to this, the more conventional space-time perspective?
Is this, can, can a trade-off be both ad hoc and post hoc, seemingly at the same time?
Very interesting question. Let us just let it float and continue on. Enter.
All right. Because maybe, because again, if it's, if it, I'll just say this, if it, if it can be,
that, that would really move us out of the classical realm.
That would essentially say that anytime we've made a pick, we re we really haven't made a pick.
There's still a whole bunch of other things that are going to happen that can, that can change
whatever that action is that we thought we carried out or enacted. If we're talking about in, in an
internal intern intern intern internality state, which is what I think we want. I think we want to be able to change our minds.
Let me take that one way, Dean. The, the analytical equations of the action perception loop don't tell us
in implementation, like if we're going to write it in code, whether we should use action first procedurally to update our observations
or whether we enable our observations to, to wag the dog and then select action at the end of the loop.
So is it a perception action loop or is it an action perception loop?
and those enable a kind of seesaw where sometimes we want what we learn to change what we do
and other times we want what we do to change what we learn and having that kind of a fulcrum
or a pivot and again to connect it to the vertex popping in and out the analytical formalisms
inscribed on the screen of the FEP like the textbooks they're ambiguous whether we lead
with action and have inference follow or whether we lead with inference and and have action follow
or or lead with action have inference follow whichever one of the combinations there are
um because we and then that that um trade-off or runoff is broken by specific embodied cognitive
agents that that trade-off about the um the procedural primacy of perception or action
can't be broken generically right
it certainly makes for a lot of waste heat if you're not careful
it'd be exhausting a lot anyway
okay so um so i i see i i don't know if we can um talk about
intent um much with this formalism but we can take a very descriptive uh approach to it
and um go down here a little more uh actually before i don't want to get up ahead of myself
uh what i mean by that is
i whether we can put intent or not in this hierarchy um i i don't know i don't know if it matters a whole
lot but at least we can talk about it you know operationally and descriptively and and say just like
when you have a clock uh
you know that the clock is just there right like it is it if you don't have the clock you don't have the
memory and that's it right uh and likewise here if we don't have attention uh an attention control
no compartment we just cannot have we cannot play with all these qrfs uh that are non-commutative
at the same time so if there is no attention control system to begin with well we don't we
cannot talk about a system that has non-commutative qrfs meaning here one one presumably goes to memory
sectors the other one goes to environment sectors and so on uh so
so this is certainly a necessity of the fact that we have um different sectors of the boundary being
allocated to different purposes such as environmental observation and memory and so on um within the
environment it was it's it's worth remarking that here if you if you think deeply about first principles
and what it means to observe an entity um well you still come down to these differences that make a
difference sort of thing right which involves whenever you're looking at the environment to if you're going
to identify a system you need sort of a background that tells you that puts the system in context right
so that you can identify the system as something distinct i think this again is something that we
have talked about in previous uh discussions where the easiest picture here is something like the gauge
speed gauge in your car where p is the gauge itself it tells you the speed but it's meaningless without the
reference system right outside of outside of the thing that stays invariant right the context the background
that gauge moving means nothing to you okay so we come on come back to this idea of if we think of
information as differences that make a difference in terms of first principles this environment sector
that we saw earlier has to be further broken down into pointer and reference states again this is covered
uh in depth in the in chris's papers uh i'm thinking particularly of uh free energy for generating quantum systems
states um states um states um states um states um states um states um states um states um states um states um
likewise whenever we have so whenever your writing is happening to into a memory you need
you need to have that clock whenever you are deploying non-community gear reps you're going to
need uh attention and attention control compartment and we just described this operationally um
if you didn't have it then the agent would not be what it is it could not deploy those non-community
uh so marching on
uh we'll just end here with the krf alignment and the free energy principle just a few more words
uh this is possibly the most interesting picture in this in this uh presentation and just we can
recall here uh the possibilities for krf alignment and how free energy comes into play in this in this
um formalism so is that we call we call a the trivial interaction we call this a thermal
interaction and and then you have a bunch of possibilities right and depending on each
possibility you're you're going to see things as uh notes or as in the paper says uh non-local
hidden variables uh the last situation is uh what we call alignment when we have
krfs of the same size perfectly aligned okay so i can't quite recall i think this
this would be the situation where you have uh noiseless classical uh computation right you just have a and b just
interacting you know and uh it also also this is the situation where correct me if i'm wrong daniel this is
this is entanglement right asymptotically once all the girls are aligned you you have entangled and now we can tie back maybe
two gains earlier so these two these two slides conclude the discussion basically and then we can open it up
um so given this possibilities for how krfs can be aligned here is deployed by amd can be aligned uh and how
you know in each situation you're going to get noise or or whatever um then what does the free energy
principle say in this quantum setting well
uh
uh
minimizing variational free energy leads you to entanglement
okay so if
theorem here
if you are in the picture of
b here
and the qrfs are are aligned
uh a and b are going to be intact
now there is a tension between this
tendency towards alignment uh as the free energy principle
uh will carry you and uh
observe reality which is that we're not just a blob of entangled particles there is separability and
systems uh are at tension between maintaining separability
um and at the same time being correlated enough to the environment
so as to be able to predict predict it
and now we can maybe go into a more philosophical discussion on
the free energy principle um i should also say
in the last month i just like i talked earlier at your apps um
lenny saskin
whose recent paper that talks about your app
it led me into a rabbit hole of looking into
his recent work and he's talked a lot about complexity
uh i'm being very speculative here so i
if someone can call me out uh that would be good in the comments but
just to skim it through some of his papers i saw a
monograph in 2018 where he talks about complexity
and you know he puts forward the second law for complexity
in quantum systems and increased complexity and it is very reminiscent of what's going on here you have a
tension between
uh systems tending to entanglement
uh
and the other side of the free energy functional if you wish
where systems
increasing complexity
and that necessarily requires
that a and b are separate
so daniel do you have any comments at this point
yeah there's a lot to it i i like that you
showed the four possibilities uh in the image above and and said it was a one of the most interesting
figures i i agree and uh
uh
how to connect this
to the classical fep
and also how to
see the quantum fep
not as just uh a second story built on top of the classical fep
which would be kind of like a uh historical
chronological understanding
of the theoretical apparatus
but it's almost like the quantum fep was like
a basement we didn't know about
because it it gives a broader context and though it appeared
conceptually several years later in the timeline we understand
that doesn't give it a secondary
um status
the classical fep
to be kind of like
a special case
of this
um
actually more
generic
setting
there's just a lot i'm very yeah uncertain maybe
i can i can i i can wrap it up uh and then if dean or you want to say something um
we can continue with that but let me conclude and this is all i have to say for today
um
um
i i think i mean
i'm sure chris will
explain this more in incoming uh sessions and lectures but i think the main
key differences is in the emergence of of space
of space how it might emerge from something more fundamental maybe a tensor network or who knows
uh but that's that's the big
big difference right and and i suppose the quantum free energy principle





!
!
you start to wrap your head around and and i i foresee interest in in those uh discussions and
lectures that uh deal with the concept of emergent space because every time you try to and i've done
it i've done this myself i've been thinking about how you could apply these formalism to
better known pictures or compared it for instance with thermal equilibrium with relaxation with thermal
equilibrium and then you start thinking about okay what is the boundary and so on
it's far from obvious right because again you have to remind yourself that the definition is topological
so in that regard i think it might be worth um
talking about one of the questions that came up that i thought i thought was good
and and then i can call it a day on this end um
so this question and i think it was the first question asked since the last lecture
can you just read the full question and then read the full answer thank you
the question and the answer it's number 28 here can you guys see it should i zoom in a little bit
it's it's pretty small but but reading it will be good
okay so this question i think i've asked myself this question
too um maybe with different in a different way but basically you know it gets to the point of what i was
saying earlier right um that it would be nice to see how we can use this quantum free energy principle
formalism to recover maybe familiar settings such as relaxation to thermal equilibrium via the heat
equation but that's far from always how you do it if your definition is topological right
so the question says what happens when the agent becomes identical to the environment
uh when the model has been improved so much that it does not differ from the environment is this
a stadium impossible would it be through my amical equilibrium maximum entanglement okay so
clearly it's not thermodynamical equilibrium but i think what the person is asking if i maybe
if i'm understanding this correctly they're wondering okay so if the free energy principle
drives a and b towards entanglement then is it fair to say that they have that any distinction
between them has dissolved right that they have merged into the same thing um
and that has to do with this whole definition of philosophical debate of thingness that uh carl priston
you know is a proponent of right uh what what it means for two things to be separate okay so let's see
what chris said um
uh christian has pointed out that the limit of the classical fp the limit of perfect prediction
corresponds to generalizing currently between system and environment each sends messages
that the other can perfectly predict uh now however it's clear and i'm not reading anymore i'm
i'm making a quick remark here i'll continue in a second in the classical fp it's clear
that a and b even if they are you know in the perfect limit of the fp they remain different the
different entities right because you have that if you wish that extra
uh layers of differentiation coming from their spatial embedding right in the in the classical fp that
is clear that they haven't even if they are getting synchronized they have not lost their separate
identities you can always say well this is the one that was to the left and this is the one that was to
the right pun intended with earlier discussion right um you have that extra uh resource for for
separating them if you wish by virtue of the spatial embedding right the spatial embedding is giving you
this extra information that allows you to keep track of of of of a and b separately okay so i'll
continue this notion depends on the system and its environment being separated and has distinguished
somehow in classical formulations they are separated in ordinary 3d space i.e they occupy different
locations so they are different because they occupy different locations right but if you don't have that
geometrical background then then how you know that they're different right okay so i continue the
quantum formulation is background free meaning it assumes no space-time embedding system and environment
do not have different locations even though they have different sets of degrees of freedom in the
overall hilbert space here the fvp the limit of the fvp is maximum entanglement this does not mean that
the system and environment are identical they are and since they have different degrees of freedom
okay so this is just addresses the question i i just posed it means that the joint state is not separable
okay um into a system s and environment t their states are no longer conditionally independent
this is distinct from thermal equilibrium which means that they have the same temperature while remaining
separable and that their interaction can be characterized as the change of thermal fluctuations i.e noise
so i i guess this is a nice warm-up for things that are to come but i i do think that this whole
uh idea of emergent space is going to be um possibly you know one of one of the most important in the
course
and it's going to help stick out between the classic and quantum formulations for sure
dean what's your take on this what what i what i saw what i saw was that when you have that kind of
alignment that perfect alignment that is one that was one that was d in that diet in that
that diagram right that was one state of a of a complex state that included an a and a b and a c and
probably a whole bunch of other ways that i mean yeah right so that one state where you've got
this kind of entanglement isn't isn't into perpetuity like you don't get there and then stay there
and that's where i think the question of separability and complexity
it still works because just because you momentarily gotten to a place that we define
in here as d doesn't mean you stay there indefinitely you could be swapping around to b and c and a
in the next instant so that's that at least that holds the complexity piece up that that moment for
however long that moment is where x a and x b are aligned isn't permanent
so it's it's not predictable in that sense therefore it is complex i still don't know how we get though
that the closer we get to agreement the more complex things are
unless we're just talking about d in this array of a b c and d
that goes back to that quantum reference frame i think like i said i again maybe i'm interpreting
this wrong but when i message pass the reason why i have to like literally give it over to the other
person and let them have it i can't give have them copy what i'm doing is because there has to be
i guess that reinforces the separability piece of this as well the fact that i can't give them a copy
that i can only give them the information and then they've got to sort of unpack it in their own
in their own way of taking it off the the boundary but again i struggle with this i'm i'm guilty as
charged but i am i am what i'm trying to do is trying to come up with my own narrative so that what
chris is saying makes sense to me as opposed to make sense to the world which is what chris is trying to do
i'll try with another speculative fiction so um there's a screen between let's just say the uh
stage and the audience or whatever it's a holographic screen and on each side of the screen there's some
embodied object so that means that it must have um vault it's a volume-enclosing object because
points and lines and planes are only abstractions every real physical object encloses volume and now
a light is going to be coming from behind each object facing the screen and that's this kind of
uh cone that we're seeing from each side it's like the shadow cast by the object so if the object was
a sphere then it would be projecting down to a circle onto the screen if the shape were a cube it could be
projecting down and so where the light is positioned is the um perspective that that cognitive entity is
taking on its qrf those lights could move so now we have this situation where the two spotlights are moving
maybe the shapes are staying the same maybe they're changing too and it's like two search lights scanning
across this b oval and some sometimes they are perfectly locked i mean there could be a situation
where they're perfectly aligned or there could be situations where they're totally disjoint um
and each of those situations have different implications for what one entity sees when it looks at the screen
maybe like the shadow is the only part where you can see because the rest of it is too blinding or something like that
and so then if we're in case a here where um maybe b doesn't have a projection or maybe b's projections
totally somewhere else then a is in this solipsistic i'm the active agent interacting within an inert world
setting and d is like potentially the um the computer engineer's classical
dream or asymptote which is like all the data going through the usb cable is just being perfectly
noiselessly received and then we also get these um b and c cases but a is kind of like the inner world
d is like the perfect communication channel and then to connect it just to fristen's concept of generalized
synchrony as we've talked about many times generalized synchrony doesn't mean lockstep two agents could reduce
their uncertainty about each other not by doing the same thing at every time step but for example by turn taking
and i think that points the way to how we get reduction of variational free energy reduction of prediction error
surprise and so on without especially spatial temporal enmeshment but not necessarily even
informational identity in measurement because you could have two things that through their alignment
become actually differentiated and that could increase the mutual information between two metronomes
not just to have them going in the same direction but to have them going in opposite directions
the mutual information those two settings is going to be high so it's not the case that generalized
synchrony means that um things are becoming uh blurred we could actually also have integrated information
through increased articulation not just decreased and then life finds a way or cognition finds a way
on this trade-off frontier of in our pursuit of unitarity will we blur to unify or will we differentiate to
unify but those are the paths we have we don't have the um backwards ratchet
yeah yeah makes sense
any other ladder slides enter uh no that's it uh so chris made a few more remarks at the end about
uh language uh language here uh but he mentioned that he's gonna talk more about this in the coming
lecture so we'll just leave it out to him
yeah there could be some very powerful and interesting linguistic
opportunities for updating our speaking to reflect what we are learning here
um
i don't know what those necessarily are
whether it's a syntactic or a semantic thing or whether it's a narrative
thing but how to actually re-enter some of these formalisms into our
our focus understanding could just be immensely powerful and um we could have a lot of integrity
between the natural language way that potentially were already showing up for engagement and some of
these formalisms that get to first principles about interacting entities and boundary conditions and all of that
dean any penultimate thoughts
not really i i'm going to go back and listen to the
i'm going to listen to chris's comments again about this common cause
and the fine-tuning assumption and whether that's sort of a metaphorically a dialing in or what it
what he what he means exactly by the fine tuning in the in the context of this conversation today
what you just kind of said about are we dulling something here or are we sculpting something to make it more
fittable like i'm going to go and now and go back and listen to what he talks about in terms of fine tuning and maybe
update my priors around that so
and are any last uh thoughts or maybe scroll over to the um schedule of the course again just so we can close on that
yeah we're halfway through we just completed the third discussion section now so we've had three lectures and three
discussions it's all downhill from here um by the way this was the first midterm
you guys both did well um we're gonna head into four or like session four with these last three how
agents use multiple communication channels and that's going to get connected to the quantum fvp
how space time emerges from communication which is something that we've brought up a bunch it's been in
the background but but making that explicit is going to be exciting and then section six
and then section six i think is just going to be such a jumping off point because the scope
and the intensity of what is transpiring is extreme so connecting it to biology
which is to say life more fully and where we go in in 23 and beyond that's going to be awesome so any last words enter
uh no i just think of what you said um very i would i would say it's going to be uphill in in terms of
how interesting it's going to get
i feel in a good sense meaning that we're planning cool well i encourage people to uh check out the
course website and submit questions that they'd like to see addressed by chris also to register and join
these participatory discussions there'll be three more of them so if you want to join share your qrf
be part of the publication of all these works that will compile at the end and just get your exoskeleton
in the game with what is happening here it'd be really awesome to hear more voices and and to have
more on board okay thank you dean and andre till next time
is

## jWEcQVcgleM

All right. Hello, welcome everyone. It is Saturday, August 26th, 2023. And we're here in Physics
as Information Processing in the fourth discussion. Thank you everybody who's joining live or watching
live or watching in replay. This should be a really fun discussion as usual. So we're going
to have Ander provide some slides and some initial clarifying questions for Chris. And
then we're going to open it up for our guests to ask some questions and check in the live
chat, see what people are talking about. So Ander, to you for some slides and overview.
Okay. Thank you, Daniel. So last time we were starting to talk about multi-agent communication
and log protocols and all of that. So let's quickly go through the slides and sort of try
to recall the main concepts. So I guess from just to go back to session three for a second,
one takeaway was that when you have non-comitian sectors in a boundary, that's necessarily going
to require classical communication between them. So that is more or less the whole point of today,
how non-comitian sectors may communicate, have to communicate classically.
Another introduction in this last lecture was this new graphical notation, TQFT, if you wish to call
it that way, for any of these clock ticks. Okay. So let's recall the whole process of measuring a sector
environment and writing it into a memory environment. It can be simplified to this sort of tick that
connects two portions of the boundary. And, you know, everything we talk about log protocols will be
written in this graphical notation. So let's keep going a little bit. This slide is on the paper,
paper on sequential measurements from 2022. These are basically the formal mapping between QRFs and
topological quantum field theories. Okay. So we're more used to the picture here on the left-hand side of
this slide, right, with the QRF sectors. But, you know, pictorically speaking, this is at least how they map.
Okay. And then from then, we started talking about entanglement and classical communications
using this notation. And this is probably where my questions to Chris will start. So in section three,
we saw this idea of the FVP asymptotically being the principle of unitarity, AKA driving the system,
the joint system and Alice involved to entanglement, which in this graphical notation amounts to them
sort of completing a cycle here, where the QRFs are perfectly aligned so that the S sector of one
becomes the memory sector of the other and vice versa. Now, I actually, at this point already, I have a
question for Chris. Let me, I have it written down here. So,
so, so yes, two things here, Chris. Number one is in the log protocol picture, we do have
a distinguishing between a quantum channel and a classical channel. And if I understood that part
correctly, we said that passage of time or expenditure of energy, free energy, only corresponds to the
classical tick. So in this, you know, quantum entanglement picture where you don't quite have that,
is it fair to say that there's no such thing as a classical tick, no passage of time, no expenditure of
free energy? Is this a degenerate picture of the log protocol where the sectors were aligned the right
way and boom, you got rid of that classical thing and that's it. And secondly, I guess it's,
what does it mean for these two parts, quote unquote, uh, in the, from the paper to implement
the joint, uh, unitary process, the joint quantum process?
So, yeah, this is, this is not a, a lock protocol clearly because, uh, there, there is no classical,
uh, communication. And in, in fact, uh, Alice is not divided into, uh, multiple compartments here.
Uh, Alice is just implementing one, this, this single quantum process, Q, and, uh,
uh, because these sectors are, are because these, these QRFs are perfectly aligned, uh, we can think of,
uh, uh, uh, uh, remember, uh, from probably the second session, the, the, the, the
picture that you were very interested in under, uh, of the wick rotation,
uh, reversing time between Alice and Bob. So Alice's clock, in fact, uh, ticks in the opposite
direction from Bob's clock because both of their internal clocks are counting incoming bits, not
outgoing bits. So in this, in the right side of this picture, um, there, there is no overall time.
You can think of Alice's clock, uh, ticking forward one unit, and then Bob's clock ticking backward one unit
so that, uh, the, the, the information flow is completely time symmetric between Alice and Bob.
So we can think of, of both of these processes, uh, Q and Q prime as bidirectional in time.
That's, that's what it means to have a pure unitary process.
So no time asymmetry, that's what it is. Right. So there is no time asymmetry in this picture.
And once, when you introduce classical communication, of course, you have to have a time asymmetry.
Right. Because, uh, you have this, I mean, classicality is defined by this notion of irreversibility.
I see. Which is just the same as, as time asymmetry. And it's the irreversibility that burns energy. So the,
there has to be energy flow between Alice and Bob, uh, to, to drive
what is in, from a global point of view, and only an apparent asymmetry, but from the point of view of
Alice one and Alice two as components of Alice, uh, they're the ones who see the asymmetry.
So, uh, I guess, uh, just to tie back to the question of the weak rotation, once this joint, uh, process is implemented, I mean,
a naively one can say, is this cycle going clockwise or counterclockwise? And it's, is that going to define on
originally whenever these guys ended up being, uh, lined up where the weak sign was coming from?
Uh, yes. Whenever, whenever Alice sees information flowing in, Bob sees information flowing out. So
their, their, their, their wick rotations are going on opposite directions.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
Yeah. Uh, very good. And, uh,
yeah. The other, the other thing to, to think of in this picture, which it's, it's impossible to draw
all of these simultaneously is that if you, if you think of the FEP as fully aligning Alice and Bob,
Bob, then not only do these processes perfectly couple, but the, the area that's green, uh, in this right-hand
side kind of expands to fill the whole boundary so that in the, in the complete limit of, uh, Alice being
able to perfectly predict Bob and, and vice versa, then the whole boundary is green. Right? So that, uh,
there's no, this distinction between the, the, the S sector and the Y sector disappears.
Yes. Yes. That makes sense actually. And just to conclude with this slide, um, back in the session
two, we saw something about, uh, agents requiring a free choice of reference frame for their QRFs,
which amounts to being able to choose how to measure spin. Right? Right. So is part of this
entanglement picture, like, do they, do they just have to align the sectors or all also the way they
are measuring a spin on those sectors? Yes. They, they, they have to align the way they're measuring
the spin in those sectors that it's that lack of, remember the, the point that, uh, free choice of, of
local reference frame is required for separability. So as the systems become fully entangled,
then their local reference frames for each qubit, uh, become the same, become necessarily the same.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Okay. And then, uh, let's continue a little bit. Um, so in, in this, in this talk,
we're mainly interested, uh, uh, QRFs that do not commute, uh, now maybe, uh, you can, Chris, you can
tie this back to what you were saying earlier about if you're perfect, you're perfectly entangled, then
the, the, the sector is going to grow. Does it have anything to do with this? So if Q1 and Q2 here are
do commute, then how does, how do you reduce this, uh, to the picture on the right-hand side?
At a first glance, it looks like the picture on the left-hand side encompasses, uh, more sectors of the
boundary. Yeah. The, the point here is just that if, if we go back and, uh, rep, go back to the notation
where, uh, what we're, we're representing by this, this simplified notation is
a collection of, uh, cone-cone diagrams. And if the, if the, if these reference frames commute,
then one can take these two diagrams and, and find a, uh, think of it in the information inflow direction,
uh, there will always be a common, uh, co-cone over the two sets of input classifiers
if the two QRFs commute. So what that means is that I go from a diagram with two sets of, of classifiers,
each going up to some apex, to a, a diagram with the merged set of classifiers going up to some,
some farther up the hierarchy apex, uh, because they commute, I can find that, that sort of yet more
abstract cocoon that covers all of the classifiers in both QRFs. So that just collapses, uh,
these pairs of green segments down to one green segment. And I've drawn it the same size. I mean,
it would, it would make more sense graphically, I suppose, to draw it. Right. Each one is twice as big, or
each one is twice the area. But keeping to this kind of very topological representation where the area
isn't actually meaningful, uh,
it is convenient to draw it this way. Right. So, so in short, community, the fact that the commute means
that you will have that higher apex anyway, so you can bypass that, that first nest thing. Right. But
it comes to the number of degrees of freedom at the boundary, uh, they're still the same. And in terms of
area, yeah. Right. Yeah. We're not, we're not getting rid of any of the, the degrees of freedom
of the boundary that these, uh, QRFs are looking at. Uh, yeah. Very good. So the next slide, um,
I found a very interesting one. So these are no-go theorems, things that Alice and Bob cannot do. And
they measure, you know, it's mainly having to do well by measuring their own entangled amount, entropy,
and counting degrees of freedom. Um, I guess, uh, this has, uh, a very holographic feel to it.
And also maybe even a, a bit of a Godel theorem feel to it. So I don't know if Chris wants to comment on that.
Well, I'll just say that I, I think this does have a, a kind of, uh, uh, girdle undecidability feel to it.
And that there, there are a large number of questions that Alice can't answer, which, uh,
uh, certainly suggests a formulation in terms of incompleteness.
And, uh, this is, the connection to Godel's theorem is actually something that
Jim Glazebrook and I are currently working on.
Um, and hopefully we'll be able to make that connection more precise.
Jim Glazebrook
But the, the point of these statements is just to emphasize that, um,
a single observer that's uncompartmentalized
cannot, uh, determine anything about the entanglement entropy of the environment.
And this is, this is just the result that to, to measure entanglement, you have to have,
you have to employ a lock protocol. So you have to have classical communication.
Jim Glazebrook
And this raises, um, a fundamental issue in the theory, in that, that, uh, classical communication
is an exchange of information that cannot be represented as a single quantum process. You know, hence,
you have language like the collapse of the wave function or these various other, uh, you know,
decoherence, et cetera, et cetera, these various ways of trying to capture this idea that
something different and irreversible is happening as soon as you talk about classical communication.
So, uh,
Jim Glazebrook
The point is for, for Alice to measure anything about the entanglement entropy of Bob, she has to be sectored.
So her entanglement entropy, uh, has to decrease, but she can't know that. She can't actually know that she has
such a lot of the, uh, the, uh, the, uh, the, uh, the very limited points of view of particular observers.
Jim Glazebrook
And to, to, to talk about that, I think it's, it's very important to keep these various limitations in mind,
because there's a real distinction between what we can say, uh, effectively from this kind of God's eye point of view that we're adopting as theorists, where we say, uh, Alice has sectors that are communicating classically.
Jim Glazebrook
And, uh, what Alice, a system can do from her point of view, or, uh, her sectors can do from their points of view.
Jim Glazebrook
And this is a distinction that's often ignored, but it's important to keep it in mind.
Jim Glazebrook
Awesome.
Jim Glazebrook
Thanks for this line, Ender.
Jim Glazebrook
Yeah. So, we continue?
Jim Glazebrook

Jim Glazebrook
Um, so then, uh, I guess we get to the, the proper material of, of the last lecture, which is what happens when you have sectors that are not commutative, such as two portions of Alice involved, that have to communicate classically.
Jim Glazebrook
This, this is what requires the classical communication tick.
Jim Glazebrook
Um, let me see.
Jim Glazebrook
So, it would be fair to say, Chris, this only such a classical channel, which is the one shown in this slide requires free energy.
Jim Glazebrook
Is that right? Because there's some writing in memory involved in here.
Compared to the earlier slide where we had that closed loop in the entangled picture, there was no expenditure of energy. Is that correct?
Jim Glazebrook
Right. Right. So, so here the, the, the example that keep in mind here is, uh, the, exactly the process that we're, that we're executing right now.
Jim Glazebrook
Alice has two components.
Jim Glazebrook
Um, and, and we are currently in the position of those components.
Jim Glazebrook
And we're communicating classically with each other by, uh, employing a channel that's part of our shared environment.
Jim Glazebrook
So we're acting irreversibly on our shared environment.
And, uh, it's that irreversible action on the environment that has the free energy cost for each of us.
We actually have to make noise to communicate.
Jim Glazebrook
And, uh, you know, our, our laptops are actually consuming power.
Jim Glazebrook
All of this is classical.
I mean, it's this irreversible irreversibility that defines classicality.
Right.
And, uh, to continue with this question, I guess, uh, it will come in, in, in, in later slides,
but the other side of this log protocol is, is the quantum channel.
And my question to you, uh, Chris, is just like there is an expenditure of time and energy involved in this classical channel.
Is, is the quantum channel basically the opposite of that?
Meaning it's, it's, it's, it's action is instantaneous.
Entanglement, presumably.
And also, again, back to that loop picture of entangled cycle.
Uh, is there just no passage of time, no expenditure of energy?
Is, does that, any of that make sense?
Jim Glazebrook
Yeah. And I think it's worth actually going to the next slide here where we complete the loop and add the quantum channel.
Uh, is it, is it this one?
Yeah. Um, I think to, to understand what's going on here, I think it's very useful to think of it in terms of a, a Bell EPR experiment.
Mm-hmm.
Right? Where, uh, Bob, in this case, the shared environment includes the source that's creating the entangled pair,
which, uh, a one and a two observe simultaneously.
They interact simultaneously with, uh, their two detectors, which are interacting with the entangled pair.
So you can think of their, their two detectors are entangled.
And it's only later that they exchange this classical information.
And in a Bell EPR experiment, the, the time, the elapsed time between the source emitting the entangled pair
and the entangled pair interacting with, uh, the detectors deployed by A1 and A2
is, is, is designed as part of the experimental protocol to be less than the time that it is required for A1 and A2 to communicate classically.
Mm-hmm.
And notice that from the point of view of the entangled pair itself, no time has passed at all.
Right? It's, the entangled pair is, from a special relativity point of view, uh, moving along a light, light trajectory.
So there's, uh, there's, uh, there's no distance being traversed and no time is, is elapsing from the point of view of the entangled pair.
Uh, there's only an elapsed time and a traversed distance in the coordinates of the observers.
Mm-hmm.
So that's, this is why I characterize the, the assumption of classical communication as a stipulation.
And also why I characterized it as a fine tuning assumption, right? We're, we're assuming something
very specific about this communication channel. Uh, and we're assuming that the, the part of Bob, the part of the shared environment
that implements this classical communication channel behaves differently from the rest of the shared environment.
Uh, it behaves in a way that is, is classical. Uh, but the rest of the shared environment doesn't.
Right? The rest of the world is, is described using quantum theory. So we're, we're making this assumption that part of the shared environment is special.
And the, the, the specialness is that it, it behaves in this classical way.
Mm-hmm.
So let me, let me finish with this, uh, slide, I suppose, uh, to go back to my earlier question about that entangled loop being,
at least pictorically appears to be like a degenerate version of this log picture.
If in this log picture, I have the quantum channel on the right, uh, that hypothetical entanglement on the, to complete the cycle on the left was only broken when a one and a two
chose to write that into their memories at different sectors. Right. And then that eventually necessitated the, the classical communication between them.
Is that, is that, is that correct? Yeah. Um, you know, one could, one could always take the point of view of, uh, if you will, the observer who's outside the entire universe
and just sees the entire universe evolving unitarily.
Mm-hmm.
And in, in, from that point of view, there's no such thing as classical communication.
So the communication is classical only, only relative to this division between the observers.
And that division between the observers corresponds to their, their measurement procedures not commuting.
Mm-hmm.
So it, it, it corresponds to what we think of classically as Alice acting on her half of the entangled state, uh, determining what Bob will then see.
Again, that's that, all of that causal language is classical.
So, right.

Right.
Uh, and we're like at 1130, so halfway more or less, let's say a few words on, uh, the, the later slides, uh, scaling profits and all of that.
Um, I guess before we, before we start talking about this, which will take us like five to 10 minutes at most,
could you say a few words again about the, the fine tuning assumption?
So, uh, I still, I still can't quite understand what is meant here,
that this whole classical communication stuff requires fine tuning.
Okay.

I, I think, uh, a way to think about it is, um, to, to think about what it means to say that Alice and Bob are able to communicate classically.
Um, what we're saying is that Alice and Bob share some sort of language.
So when they exchange their data, we can think of their data as, as written in some binary code in a data table.
Um, you know, Alice says, uh, I, I set my instrument this way and I saw this spin.
I, I, I then set my instrument this other way and I, I made this observation.
So Alice's data table or, uh, a one's data table, um, is, is just a, a, a long table with two entries in each row.
Uh, one entry is how the detector was adjusted.
And the other entry is, is what the value of the spin was observed.
And Bob's data table looks the same.
And so they, they share this information or they share it with some third party.
They, they communicate it classically.
And there are two aspects to that classical communication.
One is that up to classical noise, um, their data tables don't change when they share them.
So, uh, they really are irreversibly recorded.
They're not evolving in time, uh, along with the rest of the universe.
The other aspect is that we have to assume that Alice and Bob mean the same thing, uh, by their, their notations in these data tables so that they can actually compare them, so that they can actually do this statistic.
And see if they violated Bell's inequality.
So what that means is we have to assume that they actually share a definition of up.
And that when they talk about changing the settings on their instruments, they're talking about changing those settings with respect to some shared definition of up.
And, you know, in a, in a, in a real experiment that shared definition of up is provided by the, the earth's gravitational field or something like that.
Mm-hmm.
Earth's magnetic field.
Some shared environmental variable.
So now it seems like, uh, we have a situation in which Alice, Alice one and Alice two should be entangled, right?
Because they share this reference frame that enables them to communicate classically.
But they can't be entangled if they're going to communicate classically.
So, so we make an assumption that in just this case, they share a reference frame, but they're not entangled.
They're able, they're able, they're able to communicate classically while sharing the reference frame.
Mm-hmm.
And we can sort of wave our hands and say, uh, they only share the reference frame up to some measurement resolution or something like that.
But despite the hand waving, we're making a very specific assumption that violates, uh, the fact that reference frame sharing, uh, induces entanglement.
So that's the fine tuning assumption.
We assume that the universe is such that in this very specific kind of case, uh, we can have reference frame sharing without entanglement.
Cool.
Let's, let's keep it here and just open it up a little bit.
Let's see if, um, Harris or Dean want to just give any thought or reflection on what we've gotten to so far.
Harris, if you want to, please.
Yes.
Uh, everything is very interesting.
Um, basically I was listening, uh, uh, with great, uh, let's say focus.
It reminded me of this, uh, uh, let's say elaboration on, on the previous talk, uh, that Chris, uh, gave two weeks ago.
It reminded me something that Michael Levitt said, uh, some time ago.
Uh, it is regarding this amazing ability of, uh, cognition to scale up.
So it's not only, uh, this, uh, understanding, let's say of the scattering of cognition, but also the scaling up of cognition.
Uh, and, uh, when, uh, when I tried to, uh, get inside in my head, uh, uh, actually that, uh, uh, as Chris said in, in, in one of his, uh, talks.
That is, um, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is, is,
Thank you. I'm glad that helped. Yeah, I think this is intimately related to the question of
what cognition is. Since if we have a purely quantum system, there really is a deep sense
in which nothing is happening because of the time symmetry. So to talk about cognition as something
that actually occurs, we have to think of it classically. Thank you. Also, if you allow me
another comment on that, basically one of the comments posted during your last talk in the chat
had to do with classical memories. And I was thinking about that and I came to the conclusion
that classical memories presupposes a gestation period. And when I think about it, that actually
makes sense. And it is true, let's say, for both physical and psychological reasons. So, for example,
a hard disk needs to write data on its magnetic surface and a human brain needs to consolidate
all those neural connections through synaptic plasticity, let's say. However, when we start
thinking about quantum information and quantum memories, let's say, we realize that such quantum
memories basically will be stored in qubits or in those entangled states that you describe. So they do not
necessarily have the same limitations. And of course, quantum information theories suggest, as I understand it,
that quantum memories can be created and accessed instantaneously without any form of gestation, let's say,
without any gestation period. And of course, this goes back and it has the potential, as I see, to revolutionize
computation with in terms of quantum computation, but also, and most importantly, communication and quantum cryptography,
even. And this is something that I am truly interested in. So, yeah, I just wanted to share also that.
Yeah, that's a very good point. And the flip side is
the issue of stability, which again gets to the notion of environmental decoherence, which is just the process of observation of the quantum state by some environment or some observer, some component of its environment.
And the reason this is a problem in practice is that we don't have complete control of all components of the environment.
Right? So, we have to use things like liquid helium to try to keep the environment at bay to prevent decoherence.
Because any other components of the environment interacting with our quantum memory will alter the state of the memory.
Yeah, that is a great answer.
And basically, the reason why I typed that question regarding super selection rules, and namely, I propose something called fuzzy super selection rules.
Basically, as I understand it, those super selection rules, the classical ones, let's say, they are based on symmetries or on all those conversation laws that actually limit the accessibility or the,
our capacity to measure, let's say, certain quantum properties, let's say, maybe it's parity, maybe it's angular momentum, maybe it's even charge.
But if we start thinking like these fuzzy super selection rules, in an effort to relax these restrictions by allowing some degree of coherence or interference between the different super selected sectors,
which can be quantified, let's say, and then we have to use the same parameters, which can be quantified, let's say, by a parameter called fuzziness.
I know that in other fields, like in my field, that is fuzzy cognitive mapping, the production of fuzziness from us, as it was propounded by Professor Lotfi Zadek,
it actually helped a lot of our models to become more accurate, let's say.
So this is what I am proposing, maybe, of course, I don't expect it to revolutionize quantum information, but maybe it can help us understand a bit better what is going on in the role of this,
the coherence that comes out of the environment.
So if we incorporate it as a parameter of fuzziness, a priori, then maybe we can understand and even what we are dealing with.
Yeah. I would refer you to the paper by Bartlett, who are the other, there are two other co-authors.
In 2007, a lovely review of quantum reference frames in Reviews of Modern Physics.
And a point that they make that I think is relevant here is that a super selection rule can always be interpreted.
Let me see if I, if I, I'm not sure I'll be able to completely reproduce their argument.
But they show that a super selection rule can always be interpreted as the absence of a reference frame or the lack of a reference frame.
And one of the examples that they give is charge conservation, that we never see super positions of different electric charges.
And their point is, we never see this because we have no way of measuring it.
We have no reference frame that we could use that would allow us to see a state of superposed charges.
And effectively what they're saying is our reference frames are all made of matter that is composed of stuff that has well-defined electric charges.
So we can't, we can't, we can't see things that are super positions of charge.
And it's very difficult, you know, for us to see things that are super positions of position.
So this question of what is a super selection rule, why do we have these rules, at least in their reasoning, boils down to the question of why do we have some reference frames or some measurement capabilities and not others?
What is it about us that limits in some fundamental way our ability to make measurements?
And I suspect that when you talk about fuzziness, which is a sense of classical uncertainty, that you may be sort of pointing in that direction.
But I think, I think it would be worth looking at that paper and, which is, which is largely written in English, right?
The, the, the formalism is, uh, kept in the background.
So it's a, it's a very nice paper.
Thank you.
We'll check it out for sure.
Thank you.
Um, Andrew, maybe mute a little bit.
Dean on the mountaintop.
What can you throw down on us?
I don't have anything, anything super special to throw down.
I have a, I have a question though.
And because I am very comfortable in that fuzzy space.
I kind of see relationships as, uh, and their, and their lack of definability as a feature.
So here's my, here's kind of my question.
Um, so you talked about a minimum sort of two different memories to encode something in time.
And I think it's, it was one of the slides just after the one that's up here right now.
Um, which sounds to me like somewhere processing capacity.
It sounds like we are kind of stepping back and trying to look at this instantaneous thing.
Um, which sounds to me like, uh, from the relative position of even the things that are classical can be seen as all quantum.
So that when you mentioned that earlier, Chris, that helped me quite a bit, which then manifests itself as a classical ability to process somewhere.
I, I, I, I spent a lot of my career self labeling as a wayfinder.
So not capacity realization relationship.
Just as a relationship, it, it means that wayfinding is not just an orienting or a processing where I am.
And being gripped by the sort of the thing that I'm enveloped by it's also the channel, the screen, the bound, the divide, the gap, the unentangled potentiator.
It's the thing upon which traction can exist as being a gripper as well.
So if it's, I was already hung up on, I wanted to go back like Columbo in that old seventies TV show and talk about Z spin, because I think Z spin is an energy way of describing.
But I honestly think when I went back and watched the, your presentation a couple of times, I'm starting to get a sense that Z spin is also a relationship.
It's that affordance that allows us to be able to see up and down, but I'm just curious, Chris, are we really talking about processing somewhere in the classical sense?
But because we have these two ways of encoding different memories, we're also talking about somewhere processing just that, that state that allows for that.
That's my, my question.
Is that what we're really getting?
Are we, are we trying to open that up, that possibility up?
Yeah, I think that's a nice way to think about it.
I think we're trying to, at some deep level, come up with a way of describing
what it means to be an agent, and I'll say in our case, a self-conscious agent, with a sense of time that's embedded in an environment that we depend on to store memories for us.
And what I mean by that is that we depend on the environment to change very slowly, at least from our point of view, so that we can keep some sense of our orientation within the environment.
Right?
Right?
We're using everything we see as a memory that allows us to keep ourselves fixed, which allows
us to have a point of view.
So we're using the entire visible environment as, if you will, a reference frame against which we can see small changes.
But if the environment was constantly and rapidly changing, we wouldn't be able to do that, and we wouldn't be able to use it as a memory, and so we would have no point of view.
So, in a sense, I think what we're talking about here is the miracle of having a point of view that gives us a sense of time.
That's very philosophical.
It's amazing.
And I wonder if, along with the perspectival visual advancements, which you and Shannon Dobson have explored in the math-art settings, you're almost bringing that kind of a transformative re-understanding or re-quantum reference framing into a temporal setting, where it's not just a static spatial parallax
that we are aesthetically and formally re-understanding, but also a temporal one, which in an agent environment system necessitates these questions of communication, which in the quantum information formalism are approached topologically, rather than geometrically, which is what we needed for the kind of vanishing point type math-art in the spatial set.
Well, I think they're approached geometrically eventually.
And that's really what the session in September will be about.
It's how to start with this very topological picture, where we're only talking about interactions, in a sense, interactions in time, but outside of space, and layer a spatial structure on top of that.
And this is...
And this is...
I think this is particularly interesting in this active inference context, because it immediately raises biological questions about the ability of different organisms to layer space on their experience, and hence locate themselves, if you will, within some sort of
of perceived world.
And then, of perceived world.
Awesome.
Dean, and then back to Andra for the last minutes.
Okay, unmute Dean, and then please continue.
Sorry.
So, Chris, is it from the pure neophyte perspective that I have, is it okay to say that it's not just a flipping of position of words, that somewhere processing that availability, and processing somewhere in the classical sense, where am I?
It's our ability to diffuse those, as you mentioned, we can slow down, we can stabilize, we can see that relationship.
Or, is it about spin?
I think the former, right?
Spin is a very convenient abstraction for talking about binary encoding.
And we have this felt sense of spin, but the sense, its use in physics is very much an abstraction.
I mean, the difference between a proton and neutron is a spin variable.
So, is this is kind of ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
quantum Darwinism so towards the end the slides um appear to start pivoting towards the next
subject which is space and time and here in particular we see the earlier slide uh showcasing
the log protocol where you can you can you can notice that half of it has been cut
and has been moved to the future so here we don't have uh two sectors of Alice communicating
but rather Alice communicating with its future still you have the classical and the quantum
channel now one question that I brought up I remember and uh in the lecture and maybe we can
expand on a little more was exactly what is the difference between this quantum and the classical
channel part um something I heard Chris say is that it is crucial for the quantum channel to be
coherent so this is going to be some sort of unitary scattering evolution that is
completely independent of everything else going on uh is that correct or or should be in theory
and yes yeah and and and I suppose just like earlier the classical the classical channel is
is the part that takes time and free energy expenditure now uh my question uh to you Chris is on not not
not the not the channels in the middle but the ticks on either side of the boundaries that have been
broken down and separated in terms of an external time what's what's up with those ticks from one
sector to the other of the boundary so in q1 for example the law of the lower crf sector that's that
amount to a state was prepared the upper one was I made a memory record of that state is that that's
what it is right yeah okay so uh in in the lower sector we both had a preparation and a measurement
and a measurement was recorded classically here that's all there is yeah so so preparation and measurement are
are effectively the same process um and you can think of uh in a1 of t what a1 is doing is uh uh
from from from an operational point of view uh she's preparing an instrument
and turning it on she's she's creating an initial state
and she's simultaneously encoding a memory someplace
mm-hmm uh in her head or or on a piece of paper of what those preparation conditions were
because it's only with respect to the memory of what the preparation conditions were that the later
measurement is meaningful mm-hmm so um to let's let's go back to just preparing
a spin uh right and at t she may uh set the angle of some polarization filter that defines a propagating
beam of photons and at at t plus delta t she measures something about what those photons are doing
but the measurement is only meaningful with respect to her memory of what the polarization setting that prepared the photons was
so the uh effectively what's going on in the quantum channel is an experiment
and it's it's the the classical information that's preserved in this classical channel that makes the experiment meaningful or interpretable or informative
yeah for sure yeah it makes perfect sense and and preparation and measurement this ties back to an earlier question we had
both happen simultaneously at the same like um uh degree of freedom at the boundary or do we have preparation at the lower bounds
at the top of one
only when you
yeah one one can one can think of that operator mi
mi if you remember the the decomposition of the hamiltonian as as preparing or measuring that it's just a matter of interpretation uh
uh you know effectively is it acting to the left or acting to the right
yeah okay yeah yeah yeah and then um before we get to quantum matter correction as uh more of a spatial
uh so instead of a time thing i i wanted to ask about yet another question between this quantum
and the classic so the quantum channels does involve some sort of time evolution you know it's this unitary
you know portion that is uh sorry this portion that is evolving unitarily with no interference from the outside
uh however as you said for this experiment to make sense you need to have a classical memory
of how that experiment most prepared so that's that means that that classical guy on top
is uh static there's no time for any uh well this actually gets back to the talk by suskin that
we were talking about before we started here uh that you you kindly referred me to uh
uh part of part of part of this classical memory is uh memory for what counts as a classical clock
and we'll we'll actually get to this again in the september session but if you if you think again about
doing an experiment uh in which a state is prepared and then it's measured uh this quantum process
is a process through time with respect to some uh classical clock that actually provides the time
coordinate for the experiment so this this classical clock is some external reference frame
that that that a1 here in this notation is is using as part of her classical memory
right again uh it's a memory because it's something that's assumed not to change
uh and and this is this will be kind of the heart of the discussion in september that
that that time and memory and object persistence are all different names for the same assumption that we
make about the world
thank you chris thank you i i am going to have to disappear so um only for now though
yeah only for now i i will i will nonetheless persist someplace thank you chris so much chris okay awesome
see you thanks very much well measure you later okay um enter if you wanted to drop any other cues or clues or
uh bring us a little bit of a preparation for where we're going to be heading in lecture five that would be pretty cool
uh sure so i mean i i'm a little aware of what's coming in lecture five um
until uh uh space and time and how space may be sorry time may be a little more fundamental than space for
reasons that chris will show um has a lot to do with the notion of how you define a clock
i'm seeing we need to think hard about what what what are the very minimum ingredients for you to talk
out the existence of a clock uh these are deep fundamental almost philosophical questions that are
overlooked and the good news and that's the saskin talk that chris and i were referring talk
referring to is that other people especially in the high energy community are also looking into these
questions which is very reassuring so i'm talking about at wheaton saskin uh harlow etc they are
there is a recent talk on youtube uh where they talk about what does it mean for something to be a
clock you know how does how long does the clock last and and then chris will also talk about space
and and the punchline of it will be that um there's obviously a physics approach to emergent space
time which is very very technical and and so on but from what i understood i mean i i have yet to see
the talk my first my first myself first um is that there is a parallel biological approach as to how we learn
how we learn how to understand space time so from uh developmental psychology point of view um
infants and i suppose all kinds of animals are not born uh fully equipped to perceive space time hence
the necessity of things like play and so on so they can find correlations between uh motor inputs and
visual inputs right and eventually things like the mirror test which is non-trivial no no no no no
human born is born uh passing the mirror test already so that implies that at least biologically
it is non-trivial and it takes a few steps until you get to have that sort of
space spatial awareness right now the interesting part of this for me personally is what the what
the physics side of it is and uh i i'm i'm no expert by any means but i think the gist of it might
might have to do something with quantum error correction uh ads cft and so on um there was a
bit of a teaser about quantum error correction here in these slides uh but yeah i mean that's that's
about all i can say but very looking forward to the biology also yeah cool harris any last
thoughts or anything you want to point towards basically i would like to thank everyone for
inviting me i really enjoyed it the whole uh live stream i hope we have made some progress and uh
uh looking forward to uh the next uh live streams uh number five and number six so uh that's about it
thank you everyone thank you anything else under that's it awesome well i encourage everyone to go to the
syllabus page look ahead look back pre-gest digest re-gest ask questions and let's make progress as you
exhort harris so see y'all till next time
is

## _NfqCpsZPeM

Hello and welcome everyone. It's September 30th, 2023, and we are in Physics as Information
Processing. Discussion five should be a fun discussion on a great fifth lecture. So,
Ander, if you'd like to give some opening remarks, and then also anyone else, whether it's your
first time joining a discussion or not, it would be great to hear your remarks on lecture five,
or just where you're coming at it today. So, first though, Ander.
Sure. Hello, Daniel. So, I may as well start off by sharing the slides, right? What do you think?
Sure. So, just before, as a warm-up, let's review some of the things that Chris mentioned last time.
So, near the beginning, the main thing was this distinction between reductionist and scale-free
theories. Obviously, one very salient feature of the free energy literature is that it falls under
scale-free theories. These are theories where there is no preferred scale of energy or distance.
reductionist theories are based on such a scale existing, right? You want to break the pieces
into the fundamental building blocks of the Lagos. You know, people think of usually high energy or
particle physics as the archetype of this thing. Whereas in scale-free theories, there is no such thing,
and we should have the same skeletons or the same framework at different scales.
This is going to be very important. Chris, correct me if I'm wrong, but especially for the coming lecture
where we talk about biology, Chris himself made a few remarks on how the renormalization group flow,
aka the process of going from smaller to higher scale may be trivial in biology. That is to say
that there is a self-similarity, okay? So, some features of biology should remain invariant at
different scales. That is, what cells are to a body, different individuals of a species might be to an
ecosystem, that sort of idea. So, after talking about scale, and perhaps when we get to the question
parts, I guess this is the one thing that I would like Chris to explain a little more, more precisely
what these diagrams mean. I have a rough idea, but it would be nice to hear him talk about that again.
Anyways, in the second half, basically, we started asking, as is the theme in this course so far,
from first principles, what do you need to talk about space and time? And there was some theorizing that
time might be more fundamental. That is, the things that you need to implement a clock. We're thinking
about what are the most basic constituents to implement a clock. And those may be even more basic
than the things you need to implement QRFs or perception of space. After all, it seems like you need some
spatial extension to perceive the space in the first place. I can't remember if it was somebody who was
tuning in for the lecture, or a question afterwards, or something like that. But I think this remark gets
to a very deep point. Somebody, I recall, mentioned that some organisms, it might have been Chris himself,
I can't remember really, that there are organisms, you may know the name, Daniel, that are so tiny,
that if they try to implement a gradient to try to chase their food or whatever, they're so small that
they can't even perceive the gradient. In any attempt at implementing such perception, they're going to feel
the same amount of concentration in all directions. So they're basically not large enough to perceive space.
However, interestingly so, they can perceive time. I don't know how this ties to the remarks
that Chris made about space being more fundamental, I suppose. Chris was getting at the point that you
need fewer parts to perceive space. And the fact that such small organisms can perceive time, but not
space, I guess, is further empirical evidence for this thesis. And...
And actually, Andrew, if I can... Yes, please. I may not botch the explanation.
Yeah, I proposed earlier that time is actually more fundamental than space, that one has to have time
to be able to see space. So that's further on in these slides, that issue is discussed.
Yeah. So do you want to say something about that, Chris?
Well, this is the right slide that...
Yeah, one just needs a memory, really, to have a clock, an external clock. I mean, to have an internal clock,
when just one... One also has to have a memory to have an internal clock. But if you have a memory,
a memory to have an internal clock, and there's some kind of activity that's
periodic in the environment, then you have a clock, an external clock. But you don't need object
identity to have a clock. And that's what distinguishes it from space. You have to have object identity,
a clock, or in other words, motion, the ability to perceive motion to perceive space.
Right.
Yeah, any periodic behavior is effectively a clock.
Yeah.
Whereas, you know, for space, we need object persistence, which...
Two comments that we've made were that object persistence is the... Or rather, Chris made,
is the defining feature of classicality. You said that last time, is that right, Chris? And also,
that object persistence is precisely the notion of thickness, the way Friston would put it.
Yeah. Yeah. Object persistence is definitely a classical notion.
And it does seem to be the place where classicality enters quantum theory, as far as I can tell,
is with this notion of object persistence. That that's the most fundamental place that it enters.
So how does that definition of... Or rather, relationship between classicality and quantumness
consciousness being object persistence, how does it compare with other accounts coming from QDAR and
decoherence and all of that?
Dr. Well, say quantum Darwinism is a good example. Quantum Darwinism assumes object persistence,
right? It assumes that there is some persistent thing that interacts over time with the environment
of... According to some interaction that has fixed eigenvalues. So...
So... Quantum Darwinism already assumes object persistence,
and it also assumes classical communication, as we discussed a couple of times ago, and that it's a theory
that is about the ability of multiple observers to agree about the state of some other object.
Mm-hmm.
Dr. Which, for them to agree about that object, not only does the object need to persist,
the various observers need to have the same description of that object,
or the same name for that object, or the same way of identifying that object. So yeah, quantum Darwinism
actually assumes a lot of classical features.
The basic theory of environmental decoherence is, in effect, a single observer theory,
so it doesn't have to assume classical communication, but it does assume object persistence.
Dr. Which, obviously, if you're going to talk about empirical science, you have to, right? You have to
assume that your detector is a thing that persists through time, or you can't do an experiment. And more
importantly than that, you have to assume that you're a thing that persists through time.
So... So we need these classical notions to talk about doing science.
Dr. Richard A.
I mean, I'm not the first person to point that out, of course. I mean, Bohr pointed that out in 1928,
in his paper in Science, where he summarizes quantum theory. So it's a very, very old idea.
Dr. Right. And I guess, right away, I have a question that I suspect I may have asked before,
but maybe we can revisit it from the perspective of today's discussion, which is... And maybe I should pull
the slide. This is actually from session four. So if we're talking about differences between...
Dr. Richard A. Well, what the defining feature of classicality is, to me, that bears the question of...
Dr. Richard A. Here, right? This TQFT diagrammatic notation for the classical and the quantum channels.
So if we're talking about object persistence as the defining feature of classicality,
and this is the cartoon picture of what goes on an EPR experiment,
Chris, could you say maybe a few words about how that classical... Like how the symmetry is broken
between the quantum and classical channels? I suspect it might have been mentioned that these are
symmetrical, but yet one of the two has to be a quantum and the other one is a classical channel.
The quantum channel mediates some sort of unitary evolution. Is that correct? Whereas the classical
channel is like an information redundancy reservoir, which maybe has to do something with object
persistence, but I'm very much speculating at this point. So I'm not sure if Chris, you have any comments?
Dr. Richard A. Yeah. Well, an easy way to think about this, I think, is to actually think about
a Bell EPR experiment where you have two observers that are separated in space. So, you know,
you have to assume here, though, to talk about Bell EPR, you have to assume the notion of space
space to have a laboratory reference frame in which the two observers are spatially separated.
And in that situation, then the two observers both independently collect data for some amount of time
on multiple replicates of some quantum state that's produced by a source. So you have pairs of photons or pairs
of electrons or pairs of whatever. And at some point, the data collection stops. And at that point, the observers
have to compare their results. So it's the comparison step that requires a classical channel.
And if you think about how this happens in practice, it happens via a file sent over to the internet,
a paper that, or a piece of paper on which the data are written that's handed by one of the experimenters to
the other experimenter. Or it happens by the experimenters talking to each other. So one experimenter encodes a
bunch of information in the ambient air, and the other experimenter hears it. Or it can be communicated by
light signals, right? But it's always communicated by some medium. And that's what defines classical
communication. It's communication via a medium that persists through time in the observer's reference frame.
And the minimum time of the persistence of that medium is given by the speed of light. So if the observers are
a foot apart and they're communicating by a light signal, then it may only last a nanosecond.
But if they're talking to each other, you know, it lasts several seconds. And if they exchange a piece of
paper, then that piece of paper may last for years in a lab notebook someplace. So
there's always the question of persistence over time
that is deeply bound up with this notion of classicality as a process that takes time.
information has to flow, has to be encoded in a medium and then read from that medium
in some finite amount of time.
And in a sense, we're assuming something like that in the quantum description.
So when we think of this boundary, we think of this boundary via which the A and B,
the physical components interact, if we think of that boundary as a qubit array,
then each of those qubits persist through time. And that's what allows them to
to encode classical information. So encode observational outcomes that are repeated in time.
That's what allows them to serve as a memory, to encode information in a way that's thermodynamically
irreversible. And if you think of the boundary in that way as a qubit array,
then it has a certain thickness in time. It's two Planck times thick.
The Planck time is 10 to the minus 43 seconds. So it's unmeasurably small. But
the operation of interacting with a qubit is a physical interaction that,
from a relativistic point of view, has to take this minimal time.
So we're... It's in a sense, persistence for times that are significantly longer than the Planck time,
that is the marker of classicality here.
But even these Planck times, even persistence over the Planck time,
is a necessary ingredient for talking about communication, even quantum communication.
So it's a very, very deep concept with a very long philosophical history, going back to, you know,
the ship of Theseus and all that. People have been wondering about,
what does it mean to say that something persists through time?
Okay. Does anyone want to make a comment on that or bring in a new question?
Please feel free to if you haven't brought up anything yet.
Sure. I can speak more. I mean, if you don't mind.
I also recall, and Chris, correct me if I'm wrong.
We said that related to what you just said,
that clock tick is always tantamount to one of these classical channels.
Is that correct? Did I remember that correctly?
Chris?
Yeah. An internal clock tick corresponds to an irreversible right on the boundary.
So one can then ask, what does it mean to say that that's irreversible?
Chris?
Chris What it means is it took some energy to do it.
And if you go back to read that bit again,
there's at least a reasonably high probability that it still
is in the same state that you wrote it in.
Chris Right.
Chris And clearly that probability is going to degrade through time,
because that action is on the boundary.
So whatever you've written, whatever bits that you've written are now exposed to the environment.
So if Alice writes them, they're now exposed to Bob and to Bob's dynamics.
Chris So as time goes on by your internal clock or any external clock,
the probability of that memory being the same,
when you go back to read it, slowly decreases, or maybe it decreases fast.
Chris And, you know, we know that from our own case, our own memories degrade through time.
Because the physical world is interacting with our brains in ways that we don't control.
Chris And, you know, killing neurons or changing their activity or whatever.
So whenever we talk about memory, it's always with this caveat that the memory is exposed to the
environment, and it's not guaranteed to be the same. It's only kind of
Chris Grace of the environment being reasonably benign that any of us had memories at all.
!

Carlos And so this thermodynamic cost to classical information sharing or writing,
is in a sense, would it be fair to say that, in a sense, the price you have to pay to protect against
decoherence or, you know, entangling this sector with the rest of the environment,
just to preserve its identity? Would that be fair to say?
Robert R. Yeah, I mean, you can think of decoherence as a good thing,
or you can think of decoherence as a bad thing, right? If you're trying to preserve
a quantum state, then it's a bad thing. You have to spend energy to prevent decoherence by,
you know, cooling everything down to milli-kelvins.
Chris Grace But if you're interested in preserving
classical data, then decoherence is a good thing, because it prevents your classical data from being
completely rearranged by becoming entangled with the environment. So, I mean, think about trying to
write classical memories using the states of atoms in the middle of the sun, and the temperature is so high
that you can't do anything. You can't rearrange the atoms in any way and expect them to stay put.
So, there you're in effectively a completely quantum environment,
just because of the high temperature. So, it's a plasma.
Robert R. Yeah, and then just one final question that popped to my mind as you say this,
and I can certainly leave it here for everyone else. So, if we're trying to protect against the
random loss, against the loss of information, I suppose it really begs the question of
what is the source of this noise that can perturb the bits in the boundary?
Robert R. Yeah, thank you,
picture of information uh processing is coming from the QRS failing to be aligned um then you
know you hear about notions of quantum noise versus thermal noise uh Chris do you have any
comments on all of that um yeah I think an important thing here
let me back up
yeah the notion of noise like so many other notions is very often uh treated as objective as observer
independent and so when we're doing classical physics we think of noise as just you know there's
there's some objective randomness in the universe and we call that noise so in this picture because
we're working with just a bipartite decomposition right we just have Alice and Bob and that's it
that's the entire universe um there's there's no external environment here to impose any sort of
noise but since we only have two systems uh Alice and Bob equals everything else you know not Alice
then uh if we talk about Bob being a noisy environment that's clearly relative to this boundary we've
drawn between Alice and Bob so so noise isn't observer independent what's what's noise for Alice
it's just Bob's dynamics right so so uh if if you think about where these systems come from you've got some
universe that uh is in some pure state because it's an isolated system and uh that state is evolving
evolving through time which means it's just undergoing phase rotation so there's no noise in that system
right it's perfectly unitary etc etc as soon as you draw a boundary then there's information that the system on
one side of the boundary doesn't have about the system on the other side so uh the individual systems are uh

uh
their states can now be considered conditionally independent i mean you can you can come up with a
description in which their states are conditionally independent and that just means that what the other
side is doing uh looks like noise unless uh Alice say can come up with a way of analyzing the data that she sees on
the data that she sees on her boundary uh in a way that makes it make sense right and then it's then it's then
it's then it's we say it's information for Alice but what does that mean it just means it's behavior on her
boundary that she's smart enough to assign some kind of semantics to oh and if she's not smart enough to do that
then it's just noise so as soon as you make the as soon as you make the notion of noise observer dependent it it turns
into something that makes a lot more sense
and and just to really finish this uh i guess it's been it's been a couple months at least but i think it was back in july that we
we talked about um the distinction between what you're saying which is uh things having the appearance of noise just because you
you you have finite resources so you cannot make sense of bob's internal dynamics as opposed to um in one of in that cartoon of the
of the of the four possibilities for curf alignments right some of them were uh thermal in the sense that
one one side was was acting on a on a boundary qubit while the other one was not so then it truly looks
like like noise to the other side um does that does that get to the bottom of the distinction between quantum and thermal noise at all
Chris or am i misunderstanding things here yeah it yeah it turns the distinction into a essentially a relative
a relative a q a qrf relative distinction right right if if uh you know uh i mean languages provide a good
example i mean think of going to someplace where you don't understand the language at all like you know
hapa new guinea or something like that i certainly wouldn't understand the language uh that that language
language in that the behavior is speaking that language includes lots of information for those people
and it codes no information at all for me so it looks like noise to me i can't make sense of it but it's not
noise from their point of view um and now let's think about this need to have a thermodynamic sector if you're a
an organism that has to burn energy or any system that has to burn energy to to to act irreversibly on your
environment uh that thermodynamic sector looks to you like noise right it's it's just temperature heat
and uh you use that heat to drive your processing and if you're a really good heat engine then you can use
it pretty efficiently and get you know a lot of bang for the buck in terms of information processing if
you're a really inefficient heat engine then um maybe it you have to use almost your entire environment as
environment as heat to do any little bit of information processing at all so that's not a statement about
the universe as a whole that's the statement about you and your information processing capabilities and your
and your thermal your heat processing capabilities you know how how good is your carno cycle
determines uh the amount of information processing you can do thank you chris um ian
hi uh yeah thank you everyone for putting on this series it's the first time i've joined the discussion
sessions and um yeah so it's a question about in one of the slides there was um a green rectangle and we
were talking about that being a or chris was talking about that being a kind of um thinking of that as a
bacterium um and it got me wondering whether i think how how else i could get an intuitive grasp of this
kind of space-time emerging um and so what i was thinking is you know it appears like to us humans it appears like
the universe is expanding um through time and i was just trying to think you know a bacterium
a bacterium sing if you placed a single bacterium on a petri dish um at time zero and proven something
more simple you know let's say deep sea hydrothermal vent where life was supposed to are you know these
um agents were supposed to have maybe begun existing as um phospholipid type molecules so i was just
wondering you know if i was if i was a phospholipid within that bacterial membrane
um just a single one single phospholipid and all i can measure is the existence of
phospholipidness or not phospholipidness um or and selfness and not selfness then
you know i was just trying to imagine as this bacteria divides after 20 minutes let's say the
average sort of bacterial division time then before that happened all i could tell was i was surrounded
by phospholipidness so there was no real distinction in my environment but once um the bacteria is divided
into two then i'm sitting and i'm observing some phospholipidness which isn't in my sort of
what i call my own boundary um so then i've kind of created space space and time is starting to appear
um even though the petri dish hasn't changed in size or my you know the universe hasn't really changed
but it's the um phospholipids the orientation of the phospholipids so yeah i kind of i was just trying
to liken it if this is a scale invariant principle how can we liken it to how other things might
experience experience space and time emerging that's where i was coming from am i kind of totally barking
up the wrong tree with that or is there is that no i i think that's i think that's a really good
question and i i think you are you are constructing uh a very good kind of thought experiment and it's it's
this sort of question that i'm really going to try to address in october of how how can we think about
the fep as a scale theory uh in practice you know as as applying at the level of of macromolecules as you
were just describing you know how do we come up with a description of what a phospholipid say can actually
measure uh what actually affects its state and uh you know to what extent does it have
a self-representation uh my guess is that a phospholipid probably doesn't but the bacterium seems to
have at least some degree of self-representation i mean it has uh an immune system it can feel stress
so it's starting to seem like uh an organism that's not that different from us
uh but even even something like e coli
it can cert it certainly behaves in what we call space but it's at least not clear to me that it has
a representation of space uh although it it there are processes in the e coli that do distinguish
say uh the two ends of the e coli i mean even if you think of the chemotaxis pathway
uh the two ends of that pathway are quite distinct functionally so perhaps e coli has
a one-dimensional representation of space it can tell its anterior end from its posterior end but
perhaps it doesn't have any representation of what we would call left and right or up and down
so um but if you look at multicellular organisms
uh even something like say hydra
uh is a spatially quite sophisticated kind of thing i mean it's not bilateral it's cylindrically symmetrical
uh but it's got a very large distinction between anterior and posterior and it seems to know quite a bit
uh at least i understand from people who work on hydra about um its own body the state of its own body
and so i think these are are exactly the same kinds of questions that we should be asking and they also
apply at the scale that's much larger than us so if we think about uh a human society for example as an agent
what can that agent measure and what can that agent represent and
uh how complex can that agent's cognition be and i
i think those questions are all essentially open
so yeah it's a great thought experiment i think it addresses exactly the questions that we're interested in addressing here
thank you chris harris and then anyone else with a raised hand
yes thank you once again for allowing me to be here with all of you
interesting as always so i have a question that is related to
this notion of of the dual aspect of information basically that
the meaning of formation is not just a matter of interpretation
but rather it is rooted in rooted in the physical properties of the system under investigation
so basically that as i understand it means translates that the meaning of information
is not separate from the physical properties of the system under investigation
but it is rather an intrinsic part of it
so uh i i am also uh familiar um with this uh uh notion of uh uh from from the theory of computation
called the embrayments man's limit that is a limit on the maximum rate of computation that can be
achieved let's say in a self-contained system uh within the material universe
are written on the space so my question is how can we uh uh pass let's say
uh the though that that sort of uh uh computational uh limit in terms of uh information processing
I am not sure
that we can talk about a
I think it's very difficult to talk about
the classical information processing capability
of the universe as a whole
I mean one has to impose
some sort of classical description
and the question is then
where does that description come from
and from kind of whose point of view
is that a description
but certainly
as soon as we
you partition the universe
as a whole into
some system
and some other system
one can immediately talk about
their
information processing
capabilities
and then the question becomes
quantum information processing capabilities
versus classical information processing capabilities
and
if you're looking at classical information processing
to the extent that it's not reversible
it requires energy
and so one can immediately derive limits
based on the free energy access of that system
if you're talking about reversible information processing
which purely quantum information processing
is
then you don't have that energetic requirement
but you also don't have a well-defined answer
in any classical terms
in any classical terms
and
it's
it's only the
if
if Alice is your system of interest
that's able to do quantum information processing
then
it's only her interaction partner
Bob
who
can
can use her as a quantum computer
and then
his ability to
employ Alice as a quantum computer
is
limited by his
classical information processing
capabilities
because he has to define a classical input
and a classical output
so
I think this question becomes very complicated
as
as soon as it
is cast in these
observer relative terms
yeah
but
but
but such limits clearly exist
right
they
they just require certain assumptions
to define them
so
quantum information
can indeed be understood
as
a kind of dual to the classical information
right
um
yes
um
and
it's
it's essentially
one of these
bulk boundary type
dualities
that
that seem now to be ubiquitous
in physics
if we think of
um
I'm just thinking
in terms of the holographic principle
um
you can have
quantum processing
going on
in
in the bulk
in
in the system
that has a boundary
and
that can encode
it can
that can read classical information
from the boundary
and encode classical information
on the boundary
and
the
the
the

the




the
holographic principle
tells you how much
right
what can the maximum entropy
classical entropy
of the boundary b
um
but
what it doesn't tell you
is anything about the semantics
that
either the system inside
assigns to the information
or any observer outside
assigns to the information
it just
it's just a quantitative statement
so
in
in any setting
that
that's characterized
by that principle
um
the classical information
on the boundary
is
is dual
in an interesting sense
to the quantum processing
that's going on
inside
uh
in that
it
that classical information
on the boundary
encodes
everything
that an external observer
can know
about what's going on
on the inside
thank you
yes
thank you
yeah
okay
yeah
Anna
and then
Dean after
hi
thank you very much
um
I'm also
new to
um
your active inference
and your course
uh
I just want to say
that
uh
unfortunately
I work with humans
and
uh
um
but
and I say
unfortunately
because
uh
the complexities
are
horrific
um
so
uh
having said
that
maybe
my
my
my
question
will make sense
um
so
as I'm
learning
about
quantum
information
theory
and I'm
what I'm trying
to do
is assess
how can this
help me answer
questions that I have
in the systems
that I work with
uh
my question
is
in order to
have
a
time
arrow
irreversible
process
don't you need
to have
a goal
and
so
and so
my question
is
does it matter
to even
worry about
goals
because
as I
listen
to
all the
descriptions
and I think
about Alice
and Bob
and systems
I immediately
think about
well
so much
of what we're
talking about
depends upon
the goal
of the system
and
in some
very
abstract way
it seems
to me
that there's
a goal
that's
driving
the
need
for the
boundary
the need
for the
communication
um
and so
um
I'm
I
I'm so
obsessed
with this
question
that I
wanted to
ask
about
ask it
early on
before I
proceed
with my
learning
uh
yeah
that's
that's a
very good
question
you can
think of
the whole
free energy
principle
as
a
a
way of
of
describing
physical
systems
in a
way that
makes their
behavior as
agents
obvious
and
so the
the FEP
you could
state the
FEP by
saying that
every system
has a
goal
and
its goal
is
minimizing
prediction
error
right
it or
to put it
positively
its goal
is to
predict
and therefore
respond to
its
environment's
actions
in a
way that
preserves
its own
identity
and
I don't
know whether
you've read
much of
Carl
Fristin's
work but
he uses
the word
self
evidencing
a lot
it says
the goal
of any
system is
to
generate
evidence of
its own
existence
which sounds
very
psychological
and Carl
interestingly
enough
studied
first as
a
psychiatrist
so I
expect that
his point
of view
is actually
very consonant
with your
question and
where you're
coming from
here
yeah
actually
I started
I'm sorry
I didn't
make your
interrupt
no
no
go ahead
no
I started
I've
spent some
time
reading
um
Chris
Fristin's
um
ideas
and work
on
um
uh
the free
energy
principle
and
uh
self
evidencing
and yes
I will
continue
to dig
deep
uh
the problem
is
so I'm
an
anthropologist
and I've
worked
with
um
indigenous
people
and spent
20 years
of my
life
uh
living
in these
small
scale
societies
um
and
and so
one of my
observations
is that
and that
that I find
really
fascinating
um
but we
don't have
a good
understanding
of it
and that's
why
I decided
to
dig
into
physics
as
information
processing
uh
which is
that
goals
are
constantly
being
negotiated
and
it's
it's
uh
and more
along the
lines
of
so
Michael
Levine's
work
has
actually
was
what led
me to
explore
quantum
information
theory
um
which is
you know
like this
uh
collective
intelligences
that
are
exist
within
systems
and so
at each
level
of collective
intelligence
it's not
just that
you have
a collective
intelligence
dictating
a goal
but that
those goals
are being
negotiated
as
different
as the
environments
change
and as
relationships
between
the
systems
change
so
I know
these
these are
very
big
questions
but if
you could
just
like help
me
uh
give me
some
thoughts
on
what your
thoughts
have been
about
these
kinds
of
questions
um
yeah
I think
you're
pointing to
something
very
important
here
and
uh
uh
this
is
uh
a
question
that
um
this
kind
of
free
energy
principle
based
work
motivates
immediately
uh
when you
consider
a system
that
uh
comprises
a bunch
of
subsystems
um
you know
I
I work
with
Mike
Michael
Levin
at
Tufts
in
developmental
biology
yeah
and
one of
his
um
slogans
is
all
intelligence
is
collective
and
that
immediately
brings up
this issue
of
how do
these
components
as you
put it
uh
negotiate
their goals
how do
they
how do
they
uh
collaborate
how do
they compete
to what
extent
are they
trying to
deceive each
other
or coerce
each other
or all
of this
and
we're
you know
trying to
apply this
in a cell
biology
context
uh
as a
as a
description
of
development
and morphogenesis
if you think
about cells
in a
developing
organism
they're
constantly
facing
new
environments
uh
their
capabilities
are
constantly
changing
and
how they
interact
with each
other
is
constantly
changing
and this
all seems
very
psychological
sociological
so
I
I think
what you're
pointing to
is
the
ubiquitous
need
for this
kind
of
language
uh
in
areas
other than
the human
sciences
I mean
it's
language
that's
developed
within
the human
sciences
but it's
language
that seems
to be
important
um
at
much
smaller
scales
and
you know
clearly
one would
anticipate
it being
important
in much
larger
scales
you know
the scales
of
countries
or
civilizations
or
whatever
so
um
I guess
my answer
is yes
this is
an extremely
important
point of
view
uh
with
very
broad
implications
for how
we think
about
biology
at least
thank you
thank you

thank you
definitely
looking forward
to your
continued
learnings
and journey
thank you
so much
Dean
yeah my
question
has changed
three times
because
uh
just
the other
questions
that have
come up
in the
meantime
um
so
some context
here
Chris
you you
you've kind of
answered this
you mentioned
dual
as in
d-u-a-l
and then
Anna brought
up like
is there
some kind
of competition
to dual
a d-u-e-l
going on
and how do
we put
those two
things
together
and me
always thumping
the table
about minimum
two
we have to
have to keep
at least
two truisms
up at once
if we're going
to gain some
sense around
things
I want to go
back to that
lock
the LOCC
slide if we
can for a
second
because
Chris you
mentioned
your statement
was you draw
a boundary
and to me
there's a lot
of information
packed in
those four
words
um
you can
draw
and you
can undraw
you can
bound
you can
unbound
those are
perfectly
contextless
subject matter
information
carrying
frames
but you
also have
in that
packet
you
and
at
which
are
imperfect
orientations
an indefinite
article
and all
of us
occupying
a slide
here
none
of us
claiming
to be
anything
other
than
a
contradiction
so
one
aspect
of that
packet
two words
of it
literally
half
of it
is
perfectly
contextless
and is
information
carrying
and the
other
literally
half
of that
is
prediction
matter
or
information
graphing
it's
literally
the
byproduct
or
the
space
time
construct
that
is
included
so
I guess
what I'm
wondering
is
how do
we
make
these
different
matters
the
subject
matter
and
the
prediction
matter
tango
how do
we
get
them
to
relate
because
in the
session
five
you
went on
a detour
you said
we'll
take a
detour
which is
it holds
the exact
same
structure
as
you draw
a boundary
so there's
perfect
information
and there's
imperfect
information
in that
they're
dancing
we do
this all
the time
this seems
to me
at a
minimum
what
information
theory
is
and
that's
why
I
want
to
kind
of
go
back
to
this
slide
because
this
slide
was
in
a
much
earlier
session
but it
got to
session
five
where
the
context
could
be
recapitulated
and so
I'm
wondering
whether
or not
we can
really
talk
about
quantum
information
without
the
classical
or
if
that's
even
possible
well
I'll
go back
to
Boris
Boris
statement
in his
1928
paper
he
basically
said
the
answer
to
that
question
is
no
that
we
are
humans
we have
to
communicate
with
each
other
we
have
to
do
it
in
language
and
that's
classical
communication
and
if
while
while
we
are
doing
that
while
we're
having
this
conversation
we
can't
be
worried
about
the
question
of
do
I
still
exist
or
do
you
still
exist
we
can
worry
about
that
question
but
we
can't
do
it
at
the
same
time
that
we're
having
this
conversation
about
the
theory
of
lock
protocols
or
exchanging
data
from
a
bell
EPR
experiment
and
that's
of course
deeply
paradoxical
and
I
think
that's
just
the
situation
we're
in
you
said
none
of us
are
claiming
to be
anything
other
than
a
contradiction
it's
a good
thing
that we
are
self
conscious
about
the fact
that
we're
doing
something
contradictory
here
or
potentially
contradictory
here
a
colleague
and I
wrote
a
paper
several
years
ago
called
science
generates
limit
paradoxes
and
we
basically
rehearsed
a version
of this
very
discussion
that we're
having
right now
and
the
upshot
of that
paper
is that
in any
situation
in which
a
science
can
turn
its
theoretical
apparatus
onto
its
own
practice
so
for example
when
physics
can
turn
this
analysis
of
boundaries
onto
the
practice
physics
then it
generates
paradoxes
and
those
paradoxes
have
a
particular
structure
which
is
the
structure
that
priest
I can't
remember his
first name
a logician
who works
in
non
dialethic
logic
calls
a
limit
paradox
and
it
you know
all of
this is
coupled to
gardle's
theorem
and
these
other
paradoxes
of
self
reference
or
aspects
of
self
reference
but I
think this
situation
really is
ubiquitous
and
inescapable
that
as soon
as we
apply the
tools of
science to
the practice
of science
we
generate
these
paradoxical
situations
in which
we have
to acknowledge
that
we are
entities
of a
certain
sort
and
that
we
are
constructing
our
theories
using
a
faculty
of
imagination
that
lets us
act as
if we
don't
have a
point
of view
so it
lets us
act as
if
what we're
talking about
is point
of view
independent
but
our
theories
themselves
tell us
that we
have
points
of view
and that
they're
important
so we're
stuck in
this
paradoxical
situation
I don't
know whether
that's what
you're trying
to point
to here
but
it's
what
I immediately
leap to
hearing what
you said
yeah a
lot there
anyone else
want to
add a
piece
yeah I'm
gonna have
to go
away so
thank you
Chris
we'll
stay
for a
few
minutes
thank you
though
this was
awesome
we're
really
looking
forward
to
lecture
six
okay
thank you
all
and thank
you all
for attending
this
discussion
session
it's
nice
to have
this
kind
of
real
time
discussion
which is
missing
during
the
actual
lecture
sessions
so I
appreciate
it
thanks
again
see
you
thank
you
Chris
so
thank
you
Kate
do you
want to
ask
anything
or
anyone
can
can
just
bring
up
anything
they're
thinking
right
now
nothing
in
particular
I'm
just
really
looking
forward
to
the
last
lecture
on
the
biology
of
it
all
great
well
any
other
thoughts
or
questions
or
if
anyone
in
the
live
chat
has
a
thought
or
a
question
they
can
write
it
and
we'll
read
it
in
the
coming
minutes
well
I just
wanted
to thank
you
for
creating
the
space
it's
been
absolutely
amazing
that I
was able
to find
this
situation
where
people
are
talking
about
enormous
questions
very
difficult
questions
and
and
I
just
thought
I'd
share
that
I
find
in
academia
there's
I don't
know
why
we're
not
having
these
conversations
and
I've
been
it's
been
like
a
10
year
journey
and
I
have
finally
found
this
group
I
just
wanted
to
express
my
gratitude
thank
you
I'll
read a
question
from the
live chat
and anyone
can give
their
thoughts
so
mills
so
mills
8102
wrote
it
seems
that
consilience
would
aim
to
ameliorate
the
problems
of
self
reference
is
this
a
category
of
solution
that
seems
valuable
or
fraught
could
consilience
ameliorate
the problems
of self
reference
yes
dean
can I
just ask
a different
question
built on
that
which is
what if
the
contradiction
is a
feature
as opposed
to a
fraughtness
do I
contradict
myself
very well
then
I contain
multitudes
there's
the
Whitman
angle
then
there's
the
William
Blake
life is
a fiction
and is
made up
of
contradiction
so what
is the
problem
of
self
reference
whose
problem
is it
Harris
yeah
I will
try to
answer
a bit
to
tackle
a bit
both
questions
by
offering
my
views
from
the
cognitive
science
perspective
basically
I think
it has
to do
with
consilience
has to
do
with
numerous
cognitive
bias
that
we
all
are
let's
say
subjected
to
so
there
is
a
very
long
list
of
cognitive
biases
and
there
are
more
than
100
listed
I
think
so
this
is
one
of
the
challenges
in
terms
of
achieving
let's
say
good
levels
of
conciliance
across
various
domains
so
this
is
what
I
wanted
to
add
another
thought
on that
is
conciliance
though
it can
mean
many
things
synthesis
this
oh
sorry
oh
yeah
please
go
ahead
oh
yeah
I
just
so
I
don't
really
have
insights
into
the
self
referencing
problem
I need
to do
a lot
of
thinking
about
that
but
coming
from
training
in
evolutionary
biology
and
spending
you know
graduate
school
postgraduate
school
working
on
explanations
where
we
thought
of
many
hypotheses
models
etc
based
on
a goal
which is
organisms
are designed
to maximize
their fitness
and of
course
there are
lots of
you know
that there
are lots
of
problems
with that
and it
turns out
with our
data
what we
found
is that
was not
the case
in our
in the
populations
that we
working
with
too
often
the goal
did not
seem
to be
fitness
so
but
what
that
experience
gave me
is
that
there
was
something
we
could
hang
on
to
in
order
to
allow
ourselves
to
propose
models
for why
humans
behave
the way
they
do
and
the
decisions
that
they
make
so
that's
why
I
go
back
to
goals
!
because
if
whatever
level
of
collective
intelligence
we're
talking
about
there
is
a
goal
that
even
in
Harris
please
let me
know
if
this
would
be
correct
that
even
cognitive
biases
exist
they
exist
because
there
is
some
goal
and
therefore
we
can
talk
about
cognitive
biases
with
respect
to
some
goal
yes
there
is
some
sort
of
teleonomy
in
conscious
agents
or
personal
systems
as I
call
them
and
it
has
to
do
with
goals
yes
and
cognitive
biases
and
the
limitations
on
the
knowledge
let's
say
maybe
it's
limitations
on
parts
of
the
knowledge
representation
on
that
each
of
us
has
maybe
there
are
limitations
in
terms
of
access
to
knowing
and
there
are
various
forms
of
knowing
so
it
depends
on
many
things
and
for
example
one
of
the
cognitive
bias
that
I
believe
can
have
a
negative
impact
on
conciliance
let's
say
in
addressing
the
self
referentiality
will
be
the
halo
effect
so
where
you
seem
to
prioritize
let's
say
or give
some
advantage
to
some
types
of
individuals
ideas
or even
theories
because
of that
halo
or whatever
reason
that is
it is
based
on
maybe
on
many
different
things
maybe
on
your
past
history
or
other
things
so
yeah
thank
you
Anna
and
if
I
may
add
something
rather
briefly
your
question
reminded
me
of
Levin's
and I
think
it was
written
with
Phil
the
proposal
about
reduction
of
stress
as a
goal
that
guides
the
emergence
of
collective
structures
is
one
of
the
papers
formulated
that
that
seems
to
be
the
goal
that
drives
things
as
the
growing
complexity
reduction
of
collective
stress
or
reduction
of
stress
at
any
level
yeah
I don't
remember
the title
of the
paper
but
that
was
just
if I
understood
it
correctly
thank you
I'll look
that up
great
another
piece
that
of the
Levinson
Fields
collaboration
that
Chris
alluded
to
earlier
is
that
the
notion
of
computation
is
observer
dependent
that's
poly
computation
if
there
was
a
fully
encrypted
computation
an
observer
without
the
key
would
only
be
seeing
noise
to
them
whereas
if
they
were
to
have
the
decryption
key
then
they
could
fully
understand
and
go
into
more
detail
about
the
computation
so
then
let's
say
that
we're
in
relation
or
observing
or
investigating
some
life
phenomena
at
some
scale
but
we're
speaking
in the
scale
free
setting
but
we're
observing
a
thing
that's
there
people
have
ascribed
different
goals
to
describe
what
we call
goal
oriented
behavior
like
seemingly
to
survive
or
seemingly
to
have
evolutionary
fitness
however
one
an
observer
could
also
project
different
proximate
goals
like
the goal
to
minimize
stress
the goal
to
minimize
free
energy
the goal
to
minimize
surprise
those
proximate
observer
proposed
goals
as if
goals
may be
exactly
isomorphic
or aligned
with fitness
maximization
so
that could
just be
multiple
perspectives
of
projective
goals
and
whatever
the observer
projects
that
doesn't
mean
it
describes
the
actual
process
of
the
phenomena
at all
there's
just
nothing
Alice
can
make
any
story
about
Bob
and
it
may
or
may
not
have
anything
to do
or
even
be
possible
to be
of
the
kind
that
Bob
tells
about
himself
Dean
this
is
I
want
to
piggyback
on
that
Daniel
this
is
really
hugely
important
the
moment
you
use
the
word
goals
or
the
moment
you
use
the
word
fitness
you
are
assuming
context
whereas
a lot
of this
stuff
that's
happening
on this
holographic
screen
is
completely
abstractless
abstracted
and
completely
context
less
there's
no
no
context
required
so
if
you're
going
to
focus
on
that
part
of
it
as
long
as
you
can
juggle
both
at
the
same
time
and
keep
the
two
things
apart
because
one
does
not
require
context
the
other
completely
assumes
that
context
is
given
and
now
you're
taking
that
into
your
calculus
right
but
they're
not
the
same
thing
so
I
want
to
reinforce
what
Daniel
just
said
thank
you
Dean
Ian
thank
you
yeah
I was
just
maybe
reinforcing
what you
were saying
or
reflecting
on it
I was
thinking
about
the
behaviors
we see
in
other
animals
and
even
ourselves
that we
might
not
think
are
related
to
fitness
like
I don't
know
there's
those
kind
of
gazelle
type
creatures
that just
jump
into the
air
and like
but they
seem to
do that
at a
time
which might
make
them
be
predated
upon
by
some
tiger
or lion
which
you know
it's
you have
to
then all
the
sort
of
biologists
try and
figure out
how is
this
related
to
fitness
and we
may
do
the
same
you know
if I
go and
mow
my
lawn
waste
half a
Sunday
afternoon
mowing
my
lawn
what's
that
got
to
do
with
my
fitness
well
actually
it's
to do
with
keeping
up
with
the
joneses
and
my
social
status
so
it's
really
hard
to
actually
know
what
my
behaviour
is
about
I
can
create
a
story
to
say
that
it's
to
do
with
minimising
free
energy
or
fitness
but
really
is
it
or
not
I
don't
know
is
that
what
you
were
getting
at
or
something
different
yeah
that's
great
point
also
it's
come
up
several
times
about
goals
the
term
goal
is
not
to
be
found
within
the
active
inference
ontology
strictly
speaking
that's
why
we
have
so
much
fun
with
what
we
expect
and
what
we
prefer
how
can
it
be
what
we
expect
and
be
the
positive
thing
that
we
pursue
well
that's
how
paths
of
least
action
work
and
then
if
somebody
else
wants
to
look
at
that
path
of
least
action
and
say
well
here
was
a
mile
point
and
this
is
where
it
looked
like
they
were
heading
north
and
this
is
where
it
looked
like
the
goal
was
to
evade
this
those
are
all
stories
that
an
observer
could
tell
about
a
path
or
that
the
path
might
tell
itself
about
its
own
path
but
those
goal
narratives
don't
need
to
be
implemented
proximally
or
primally
with
goals
as
a
kind
of
core
player
in the
active
inference
ontology
I'll
read
some
of
these
great
comments
and
questions
just
if
anybody
has
a
thought
on
them
from
the
live
chat
just
feel
free
John
Reed
wrote
what
does
the
active
inference
group
I
think
that's
us
but
includes
everyone
think
about
the
equation
of
pilot
wave
with
many
worlds
recently
expounded
upon
by
Chris
O'Dowd
at
PBS
I
found
it
to
be
mixing
terms
and
frustrating
!
many
worlds
and
I
would
also
just
be
curious
on
the
physics
or
technical
side
where
does
what
Chris
is
sharing
connect
to
these
kinds
of
discussions
that
people
have
about
many
worlds
and
different
interpretations
of
quantum
yeah
that's
a great
question
so
I
don't
know
that
I
can
answer
it
but
I
know
that
when
it
comes
to
interpretations
of
quantum
mechanics
whether
you know
the
collapse
or
the
many
worlds
or
whatever
I
think
what
they're
hinting
at
is
and
Chris
would
probably
answer
something
along
those
lines
that
quantum
theory
is
fundamentally
about
information
and
until
we
make
sense
of
that
fully
and
fully
spell
out
all
the
details
I
think
these
philosophical
issues
are the
interpretations
of
quantum
mechanics
are going
to
linger
I
don't
have
any
strong
thoughts
on
interpretations
and
I
would
say
I'm
an
agnostic
about
interpretations
of quantum
mechanics
I
don't
know
that
I
subscribe
to
any
of
them
and
especially
Pilot
Wave
I
don't
have
the
slightest
idea
about
it
cool
yeah
Harris
yes
if
you
allow
me
I
have
a
small
story
regarding
Pilot
Wave
I
was
conversing
with
chat
GPT
and
I
actually
asked
what
it
thought
about
Pilot
Wave
after
watching
a
lecture
on
it
and
then
I
got
intrigued
and
I
wanted
to
ask
and
this
actually
happened
the
model
started
replying
and I
got
the
chance
to
read
a bit
the
reply
the
reply
was
like
it
is
very
interesting
but
most
probably
is
not
wrong
it
is
not
correct
it
is
wrong
and
then
it
must
have
reached
some
sort
of
information
goal
it
retracted
the
reply
and
it
replied
to
me
can
you
ask
me
a
different
question
so
this
is
what
this
is
my
short
experience
with
Pilot
Wave
here
ask
a
question
is
a
Pilot
Wave
more
or
less
than
100
feet
in
height
I
think
it's
exactly
exactly
100
any
other
thoughts
or
questions
it's
a fun
and
lively
live
chat
too
which
is
always
fun
yeah
well
we
are
coming
right
along
in
the
year
and
now
five
sixth
completed
with
this
course
so
any
comments
that
anyone
here
just
wants
to
make
in
a
closing
route
anybody
who
wants
to
can
go
for
it
yeah
I
have
a
question
if
questions
come up
have
come up
during
the
session
yes
how
can
send
when
could
I
send
them
to
and
how
great
question
in the
video
description
you can
get to
the syllabus
of the
course
and one
of the
pages
on the
course
website
course
syllabus
is a
question
and answer
form
so you'll
see
several
dozen
questions
that people
have already
written
and Chris
gives
answers
and then
it's
publicly
posted
all
of
the
lectures
discussions
and questions
and answers
will be
published
after the
course
so every
question
no matter
from where
or where
to
all of
these
questions
are encouraged
it only
makes it
a richer
and more
relevant
publication
thank you
okay
Ian
Harris
or Dean
yes
Susan
also
says
post
and
discord
great
point
yeah
I just
wanted to
add a
small
point
as a
conclusion
from my
personal
perspective
I really
find that
the ideas
of Chris
Fields
they can
be
revolutionized
revolutionary
let's
say
in a
variety
of
different
fields
and
I can
see it
in
quantum
cryptography
and also
about
what I've
mentioned
before
in terms
of
quantum
knowledge
representation
so
these are
the two
fields
that I
can
clearly
see it
so
it is
great
to be
able
to
participate
in
this
conversation
so
once again
thanks to
everyone
great to
participate
in this
conversation
or
quantum
knowledge
representation
whichever
you prefer
Andrew
any last
comments
not really
just looking
forward to
the next
one
I guess
and
next
few
I should
say
it
was
next
year
this
is
going
to
be
an
ongoing
thing
yes
we'll
come back
stronger
next
year
for
sure
okay
what a
ride
thank you
all
see you
next time
bye
bye
everyone
!
you

## dAolShffDWo

Hello and welcome everybody. This is Physics as Information Processing. It's October 28th,
2023 and we're in discussion six. So we'll see where and how and when we go. But to begin with,
thank you for watching. If you're watching live, please feel free to write any questions or
comments in the live chat as this is our last discussion. We're going to be probably ranging
broadly. So looking forward to people's comments there. Otherwise, perhaps we can all go around
first and say hello or just give any thoughts or reflections to get things going.
And then we'll jump into some of the questions and answers and look at some of these great
thoughts that have been sent and responded to. So perhaps Dean and then Harrison David,
any just overall thoughts or comments to get us going?
Dean and Harrison David, Ph.D.: Thanks, Daniel. I guess my overall impression was that I think
that the way that the entire series was organized and structured allowed for these kinds of conversations
that we're having today, which I think are really, really valuable. As you can see on the slide
here, I think a lot of a lot of question and answer tends to be focused around what is
whereas the conversations that we've had, we can sort of tease that apart a little bit and ask questions
around what if and get into the counterfactual piece of it and interact around that. And I've really,
really appreciated that. So that's my overall sense that we haven't left it sort of on the page.
We've actually been able to sort of breathe some life into it through these conversations.
Daniel Pérez, Ph.D.:
Cool. Harris?
Harris B.: Yeah. I just wanted to say that it was a great series. We all learned a lot and we got the
opportunity to even ask questions to Chris and get back some very insightful answers that they are very
helpful in order to, let's say, push the envelope forward. Overall, this has been a great series.
I've enjoyed it a lot. And while conversing with some of my colleagues, they also enjoyed it. So
the feedback is great. And thanks to Active Inference Institute for facilitating this and to you guys.
Thank you.
Thank you. And welcome. David, if you want to just begin with any thoughts or what brought you into
the game in the bottom of the ninth?
Harris B.: Well, in school, I was actually trying to use free energy to develop some sort of a network of
agents that were deciding what information to send and what states to be in based on each other's
Harris B.: And so I registered at the beginning, but then I guess life happened. I didn't really
crash the page.
But, um,
Harris B.: Yeah, so now I'm just kind of opening up to things and participating more in the world that I
exist in. And this is a natural, um, this is really tied to the work that I was doing in school.
I don't know if this is a place to ask a question, so I'm not gonna ask any questions, but that's like the
first.
David P.: Let's begin with that.
Harris B.: Okay. Oh yeah. So I was thinking about, I was, I was, I'm still confused about like Markov blankets
and non localism.
Harris B.: How would those two things work together?
Harris B.: Oh, well, like non localism seems to me that an entity could be distributed arbitrarily in
like in whatever is, I don't know if the universe is like space time is what is, or if that's just
a construction that we create through the information processing and like putting relation like
Harris B.: enunciating or like uh rendering the information in a way where it's like all the
related components can be mutually distinguished.
Harris B.: But the mark off blank it seems to be highly local.
Harris B.: I don't know, maybe this is what like i'm confused about this, it seems to be highly local
and like, uh, it seems like everything is connected with everything.
Harris B.: So I i'm kind of confused about how
Harris B.: An entity could be defined with a mark off blanket while at the same time.
Harris B.: What is seems to be completely intertwined non local mutually like defined.
David Pricey- Yes, Dean, please.
David Pricey- So can I just do just clarification.
David Pricey- Are you thinking that local and non local is.
David Pricey- Somehow similar to maybe arbitrary.
David Pricey- I'm thinking local is like within a volume and non local is like.
David Pricey- Distributed complete a look like a sphere,
David Pricey- Like a small sphere where all the information is like within a sphere.
David Pricey- And everything within that sphere is causally relevant everything without is
causally irrelevant, but then.
David Pricey- Like i'm thinking of a mark off blanket is a sphere and everything on the inside is
David Pricey- Like independent statistically from everything on the outside.
David Pricey- I guess i'm asking around when where where do you play where do you see that being placed do you see that being placed arbitrarily.
David Pricey- Like when you when you set that up whenever you do whenever you decide where that boundary exists,
David Pricey- Are you asking because it's local or it's non local because it's wherever inside and outside.
David Pricey- Is present is is it is that is the.
David Pricey- Is the.
David Pricey- What's the word i'm looking for.
David Pricey- Are you are you are you wondering about how the how that doesn't seem to be consistent that.
David Pricey- One minute, it can be here and then the next minute, it can change an arbitrarily end up being in a different place.
David Pricey- Not not that i'm not that it doesn't seem to me that that's the confusion is more like.
David Pricey- Like.
David Pricey- Like you know David bones implicate an explicate order and they do the explicate orders like.
David Pricey- One hologram there's like the hollow movement or each layer affects each layer and it's all the explicate is all at once explicated in mutual relatedness I don't know.
David Pricey- um.
David Pricey- I don't know if these words are incoherent completely.
David Pricey- Like and.
David Pricey- um.
David Pricey- And then, but then the markup blanket like i'm i'm taking the example of my skin is like.
David Pricey- Like I don't know if that's even.
David Pricey- um.
David Pricey- An example, but my skin is like a markup blanket but then if everything is mutually related and explicate like this whole body is submerged in the same field that everything else is submerged in.
David Pricey- And in that sense, everything is linked everything there's no I don't know like.
David Pricey- um.
David Pricey- um.
David Pricey- let me try adding a few pieces here.
David Pricey- So welcome welcome and her and and Chris will hopefully join to.
David Pricey- Here we go.
David Pricey- Okay, opening act.
David Pricey- Just to catch up.
David Pricey- Chris and enter.
David Pricey- David asked about the markup blanket and about if slash how everything is connected to everything and how we associate markup blanket or the holographic screen with localism and non locality.
David Pricey- Do you want to give any quick thoughts on this or.
David Pricey- Are you asking me.
David Pricey- If you want to either of you could.
David Pricey- Um, I don't know.
David Pricey- Let's wait a minute for Chris to show up.
David Pricey- Yeah, I'm here now.
David Pricey- Yeah, I'm glad you found the way finally.
David Pricey- So.
David Pricey- Question, did you guys go through the slides of last time the lecture on biology.
David Pricey- No, no, we just began and started with a markup blanket question.
David Pricey- Yeah, I mean, I think.
David Pricey- I think you wouldn't hurt to talk about that because.
David Pricey- A big part of that last lecture was the copy and diversify notion.
David Pricey- As a universal feature in nature.
David Pricey- And I mean naively I think that you know the creation of new.
David Pricey- boundaries is implicit in there so maybe maybe Chris can comment, but I.
David Pricey- I also thought it was very worthy of mentioning today that you know the cycle of error correction memory and so on.
David Pricey- Those would be my only two comments in.
David Pricey- In the agenda for today.
David Pricey- Maybe Chris can say a few words, but I didn't mean to interrupt.
David Pricey- So markup blankets, we can pivot it to biology, I'm sure.
David Pricey- Okay, okay.
David Pricey- I think I'm seeing this question.
David Pricey- Is this a question about the definition of markup blankets?
David Pricey- There's something about.
David Pricey- I can't actually see the entire.
David Pricey- No, it's not a question on my screen.
David Pricey- Oh, it's not a question on your screen.
David Pricey- Okay.
David Pricey- So I didn't get.
David Pricey- It's a question on your screen.
David Pricey- Right.
David Pricey- But could you tell me what the question is again?
David Pricey- Yeah, David, just restate it how you see it.
David Pricey- Well, the question was if.
David Pricey- If everything is like mutually connected and mutually
David Pricey- defined and interconnected and there's non localism in the sense that everything
David Pricey- is mutually connected and mutually defined.
David Pricey- And I'm kind of implicitly
David Pricey- working with the assumption that the implicate explicate order makes sense and the
David Pricey- explicate is like one hologram and it's.
David Pricey- Oh, it's all together now.
David Pricey- Oh, I still hear him.
David Pricey- Oh, the audio.
David Pricey- Chris?

David Pricey- Is the audio okay?
David Pricey- Yeah, I lost at least half of that audio just dropped out altogether.
David Pricey- Oh yeah, so i'll try to sorry about that.
David Pricey- Just like so if everything is kind of explicated like if it's information
David Pricey- in the brain is kind of rendering it all at once together.
David Pricey- I'm just confused as and the whole body is submerged in the same like in the same
David Pricey- like the whole body is submerged in it.
David Pricey- Like if I look in the mirror, the whole body is submerged in it.
David Pricey- And it's all non local.
David Pricey- I mean by that I mean it's all like connected together and mutually defined and mutually
David Pricey- necessary to even make sense of any piece of it.
David Pricey- If there is any even such a thing as a piece.
David Pricey- And i'm wondering, I mean not so that's one that's one way of looking at it,
David Pricey- And then the other way is like the local to me, it seems like there's like this
David Pricey- skin mark off blanket and it's kind of local and i'm kind of.
David Pricey- Like confused as to how those things kind of worked like how those things.
David Pricey- Like it seems like all the information in this sphere,
David Pricey- The sphere could be a mark off blanket and then the.
David Pricey- On the inside and the outside they're statistically independent is
David Pricey- Like the whole movement on the inside and the outside.
David Pricey- Because of the mark off blanket separates those.
David Pricey- But then if everything is this whole body is submerged in this thing that's mutually
David Pricey- related i'm just confused as to how.
David Pricey- Like.
David Pricey- I don't know I just i'm confused as to how those things work together.
David Pricey- I suspect the i'm not sure I understand your question but i suspect the answer
has to do with whose point of view we're talking about.
David Pricey- So if if you are the system that's in so let's fix a mark off blanket someplace.
David Pricey- If you're the system on the inside then all you can see is what's encoded on the blanket
David Pricey- And you have no independent access to what the dynamics is on the outside.
David Pricey- So you don't actually know what the dynamics is on the outside.
David Pricey- And similarly if you're on the outside.
David Pricey- Now if you're somehow able to view the whole system you can see the whole system is having
some joint dynamics. But if the if the whole system is is isolated then there isn't anybody on the outside
kind of by definition. So the idea of a whole dynamics is just a theoretical postulate
David Pricey- That we make to make the mathematics make sense.
David Pricey- Now if you move to
a move from the classical formulation to the quantum formulation then it's possible to prove a very nice
theorem which is that if you're inside a holographic screen
David Pricey- You can't measure the entanglement entropy across the screen.
David Pricey- What that means is that you can't know that your state is conditionally independent of
what's going on outside. So you if if you're inside a holographic screen you can't know that you're not
entangled with with whatever's outside. So you can't even know whether you have a well-defined state in a sense.
David Pricey- And
David Pricey- Sort of
David Pricey- I think the same thing would probably hold true from the point of view inside a Markov blanket
David Pricey- That you wouldn't be able to know whether your Markov blanket had holes in it or something like that.
David Pricey- I mean the problem is in the classical formulation
David Pricey- You assume there's no analog of entanglement. So there's no analog of entanglement entropy.
David Pricey- So I think the strongest thing you can say is you don't actually know your
statistical relationship to what's going on outside, but you still can only see what's encoded on the blanket.
David Pricey- Thank you, Chris. If I could add a few more pieces. So David, you described everything
David Pricey- connected to everything. David Pricey- For a system with that kind of a base graph,
David Pricey- there aren't Markov blankets because a Markov blanket is the set of nodes
David Pricey- that make two other sets of nodes conditionally independent. So in a fully connected
David Pricey- setting, again leading to the question what is outside of that, but in a fully connected
David Pricey- setting you don't have a blanket as such. David Pricey- in fact, the Bayesian graph
David Pricey- describes the factorization or the articulation and the sparsity of the system. So it is a
connectedness that is usually much, much, much sparser than everything connected to everything.
David Pricey- But that's not to say that differences can't make a difference at a distance.
David Pricey- it's just that they propagate through a local causal structure. And then
space-time is constructed by certain kinds of cognitive agents. That was one of the key
aspects of this course. And so we can take as primary the topology of the active inference agent
environment relation. And then Markov blanket is just the sensorium on the inbound and the action capacity
on the outbound. One question though I do have to that is what about the non-zero gravitational effect,
for example, of something that's distant in space and time?
Of course, Markov blankets don't have to be spatial temporal. They can be in arbitrary state spaces.
But how do we deal with those kinds of long-range influences?
That's my question.
Yeah. Well, here I think it's useful to contrast Newtonian gravity with Einsteinian gravity.
I think it's useful to say, Newtonian gravity is infinite range and instantaneously acting.
Whereas Einsteinian gravity is infinite range, but it's locally encoded.
So the Einsteinian gravity that you feel is your local measurement of the curvature
of your local bit of space-time. So that is very much happening on your Markov blanket, right? It's a local measurement,
local in space-time. So let's assume there's a space-time that's objective and characterizes everything.
Then you're locally measuring it on your blanket, and that's what you feel as gravitational attraction or your mass.
Whereas in Newtonian or Laplacian gravity,
you don't have that sense of locality, right? As soon as something changes anywhere in the universe, it affects you.
So Einstein was struggling, of course, to make gravity consistent with
electromagnetism, where it was clear that forces are transmitted at finite speed, the speed of light.
And he didn't have the idea of a graviton moving at the speed of light.
But he did have this idea of local measurement. So non-locality was anathema to Einstein, and that's
basically why he spent so much trouble removing it from physics. And that's why he hated the idea of
entanglement so much, because it seemed to him that from a space-time point of view, it had to be non-local.
Daniel, can I bring up a point at this point? So I think this is somewhat relevant to a question I
really wanted to ask Chris, which is in lecture six, I remember minute 23. I wish I had written it down,
but I can roughly remember. There was that phylogenetic graph and you see life growing in a
self-similar way, just like the genealogical tree of species, same thing happens at the individual
level with growth and so on. Anyways, I found that fascinating in the sense that the degrees of
freedom of life as a whole grow, right? And around that minute 23, you made a comment,
well, then the environment must be shrinking. And you tie this with space-time and something about
space-time, you know, we, from the physics side, we also have that, you know, we have cosmological
inflation and whatnot. Are any of those things related? That remark, I feel like was made in passing,
and I think there's a lot there to be said. It also maybe shed some light on
the emergent space-time issue. If it does emerge from a more basic ontological object like the
tensor network and the degrees of freedom in the tensor network, is it fair to say that life as it grows
gets more of those degrees of freedom, but then somehow anything that happens to space-time is an
illusion in that sense? I don't even know if I'm formulating that question right, but I think
Chris knows what I'm talking about. Yeah, the comment makes the most sense in
the context of the state space itself leaving aside space-time. So if you think of
think of a Hilbert space and draw a boundary someplace that separates what we're going to call life from
what we're going to call non-life. Yeah. And essentially what, you know, life has done over the past 3 billion years
is incorporate bits of the non-life part of the state space into life. Right. So, you know, total biomass is increasing. Right.
So, more and more of the available mass is getting incorporated into living things. And so, if we
we can kind of heuristically fold space-time in and say, you know, in the locality, in the locale of Earth and over this fairly short time period,
we can kind of the expansion of space-time is more or less negligible. So, life is actually taking up more space now than it did, certainly at the time of Luca, when all of us weren't around, but there is just one probably population of cells that we're descendants of.
Mm-hmm.

Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
But the point about the Hilbert space is just the point that if you have one, if you've divided it in two and you move the boundary, then one system gets bigger at the expense of the other system, which now has less of the Hilbert space.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
So, that's all that remark really is.
Right.
As the system, in a sense, takes over degrees of freedom of the environment.
Mm-hmm.
So, that's, in that case, so…
So, it becomes a different system at every time step from the point of view of it has now a different Hilbert space and different internal dynamics. So, physically, it's a different thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, when we look at it, we say, oh, this thing is continuous through time. It is expanding, it's growing, it's developing, evolving, whatever.
Right.
Right.
And so, then, I guess, a comment, just a question that just occurred as you were talking. That begs the question, you know, does that biomass come to dominate all the degrees of freedom in the universe?
Is that there's all… Presumably, there's a tension with the rate at which those degrees of freedom are growing and the rate at which the space-time is growing.
Does the growth of space-time, in terms of those degrees of freedom, that may be more fundamental, amount to loss in error correction capacity? How do we not… I mean, and maybe more speculatively, how do you reconcile this with loss of thermodynamics?
Like, do we know… Are you implying that life is going to come to dominate everything and fill up the entirety of the known universe?
Yeah, I think that's a stretch. But…
I would say at this point that until we have a mature theory of quantum gravity that makes enough empirical predictions to be testable, it's not clear, at least to me,
how the whole emergent space-time picture fits together with the inflationary picture or the expanding space-time picture.
I mean, in some sense, taking a strict Hilbert space view, if the universe is an isolated system, then its Hilbert space is fixed.
And so, your question, in a sense, becomes, what's the relationship between space-time and this Hilbert space?
Are what we think of as space-time degrees of freedom real degrees of freedom or not?
And…
It seems to me that question really isn't resolved. And I'm not sure at this point how to resolve it.
I mean, Paris, do you want to…
Yeah, I just have something small to add. Overall, this is very interesting and these questions are very deep.
What I wanted to add is that I was thinking the initial question regarding Markov blankets.
And I also have some… a question that… it's related with it. But I will ask Chris later.
What I wanted to add now is that… basically, Markov blankets are a way of describing the boundaries of a system in terms of statistical mechanics or statistics, let's say.
And essentially, from what I understand, they are paramount in order to define observers and also the systems under observation.
So, any physical system that can be seen as an observer with a Markov blanket, let's say.
So, now trying to tie it all up with active inference.
Well, active inference, as I understand it, implies that the system is actively referring to its external states from its internal states.
In an effort to both learn, let's say, and adapt to the environment.
So, this goes back and ties with this metaphorical link, let's say, with the skill.
This is how I understand it.
And it actually means that the system with a Markov blanket can actually be seen as performing physics as information processing, which is the bulk of this series that Chris is offering to us.
And a final comment in terms of non-locality.
Non-locality can actually be seen as a form of information processing.
So, this is what I wanted to add.
Could you say how non-locality is a form of information processing?
Yes.
Yes.
This is how I understand it.
What do you think about that, Chris?
If we put it in terms of entanglement, entanglement is a useful resource for information processing, but it's only a usable resource.
If it's combined with classical communication either across time or across space.
So, entanglement is only useful as a resource if different observers can act locally, i.e. without interfering with each other, on the quantum resource.
So, if you think of entanglement as non-locality, if you embed it in space-time in that way, then it is useful as a computational resource.
But the observers also have to transmit classical communications in a way that fully complies with locality.
So, in a Bell-EPR type experiment, for example, if you have Alice in one lab and Bob in the other lab making measurements of some entangled state, then at some point, to know that the state is entangled, they have to send their classical records to each other as classical communication and then deal with those records locally.
So, in a sense, non-locality in that sense is useful for computation.
But it's only useful if you also have locality.




Great.




Great.
Great.
Thank you.
Actually, I'm working on a novel notion, let's say.
That is something like takes the notion of entanglement and transform it in the following sense.
I'm actually thinking of maximum entanglement as a resource for classical computation.
So, that's something I am actually exploring.


Yes.
I find it to be a nice concept.

Yes.
Maximum separability.
Yeah.
Maximum separability.

That makes sense.
I mean, we need maximum separability.
Yeah.
Okay.

So, I'm going to ask you to talk about two different observers.
So, to talk about conditional independence.
Yeah.
In my head, this maximum entanglement as a resource can actually be expanded to perform a classical computation or even to increase the coherence of a quantum system.
So, I'm playing with that notion a bit.
Cool.
Thank you.
Can I ask something really quick about...
Yeah.
There is...
Okay.
So, apparently, like, from what I don't understand very much, but from Boer, apparently the...
The whole experimental setup was one, like, entity that couldn't be broken down into, like, constituent pieces that are interacting, but had to be taken as one entity, from what I understand.
And apparently Einstein's view was...
Well, I really don't know what his view was, but apparently, like, it's not one entity.
It can be broken down into localized pieces that are interacting.
And I'm kind of...
Apparently, they couldn't get along, like, Boer and Einstein.
Apparently, there was, like, a party or something, and then they all congregated to separate parts of the room and didn't really interact.
And apparently, it was because they had these, like, opposing views on...
The same thing of, like, breaking down the interconnectedness into separate constituent subsystems.
And even, like, taking the partial trace...
I mean, partial...
There was one universal function, taking the partial trace, which wisely defined the subsystems whenever perfectly.
So, like...
It's all tied together, but I can't really explain it.
I'm trying to say, like...
Well, how do you...
I'm asking...
I'm asking...
To everyone, like...
These seem like two very opposed views.
They seem like very alternative views.
Like, on one side, you have, like...
Kind of, like...
An indivisible whole.
On the other side, you have, like, locality, where it's almost like there's, like, a sequence of measurements leading up to an ego, an I, that then measures as, like, a real entity.
As in another one, it's like, the observer and the observed are one thing.
They cannot be meaningfully separated.
Maybe functionally, they can be separated, but, like, as actually...
As actually existing subcomponents that cannot be defined strictly.
That's two different...
From what I understand, one of them is saying, yes, you can define these subsystems, and they really do exist as separate entities.
The other one is saying, that's just kind of like a...
Like a useful notion, like a useful way to organize information as to operate on that information, deposit a subject in an object.
And to have the subject operate on the object is a useful way for thinking to separate itself.
And it seems like this is closer to Bohr than the other one is closer...
Well, apparently that's a distinction of, like, Bohr and Einstein from what I understand.
From what I understand, which is...
Please correct me if it's wrong.
And so, yeah, I just wanted to put that out there.
And I don't know what that's going to spawn in terms of responses, but yes.
Well, I think that's a fair characterization of the Bohr-Einstein debate, actually.
So, to add a response there, whether it actually exists, it seems like in one of those framings, you had an observer looking at something.
And if we define actually existing in a relational observed setting, then to the observer, it actually...
The measurement actually exists.
Prepare, measure, prepare, measure.
And then, from another perspective, viewing that setup, then it's the observer of a setup.
Mm-hmm.
And so, it's just, again, to Chris's first point about what perspective...
And this is one of the most essential pieces that the blanket screen relationality brings into play, is there isn't a view from nowhere, but there is a perspective that may have a definite answer, and yet there are multiple perspectives that have complementary answers in our scenario.
Daniel, can I speak for a minute?
Oh, yeah.
I was muted earlier.
I didn't realize.
I meant to ask David, I don't have an answer to your question, but I was wondering if you could reformulate, it would be fair to reformulate your question as saying, are blankets objective or not?
Is the Bohr-Einstein debate equivalent to that?
And then, second, and I guess this may be for Chris, I was skimming through the answers, and one of them was talking about how the main...
One of the big tensions between general relativity and quantum theory is the idea of object persistence.
And I don't know how to articulate it either, but I feel like it was more or less what you were getting at, David.
Is that correct?
Yeah, I think that's another way to put it.
And also the thing you said about the third person looking at those systems, if there's multi-agent communication, that's kind of the thing that I'm kind of stuck on in terms of trying to understand this.
Because if there's a third agent looking, those two are subsumed in the information on the holographic screen.
And then, I don't know, anyways, so that's where I'm kind of...
I think a delightful thing to read here is Gene Wigner's paper where he introduces the Wigner's friend thought experiment.
And I think it's from...
There's a book called The Scientist Speculates.
The editor is someone named Goode, G-O-O-D.
And it's also...
And Wigner has a paper in this book.
I think it's 1961.
And it's also the paper where Wigner talks about consciousness being an essential concept in quantum theory.
But the thought experiment is that Wigner's friend is doing an experiment in his laboratory and making observations.
And Wigner's outside the laboratory.
And Wigner has to regard his friend as in some sort of superposition with his instrument.
He has to regard his friend as entangled with his friend's instruments.
Until Wigner can actually interact locally with the friend and make a measurement of the friend's state.
And so it makes Wigner's friend and his apparatus look like an entangled pair.
And Wigner now looks like an experimenter who's operating on just one part of an entangled pair.
But Wigner himself tells the story very nicely.
And it's just...
That sort of historical text, I think, is always useful to have a look at and see how the people themselves were responding to this idea.
And Wigner is quite perplexed by this thought experiment.
And I think all of those people were quite, you know, they were quite honestly mystified with what observation actually is and what consciousness is and all of these other questions that people are a little bit scared to talk about in the ensuing several decades.
So that's a good point.
Self reference.
Yeah, you can go ahead.
Self reference seems to be like there's this ancient symbol of the Uroboros.
Self reference.
The output is the input.
It feeds on itself.
Even like consciousness, I have to contextualize my...
I have to contextualize to contextualize.
Like it's self referential.
I have to...
Everything refers to itself.
And then at the end, self reference is where all the paradoxes are.
Like this sentence is false.
Or all I know is that I know nothing.
These are all paradoxical statements.
So there's some sort of mystery.
Self division is self reference.
Like that ancient view is that it's like embryogenesis, cosmogenesis, same thing.
I don't know.
There's...
Yeah, there's...
It seems to me that there's some sort of mystery that's so...
It's like the mind just alludes.
Like, I don't know.
Thinking tries to make these thought systems, but it just slips out.
Like, I know, I just...
It can't grasp it.
I don't know.
I mean, but that's already a conclusion, which I don't necessarily want to even make.
Because if it's self reference, I just thinking, okay, then maybe it goes all the way to the bottom.
But I don't know.
Daniel, can I ask a question before we run out of time?
Actually, I have two.
Maybe one is a bit longer.
The second one, I'm sure.
So the first one, Chris, is...
I was very intrigued and looking forward to hear you talk a little bit about that.
Cycle of error correction and memory and persistence and so on.
And in particular, I was wondering if it relates at all to the main other thing you talked about in that lecture six.
The copy and diversify business.
Because intuitively, if that cycle is something that an organism has to implement.
I'm talking about that slide with the error correction and whatnot.
Then it pays the thermodynamic price for it.
So I...
Presumably, there is an anabolic process of trying to grow so you can feed degrees of freedom into this error correcting scheme.
If, you know, thinking like a physicist, something like that might be happening.
So is the copy and diversify feature a necessity of having to run this cycle?
That's my first question.
That's a good question.
I don't know whether it's necessary.
I think one could think of a fairly small scale heat engine or metabolic system that can pull just enough free energy out of its environment to store a one-bit memory.
And you can think of something like a flip-flop, right?
These things aren't alive.
So it's not quite as complex as an organism.
But it is using energy to maintain a memory.
And its memory does influence its behavior.
So I think we have these limiting cases like this that don't have to grow.
But when you think about organisms,
organisms have the problem of being made out of very delicate parts that need to be replaced.
And it's that degradation that I think is driving this need for constant copying.
Mm-hmm.
And from a physics point of view, I think what that boils down to is that the organisms living right at the edge of an interaction with its environment,
that's too strong to maintain.
So the environmental interaction is constantly at risk of spinning out of control and having too large an energy transfer, which basically tears the Markov blanket apart.
Mm-hmm.
And exposes too many of the internal degrees of freedom to the outside.
So this may be one way of saying what characterizes life, that it's interacting with its environment right on the edge of an interaction that's too strong.
Mm-hmm.
And it's great to have a strong interaction because then you have big eigenvalues and so you have large bandwidth.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
But the risk is that the environment tears you apart.
Close to the fire, but don't get burnt.
Become the fire and then control the redox balance and gain that autopoetic, regulative capacity.
Yeah.
Which works when it works.
Yeah.
Until something comes along with bigger teeth.
You know.
So another comment, if I may, is as the course comes to an end, one, two of the, two themes I realized associated to classicality that we've talked a lot about in this class are object persistence and boundaries, right?
persistence and boundaries right so classicality being a feature intrinsically boundary related
and having a lot to do with object persistence and so so so artists just things completely dual
from from an FEP point of view because you want to maintain the integrity of the boundary
you want to you know you want to preserve that classical information presumably I'm not sure I
guess my question to to everyone is our object persistence and and uh and uh well in the topic
of uh classicality object persistence and boundaries like are these basically completely dual dual pictures
that's my question yeah I wouldn't be surprised
and we also need object persistence to define space so
this idea of object persistence is is
a very key idea that that has to be dealt with and physics has largely ignored this idea which is
uh kind of objects are taken for granted
but but I think I think what Carl says in that 2019
free energy principle for a particular physics paper is fairly clear on this I mean he basically says
uh the free energy principle tells systems to persist that's basically what a system has to do
by by maintaining the integrity of its markup blanket I think that's very insightful
if it doesn't it's not yeah it's not a system anymore
well as we
we
this now measured outcome how do we prepare individually at the institute scale ecosystem
scale and what are we going to do coming out of this are we talking about that right now
or any thoughts yeah just keep learning bro
ecosystem scale like the active inference ecosystem and our own ecosystems
going beyond our own scale i guess the only thing i can comment on this is i echo
the view that or not view or rather remark that chris made in the lecture
about quantum biology as a field it's in a nascent stage right now but i mean i think you know there
will be a non-trivial interaction between the active inference community and
and quantum biology that i'm i'm making that surmised right now
so let's talk about quantum biology for a second
i'll open up the pandora's box here let's think of it as a parable as opposed or maybe even fan
fiction because chris has shared so much with us i want to kind of build off of it
if you'll um indulge me for a second i'll read you a little story just hear the story out
so quantum biology sounds like more than up or down without saying that it is more
up or down as what information can be counterfactually is looking at carrying capacity as in
quotes can be and from that carrying capacity comes orientation things like direction and scale
things like the ability to plan appear to fit better in the
in the orientation category relative to the carrying capacity category, which is non-communativity
in action. So if this is a big if we agree that orientation is to follow, should our
recognizing of planning affordances follow as well? So from the session slide, there
was a quote, living systems are genetic quantum systems that the FEP has driven to a high
level of computational complexity. And here the in quotes computation is baked in as something
plannable. With this as a reference frame to make plans, we need carrying capacity. Check. Agreed.
But in order to learn, where does the carrying capacity plus orientation relationship insist
that we start with a received plan? This perspective is compared to say actively
inferring our way to the plan falls out of carrying capacity. Just making this explicit,
we can then ask, should we first apply a received plan or apply active inference?
That helps clarify when the strategy is one more based on exploitation versus a strategy more
based on bias to exploration. In summary, when did information delivery, things like product or
package, packaging, begin to trump information carrying capacity, which is essentially information processing,
rather than we need this paired relationship to carrying capacity plus the orientation as a minimum of two,
so that we can compare, identify change and no change, model patterns, etc. This is another way of asking,
when did subject matter expertise come to be seen as more valuable than prediction matter expertise,
when it seems like we need both capacities, if we want independency? And here's the kicker.
If not given time to reflect on what's being asked here, and I know Chris oftentimes has a nice long pause
to reflect, but if not given the time to reflect, people will take their subject matter expertise strategy,
which clearly is a next move perspective over one that holds up next move plus all moves, meaning that
they bring prediction matter expertise in to follow, to parameterize, to unlock, to unring, to unbound what's in and what's out.
Of course, without prediction matter expertise, what is quantum biology?
Wow, can you just post that someplace so we can think about it?
I'll just email it to you, Chris.
Cool.
That was great.
Yeah, I think you're asking about the
fundamental question of what does Carl call it? Epistemic value and the role of curiosity and
that whole cluster of issues.
Well, I think I need to give you the credit that you deserve on this. I think it's the fact that you
have allowed us to interact with you that's given us that kind of courage and confidence
to be able to put things out there. I don't know how much of it sticks or how much of it, I'm not
sure that it requires disciples, but I do think it provides what you've done is provided that medium.
So again, I guess that's my way of saying thank you.
Well, thank you.
That's...
Yeah, thank you, Chris. I have learned so much this year, more than ever before.
Okay, well, great. This has been a great class. And hopefully...
Hopefully various things will come out of it. I mean, certainly just from looking at the questions
that have been in the question forum, lots of people are thinking about these issues. And
that's what I think AI needs going forward is people thinking and talking about stuff.
I think AI needs to be a little bit more. And I think AI needs to be a little bit more.
Thank you, Chris. Yeah, a few outcomes that we know will transcribe the lectures,
the discussions, add in screenshots, add in the Q&A, and publish those proceedings as a book.
We will pick back up in 2024 with potentially having the recorded and written contents as
part of a curriculum. So not just replicating, but now continuing on with another quantum flow
across this now classical artifact, because it's quantum in the moment. And then once it's communicated,
it becomes a classic.
And we have most to prepare that state.
All right. Great. I'm gonna have to sign off. But thank you very much.
Thank you, Chris.
Thank you. Thank you, Chris.
All right. Ciao.
Bye-bye.
Does anyone else...
Does anyone else want to make any reflection or comments?
Chris
I just thank everybody that's helped organize, participated in all of the discussions,
even the people who showed up at the very end of the discussions, because I really appreciate that.
Again, I can't emphasize enough, when we get a chance to interact with this stuff,
when we get to manipulate it, when we're able to get asked questions, even though we feel vulnerable.
I think that that's when a lot of the really good stuff tends to get consolidated. So thank you to all of you.
I'll read some fun comments from the live chat. Just the last several, just to recognize some of our great
colleagues.
Lucrative Leadership
wrote
Yes, more on affordances. Ian wrote, would love for this series to continue. Joanne wrote, thank you. This was a wonderful learning experience.
Mills 8102 wrote, the probable and the possible.
There are some emojis. Pablo sent a heart.
Paul, the probable and the possible.
I don't speak this language, but I can definitely hear, understand and feel it.
So thank you everybody who's watching along. These were all great. And
we prepare and measure every day at the Institute. So I really do hope that people from all backgrounds,
all vectors, all preference and prior sets come engage and not presuppose too much about us or
themselves or what can happen when we really do interact. And when we take it into
the kinds of spaces and timelines that we know we want to be on.
All right. Thank you. Bye.
Bye.
Thank you everyone. Bye.

## RpOrRw4EhTo

Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference Institute. This is session one of the course
Physics as Information Processing with Chris Fields. First we'll have Andra Ghire and Chris
Fields introduce themselves and then we'll carry on with the first lecture here. Check out the
video description for a link to the course overview website where you can ask questions
that will be answered asynchronously, register to participate in the discussions which happen about
two weeks after each of the six lecture sessions, and just learn more about this area. So thank you
both so much for joining into this adventure we are starting now. And first please Andra Ghire
introduce yourself and then Chris introduction and lecture. Thank you.
Hello so I'll be the course assistant and so I'm a postdoc in math specialized in
probability and I have a deep interest in the physics of information and I've been
familiar with Chris's papers for a while and so yeah just here to learn myself.
Chris Fields
Thank you Andra and thank you Daniel. I'm Chris Fields
and I'll be presenting this course in six sessions and Andra will be organizing discussion sessions
after each of those and all of this is explained on the course website. So let's start. This is a course on physics as information processing and this first session will be historical perspective
on the idea that physics is is or is about information processing and I'll just start with a few quotations that span the middle of the 20th century from Wittgenstein in 1920 saying the world is all that is the case so defining the world in terms of facts not objects.
Chris Fields
Landau
Landau
Landau
Landau

Landau

Now I'm going to have to worry about the years of this idea get pithier as the 20th century rolls on. But the history goes back further clearly than the 20th century. But I'm only going to really talk about a piece of it. And the timeline that I'll actually discuss today, the most relevant history of this idea goes back to the mid 19th century.
century. And the first specific thing I'll talk about is Clausius' definition of entropy.
But with the beginning of the understanding of thermodynamics and the role of information
in thermodynamics, you get this very interesting multidisciplinary progression of ideas
that incorporates the beginning of quantum theory. And the beginning of quantum theory can kind of be
dated to the first Solvay conference in 1928 and the famous debate between Bohr and Einstein
over whether quantum theory is about knowledge, information, or objects, things.
But it incorporates a lot of work in computer science and logic and mathematics. So interestingly,
computer science was born effectively in the mid-30s with the work of Church and Turing,
which very rapidly converged with the work in physics. So today we'll be talking about both
computer science and physics. And then in the second half of the 20th century, this just exploded into
a huge area. And in consequence of that mid-20th century development, we're beginning to see a new
idea about physics, which is roughly encapsulated in quantum information theory. And the new idea is this.
It's that what physics is actually about is information transfer across boundaries.
And the information, we can represent the information transfer like this, and this is a convention I'll use.
A boundary is always a blue ellipse.
A boundary is always a blue ellipse. And the agents that are exchanging information across this boundary
are conventionally called Alice and Bob, which is just a more polite way of saying A and B.
And when you think about this picture, it becomes clear that what physics is really about is communication.
And this is a wild re-description of the idea of what physics is compared to the ideas of Newton or Laplace or even the 19th century ideas.
And it's very different from the idea that's been preserved in 20th century physics in the lineage of Einstein
Einstein and others who viewed classical physics as, in a sense, a fundamental, either as completely fundamental or as a fundamental adjunct to quantum theory.
So this way of thinking about physics is a very deeply quantum theoretic way of thinking about physics.
And where we're going in this course today is really how did this all happen? It's the origin story.
And then in the next session, I want to discuss quantum information theory explicitly.
And in particular, how quantum theory makes this conclusion that physics is about communication very simple and obvious, much more obvious than it is in classical physics,
where it takes work to formulate this idea.
Then in the next session, we're going to talk about semantics and how observations become meaningful to the agents who make them, and hence how actions become meaningful to the agents who make them.
Then in August, we'll talk about communication theory a little bit more explicitly,
and talk about how agents employ multiple communication channels when they're communicating.
And, you know, this is obvious when you think of people communicating.
They not only talk to each other, they look at the same things, they point to things, etc.
So this is what I mean by multiple communication channels.
Then in September, we'll leverage that discussion to talk about how space-time actually emerged
from communication. And this is one of the most important aspects, I think, of quantum information theory.
It provides us with a way of viewing space-time as an emergent phenomenon.
That communication is what is fundamental in some ontological sense.
And the box in which it happens, space-time, is not.
So the final session in October will talk about applications to biology via the free energy principle and future directions, both in physics and biology and elsewhere.
So it's going to be an interesting ride.
So I'm keeping formalism to a minimum because we're directing this toward the broad array of people who are interested in active inference
and who are involved with the Active Inference Institute.
And I would ask you to hold questions, because we have a lot to get through in an hour,
for the interactive discussion and for the discussion forum.
So I hope I explained things well enough that all of the concepts will be understandable.
If not, Wikipedia is actually a wonderful resource in this area for just definitions of terms.
So if there's anything that just a term that is a trip up, try Wikipedia.
It's probably a very good source for what these terms mean.
So let's start.
Our story, as I said, begins in the 19th century.
And in the mid-19th century, lots of physicists were devoting their efforts to figuring out how to make better steam engines.
And one question that arises when you're trying to design a steam engine is what happens physically
when you add heat to a system at constant temperature.
So if you're building a steam engine, you've got a boiler because you need to make steam.
And as you turn up the heat to your boiler, you get more steam, but the temperature doesn't change.
So this is a mystery.
What is the heat actually adding to the boiler that is not increasing the temperature?
And Clausius responded to this question in a way that's sort of typical for a physicist or a mathematician.
Since he didn't know what the answer was, he just invented a new name for whatever it was and gave it a formal definition.
So he called it entropy, which is a made-up word that, if it was translated from the Greek, would roughly mean transformation content in tropy.
And he represented it by a simple equation that the change in this new concept entropy, which is always called S,
is just equal to the change in heat, Q, at constant temperature T.
So obviously this equation just reformulates the question in declarative form, saying whatever this stuff is,
is changes in heat at constant temperature.
is energy. And this wasn't completely recognized in the mid-19th century.
But the way you'll see this equation in a current textbook is ds is d energy, change in energy at constant temperature.
So even more commonly you would see it written as the change in energy is equal to the temperature times the change in entropy.
It's the most common sort of textbook way of seeing this.
But the question, of course, is what is this quantity? What is this entropy? What does this concept mean?
What is this density in density in density is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to
constant times the number of states that the system can be in that look the same to us.
And since that number of states is enormous, the way to make that manageable is to take
the log of the number of states. The natural log is ln. And this constant k is called
Boltzmann's constant. And Boltzmann was able to do this because he subscribed to a radical,
very unpopular theory that material things, including gases like air, were made of atoms.
And heat made the atoms move around. And as you increase the amount of heat, the atoms can move
in many different ways. So the number of states that they can be in that look the same to us
increases. And that's what entropy is. It's this increase in the number of states that the system
can be in that all look the same to us with the measurements that we can make. And since they
look the same to us, we're uncertain about exactly what state they're in. So entropy is a measure of
uncertainty. This was really the beginning of modern physics. Because what it says now is that decreasing
uncertainty requires energy. It links a measurement of uncertainty to a measurement of energy.
And if you think about the uncertainty principle in quantum theory, the core idea of the uncertainty
principle is that you can't measure a system without disturbing it. So to actually act on a system
requires energy. And that's what you have to do to get information. So here's Boltzmann basically
inventing quantum theory. So we're going to fast forward by another 15 years to 1900.
And in 1900, Planck solved this problem called the blackbody radiation problem, which was basically how
much heat does your hot boiler give off into the air. And all of the measurements of the heat that hot
boilers gave off to the air ran into problems in classical physics and caused contradictions and
quantities that went to infinity. And all of that was bad. So many people were trying to solve this
problem. And Planck solved it by making a simple postulate. He said the energy of the radiation
is proportional to its frequency. So it's color in the case of light. And if you go higher frequency,
you end up in ultraviolet and x-rays and gamma rays. If you go to lower frequency, you go into microwaves
and radio and all of that. So this is a nice way of talking about radiation. And it turned out that
this solved the problem. I mean, just assuming this simple proportionality relationship
produced spectra for blackbody radiation that worked, that matched what you saw experimentally.
Well, this means something very important. It means because this number, h, the proportionality
constant called Planck's constant, is a number, it's finite, it means that energy comes in discrete units
of h. You can have 1h or 2h or 10 million h, but you can't have half an h of energy. So it's quantized.
And this is widely recognized as the birth of quantum theory.
But of course, we should have known this already if we just thought a little bit.
Right? We know that changes of energy are proportional to the changes in entropy
by temperature. And we know that entropy is a measure of the number of states. And numbers of states are just
numbers. You can have one state, two states, three states, 10 million states, 100 billion states,
but they're all just a number. One up. And it's not infinite. There's not an infinite number of states
unless you have an infinite amount of energy, which we don't have. So we knew already that entropy could
only take discrete values. And since energy and entropy are basically the same thing, we knew already that
energy could only take discrete values. So we could have realized in 1900 that energy is quantized because
the number of states is quantized. So it shouldn't have really been a mystery why energy was quantized. But it was a mystery.
And it stayed a mystery. I mean, it's still a mystery. People still debate the meaning of quantum theory.
But another thing we could have known in 1900 was something very important. And it's that this quantum of action,
Planck's constant, which is units of action, which is energy times time, is intimately related to Boltzmann's constant.
And Boltzmann's constant has units of energy over temperature.
But this wasn't actually understood until the 1950s. No one really figured this out. There was this relation
until the 1950s. And when it was figured out, it was figured out by a guy named Giancarlo Wick.
And he introduced this notion of the Wick rotation by realizing that if you have an equation in classical physics,
and in it there's the term 1 over kt,
you can always replace that 1 over kt with this other expression,
it over h-bar. H-bar is just h divided by 2 pi.
And you'll get an equation that's valid in quantum theory.
And this is typically described in textbooks as a trick.
And whenever something in physics is described as a trick, what that really means is it's something we don't understand.
And lots of papers have been written about the meaning of the Wick rotation.
But to start to understand the Wick rotation, I want to look at this equation a little bit.
1 over kt is 1 over an energy.
And it over h-bar is 1 over an energy, since h-bar is units of energy times time.
1 over time. We have time in this equation.
And then we have this factor i, which is typically thought of as just an imaginary number.
So it's the square root of minus 1.
And what's this i doing in this equation?
And in fact, you see factors of it over h-bar, if you're familiar with quantum theory, everywhere
in quantum theory. So what's the meaning of this imaginary number?
And if you just think of i,t or of i as this arbitrary imaginary number that somehow renders the
equation mysterious, then the whole of quantum theory is mysterious, but the Wick rotation is very mysterious.
But what i is actually is an operator.
And if you think of the real numbers as an axis, which is always drawn horizontally, so here it is.
Here's 0. And the axis is pointing that way. I'm sorry, I can't get the camera really far enough away to see my arm here.
So what is i? I is actually an operator that rotates the whole real axis by 90 degrees.
So if you see a plot of complex numbers, then the real numbers go this way and the, quote, imaginary numbers go that way.
So what multiplying by i is done is rotate by 90 degrees. And of course, if you do i squared, you rotate twice by 90 degrees.
But you end up pointing that way. And those are the negative numbers. So i is an operator that rotates something by 90 degrees.
And if you rotate four times by 90 degrees, you're back to the identity. So i to the fourth is 1.
So this tells us something very interesting, which is that what the Wick rotation is really talking about is a rotation.
It's a geometrical equation. And in July, we'll come back to this and really probe what this Wick rotation means physically.
But as I said, this wasn't understood in the 1950s. And by the 1950s, a lot had happened.
So quantum theory had been developed. Bohr and Einstein had had their debate. Particle accelerators had been built. The atomic bomb had been built. Nuclear physics was well in its way.
So an enormous amount of practical physics had been done. Quantum theory was highly developed. People were starting to think about quantum field theory before they made this simple realization that's formulated in the Wick rotation.
So this is a hard-brainer of things to come. But before we continue in physics, we need to backtrack in time a little bit and look at what the mathematicians were doing.
So across the hall in physics, one year after the Solvay Conference in 1929, Kurt Gödel proved his famous first incompleteness theorem.
And the theorem states that no formal system that contains arithmetic can be both consistent and complete.
And that means that either there are true statements that aren't provable in the formal system,
or there are false statements that are provable, or of course both.
And Gödel's proof is actually extremely simple. Almost all of the work in the proof
is setting up all of the notation and procedures and so forth to formulate within arithmetic the sentence,
this sentence is not provable.
And once you have that sentence formulated within arithmetic,
then the conclusion of the proof is obvious.
You know, if you can prove the sentence, this sentence is not provable, then you've proved something that's false.
And if you can't prove it, then there's sentences that you can't prove in arithmetic.
So this was incredibly bad news for mathematicians
who thought that finite discrete operations, which is what proofs are, and also what computations are,
can exhaustively enumerate the facts. And this was the assumption behind Wittgenstein's claim that
the world is all that is the case. The world is a collection of facts.
And optimistically, he thought that first order logic would allow us to enumerate all those facts and we'd be done.
Dreams of a final theory again.
So Gödel's theorem means that no system with finite capabilities,
no system that can just do finite discrete operations, can fully describe its environment.
It will always be in an environment where there are true things that aren't provable
or false things that are provable. But I think more relative to a discussion of agents is that
it means that no agent can describe itself. Any agent's theory of itself will either contain true
statements that it can't derive or false statements, or it will either miss true statements that it can't
derive or it will end up deriving things that are false about itself. And of course, we see this in
psychology all the time. So an immediate consequence of Gödel's theorem was an intense investigation of
what computation actually is, what it meant to talk about finite discrete operations.
And two leaders of this were, of course, Church and Turing. And here's a picture of a Turing machine,
which is just a little device with a couple of tapes, and a tape reader and a simple logic unit that
either writes a one or a zero if it sees a one or a zero. And they defined a computation
as a process that can be implemented in finite time by such a machine, or by Church's lambda calculus,
or by any of the now hundreds of other methods that are provably equivalent to a Turing machine.
So what does this mean? It means that computation is a physical process that can be mechanized,
and it turns out mechanized in any one of a huge array of ways. It means that many different
implementations of any computation are possible. So I can do it on a Turing machine, I can do it on
my laptop, I can do it in my head, etc. The most important things it means is that there are questions
with no computable answer. This is the revenge of Gödel's theorem. And two of the most famous
questions of this kind are, given some arbitrary program, will it halt? Will it get to an answer
in finite time? And the answer to that question is, this is undecidable. No procedure can figure this out.
And the other undecidable question is, given some arbitrary program, what function does it compute?
And you'd think that would be simple, that you can read a program and figure out what function it
computes. But it turns out that is undecidable. That cannot be done by any finite process.
So this was another body blow to the goal of understanding everything with finite discrete
processes. But it also set the stage for something new. It set the stage for thinking about an agent who
interacts with a computational process by giving it an input and then looking at its output sometime later.
And this, of course, will look familiar because I've included the blue ellipse, which is the boundary,
which these days we call a user interface.
is the user interface. And the user interface just allows some finite action on the system and then
the ability to observe some finite response by the system. So we can now ask, what can Alice determine
by acting in some finite way and then making some finite number of observations, i.e.
that she's acting on. And the first 20 years of this produced a large number of answers, all of them negative.
So to go back to Turing, he proved that Alice can't tell what's implementing the function that she sees being
implemented. She can't tell whether a given input will lead to an output. That's the halting problem.
Shannon showed that Alice can't tell what the inputs mean to the system. His whole theory of communication
is completely independent of semantics. And his theory of communication actually accurately describes what Alice can observe.
So, of rice is the one who proved that you can't determine what program is generating the outputs.
And then Moore proved a very similar result in a completely different formal setting of general
cybernetics, that you can't tell what process is generating the outputs by finite observation.
So, what Alice can do is build a predictive model of what generates the output she sees in response to her inputs,
and test it by designing new inputs. And this is, of course, as Karl Popper told us, the process that we call science.
So, Alice can do science even though she can't answer any of these fundamental questions.
Now, this, of course, has a huge technological consequence.
Since this theory of computation tells us that processes are effectively virtual,
we don't know what they are and we can't determine what they are except in theory by making a theory.
Technologically, it means we're free to use virtualization everywhere because we have to deal with it anyway.
And this allows us to build multi-level architectures. It means that we can architect computers where
no layer of the computation has any idea what's going on below or above it and doesn't need to.
And that's what makes practical programming possible.
So, from these no-go theorems that tell you what you can't do, you actually get an enormous boost
into it and use to probe the world and develop theories and on and on and on.
So, in a sense, Gödel birthed not only computer science but practical computing by showing us that
virtualization is just the way the world works. So now let's go back to physics, where these ideas were
replicated, basically reintroduced, reinvented by Feynman in developing his path integral formulation of
quantum theory. And basically what Feynman realized was that in any physical process,
the observer, Alice, prepares some state that she's interested in, she prepares some input to an experiment,
then she lets something happen, and then she sees what the result of the experiment is.
And the canonical experiment in physics is scattering, you fire two protons at each other and they intersect
someplace and stuff comes out and you measure the stuff that comes out. And what you can measure is
momentum and spin, energy, things like that, position. So, these processes conserve the total values of the things you can measure.
So, in particular, they preserve momentum and they preserve other things that are harder to measure and are
only approximately conserved anyway, like lepton number. But Feynman's contribution to this way of thinking
about experiments was to say, look, if you want to understand the output, you have to sum over all of the
possible processes that could have produced the output from the input, no matter how improbable they are.
So, the famous idea from Feynman diagrams is if you have an electron that's scattering off an atom,
you measure the initial state of the electron that you've generated with an accelerator or something,
and you measure the final state, which involves momentum and spin and so forth. And for all you knew,
partway through the process, the electron disappeared and an entire universe appeared and then annihilated with
a copy of an entire anti-universe and the electron came back out. And you have to include processes like
that if you really want to understand and correctly predict the outcomes of your measurements. And Murray
Gelman lifted the bumper sticker slogan from T.H. White and the Once and Future King,
everything not explicitly forbidden is mandatory. That sums up Feynman's idea. And this is called the
totalitarian principle, since it's what's written in T.H. White's book on the kingdom of the ants,
for which everything not explicitly forbidden is mandatory. So, let's think about a real example
that's a bit, actually, it's the same as scattering. The ultimate scattering experiment in physics is a black hole.
Stuff goes into the horizon, stars, whole galaxies, whatever. Something happens and stuff comes out. And what
comes out is hawking radiation. And information is conserved if the information in the hawking radiation is
actually the same as the information in the stuff that went in. And conservation is not qualitative, it's
quantitative. It's only the quantity of information that's supposed to be preserved. And you can ask,
how much is the information that's being emitted by a black hole that's emitting hawking radiation?
And Bekenstein was the one who figured this out using an incredibly simple argument. But I'll just give
the answer here. The answer is that the total entropy of the black hole is its area divided by 4. And
the area in this equation has to be computed in Planck units, which are units where
Planck's constant and the speed of light and Boltzmann's constant and other interesting things are all set equal to 1.
So one Planck area is the Planck length squared, which turns out to be about 10 to the minus 70th meters squared.
So this says that black holes are the most entropic entities we know of. So a black hole about this big,
with a radius of about a meter, has an entropy of about 10 to the 70th, which is, of course, an astonishingly big number.
And a black hole with the area of the sun, so a moderate-sized cosmological black hole,
a real thing that we can observe with a gravity wave telescope or something, has an entropy of about 10 to the 79th.
And really big black holes, which are bigger than the entire solar system, have entropies into the 10 to the 80th,
you know, 10 to the 85th or something. So these are enormously entropic entities.
But Beckenstein didn't just tell us that. He told us something about the structure of the interface,
the horizon of a black hole. And this is what he told us.
You can compute entropy in bits just by using
log space 2 instead of log space E, natural logs. And that's just multiplying the natural log by about 1.4.
So we can write the entropy of black hole in units of bits, and it's about A over 6.
So what does this mean to say that we can think of the entropy in terms of bits? What it says is that we can
think of the interface in terms of a bit array. And we can think of all of these bits
bits as encoded on this interface at a density of 1 bit every roughly 6 Planck lengths squared, 6 Planck areas.
So this is an incredibly dense encoding in a black hole. And it's an interesting idea about black holes,
which what gets really interesting is what happens when you generalize it. And of course,
physicists are prone to generalization, and that's what happened next.
Gerard Tehuft almost immediately thereafter, on the basis of Beckenstein's work, formulated the
holographic principle. And what the holographic principle says is we can think of any
any system as approximately a black hole. And the only approximation is the encoding density.
The boundary of any system encodes the information that we can get about the system
at some density. And the density is less than the density for a black hole because we're not black holes.
And this rules out a lot by limiting the amount of information that you can extract from a system
to the amount of information that you can actually write on its boundary.
And one of the things that it rules out is knowing the geometry on the inside of the system.
And Tehuft put it this way, which I think is a brilliant thought experiment, he says, look,
the metric inside this system can be so curved, effectively the space-time inside the system
can be so curved that you could stick an entire universe inside. And we'd never know, because it
wouldn't change the amount of entropy, the number of bits that are encoded on the boundary.
So the inside geometry can be anything, and you can't find out by looking at the outside of the system.
So the holographic principle almost follows from classical physics.
There's Euler's theorem, which tells you about 1 over r squared forces, and you can think of the force
as penetrating the boundary at some density. And the difference between Euler's theorem and the
holographic principle is just that the density in classical physics can go to infinity. And in the
holographic principle, it can only go to this maximal density that's achieved by a black hole.
Why? Because if you try to get any higher, more information, the information gets sucked into the
black hole, and you can't get it out. So the holographic principle becomes a guiding principle
for thinking about any physical system and what it means to extract information from a physical system.
And in fact, we'll talk about this next time, you can say exactly what the information encoded on the
boundary of any system is. And what I'll go through next time is seeing that the information that's encoded on
the boundary is a specification of the energy that's being exchanged by the interaction, which of course is
linear in the number of bits. It's just counting the number of bits. Okay. So with the holographic principle,
we now have a complete new science about systems that are exchanging finite discrete information across
a boundary by encoding that information on the boundary and then reading the information off the boundary.
So here's a new way of thinking about physical interaction. Alice writes a message on her boundary with Bob,
and Bob reads the message off the boundary and then writes his own new message, which Alice then reads.
And of course, that's what's happening right now. I'm writing information by speaking on an interface,
which is effectively the internet. And you're reading that information off the internet by listening to it.
And when we get time for questions, you'll be writing information on the internet, which I'll be reading.
Now, the key thing about this new science is that it's topological. It's about connectivity
across some communication channel, which we represent as a boundary. It's not geometric. So it doesn't assume
anything about space-time. So it allows us to build a model of space, in particular, as an emergent phenomenon.
And it allows us to see time as not some absolute external abstraction, but something that the communicating agents measure for themselves.
And so they each act in their own time. And we get a very natural measure of time in terms of how many bits I see coming across my boundary.
And again, we'll talk about that in the next couple of sessions. And then talk about it more thoroughly in September, when we talk about emergent space-time.
So quantum information theory looks very different from the physics that came before,
not because it's adopted a new formalism, the tools of quantum theory. It's because it's entirely changed the thinking about what physics is and what it's about.
And replace this idea of forces and balls banging into each other and all of that with the idea of communication between agents.
And, of course, that's familiar from an active inference perspective. So we can now back up a little bit to see what they were doing in classical physics during this period.
Well, let me go on a little bit. Sorry. This is just a slide quoting Wheeler, who, of course, is the most radical in terms of and pithiest in terms of formulating these ideas.
But here's his characterization of this new physics. It's not reductive. All of the reasoning is circular.
You don't have smaller things and then yet smaller things and then yet smaller things forever.
There are no laws. So what you see on the interface is a message. It's not something that's governed by laws since the beginning of the universe.
There's no continuum. So there's nothing described by real numbers. It's all described by integers. Everything's done in finite dimensional spaces.
And finally, and most importantly, there's no space-time box in which things happen.
So think of how radical this is. It means there's no big bang. There's no big rip. There's no bouncing universe.
All of those ideas are out the window because they're classical and they're about space-time.
And what the new physics wants to do is derive space-time out of basically users' experiences.
So the agents here are all observer participants in Wheeler's language.
But what that just means is agents that want to communicate.
And it's their communication that gives rise to physics.
So now we'll go back to classical physics.
And what was happening, or one thing that was happening in classical physics at that time,
was a lot of thinking about stochastic causal networks.
And Perl realized that if you have any stochastic causal network that's unidirectional,
then around any node, you can draw what he called a Markov blanket.
And a Markov blanket is just the set of nodes in the network that absorb all outside causation
and then transmit that causation into whatever node you're interested in,
and then absorb all causation coming from the node you're interested in,
and transmit it to the rest of the world.
And so we can redraw that in Part B here.
And it should look very familiar.
A Markov blanket is just a classical physics way of talking about a holographic screen.
And the number of nodes in the Markov blanket,
or in particular the number of degrees of freedom times the number of nodes,
is just the number of bits that flow across that Markov blanket.
So it's the entropy of the effective holographic screen.
So all these ideas were reinvented more or less independently within classical physics.
And it was from this classical physics background that Carl Freston came up with the idea
that a Markov blanket defines a persistence.
At least from an active inference institute point of view everyone is familiar with,
because it's the foundation of the idea of active inference.
Any system that persists through time does so by making sure that it doesn't dissolve into its environment.
Well, what does that mean?
It means that it persists through time by maintaining the integrity of its Markov blanket,
or the integrity of its boundary.
So this, of course, is just a tautology.
But it's a very interesting and very productive tautology,
because it says that any system is using the information it gets on its boundary from its environment
to build a model of how its environment behaves.
And then it uses that model to act back on its environment to test and refine its model.
And again, as Popper told us, this is just what science is.
So what the free energy principle really tells us is that all systems are agents that are doing science all the time.
So physics is effectively not just the study of communication,
but it's the study of agents doing science with each other,
pairs of agents who are trying to figure each other out by their communicative exchanges.
So that's the history of how we got from 1850s thermodynamics to the free energy principle.
And how the free energy principle connects to these very deep and extremely radical,
especially within context, ideas in quantum theory and quantum cosmology and computer science,
all of which tell us that the world we see is a projection that's being written on our boundaries
by a process that we have no access to except the procedure of active inference or the procedure of science,
science, which is to formulate predictive models and test them by doing things in the world and seeing how the world responds.
So that's it for this session.
The first discussion session, which Andrew is going to lead, will be the 3rd of June at this same time,
i.e. 5 o'clock European time.
And then my session number two will be in mid-June.
And if you look at the course website, there's this subsidiary website for interactive Q&A.
And I invite everyone to post questions and discuss them
and hope that we'll have an interesting exchange
and that everyone will come to sort of an understanding of what was talked about today through discussion.
And we'll be interested in being back in June to see how to formulate this in quantum theory.
So thank you very much.
And thank you again, Daniel, for organizing this and hosting it
and putting together all the technical things necessary to pull this off.
I could never do that on my own.
Thank you.
We're really excited here.
Any closing thoughts?
Or, Andrew, I'd love to hear your reflection just briefly.
How would you have told that history or how does that history reflect on the areas that you're familiar with?
Well, I don't think I have much to add.
I've been mainly interested in the weak rotation part.
I am excited to hear more about that, Chris.
But no, I mean, I found this to be a very, very nice summary.
I don't think I'm less familiar with the step on computation, formal computation,
despite being a mathematician by training.
And I was a little more familiar with all the physics stuff.
But yeah, I thought it was great.
Thank you.
All right.
Thank you.
I will close it.
So in about two weeks, we'll have the first discussion.
Everyone's welcome to join.
I will share with Andre and Chris the questions, and we can develop that,
and we'll have that on the course front end before the coming discussion.
So thanks again, fellows.
See you next time.
Bye.




























































Thank you.

## k55mAFCIQ60

Hello and welcome everyone. This is Physics as Information Processing, Session 4 on Communicating Observers.
It's the 10th of August, 2023. Chris, looking forward to this lecture. Off to you.
Thank you, Daniel, and welcome to this session. As Daniel said, this is about communicating observers and fasten your seatbelts because we have a lot to cover in the next hour.
So just to do a quick review, we've been talking about quantum information theory, and we've been talking about it in the simplest possible setting of two systems, Alice and Bob, that exchange information through their mutual boundary.
And we've assumed that everything is finite dimensional, so we don't need to worry about infinite energy transfer across this boundary.
And, of course, we assume conservation of energy, so there are no sources or sinks in either of the systems, Alice and Bob.
And we emphasize that this way of depicting things is topological. We're not assuming any background geometry, no sort of spatial embedding, which is going to become very important in this session.
In the last session, we talked about how the boundary, which I'll always call B, can be thought of as a channel that comprises n qubits that are independent.
And Alice and Bob each can prepare and measure those qubits.
And they can always choose independently their reference frames for doing so, so how they define up and down when they're measuring a spin with effectively a Z-spin operator to interact with these qubits.
We talked a little bit about the free energy principle and its quantum formulation.
And the principle basically says that interacting systems will behave in a way that aligns their reference frames and that they therefore asymptotically approach entanglement.
So the FEP is a classical limit of the principle of unitarity.
And that's one reason for studying quantum information to learn more about the FEP and so to learn more about active inference and what the theory of active inference says about agents.
And last time we talked a lot about the constraints that are imposed by a limited free energy supply on any agent.
Recall that we talked about the fact that in the absence of sources of free energy within an agent.
So as long as you conserve energy globally, that the free energy that each agent uses has to come from its environment.
That's clearly true for us.
We have to consume oxygen and eat food and things like that to keep running as systems.
And we discussed a little bit this theorem that if two reference frames or quantum processes, Q1 and Q2, don't commute,
they have to be implemented by compartments that communicate classically.
And we'll use this extensively today.
But the bottom line last time was that physics alone gives us compartmentalization in systems whenever the systems are complex enough to have multiple kinds of measurements that they can't deploy simultaneously.
So where we're going today, we're going to start from this place we left off last time of the possibility of agents that are compartmentalized and into compartments that have to communicate classically.
So we're going to talk about agents that can be compartmentalized into multiple subagents that share an environment, the environment consisting of Bob, and how those agents talk about that shared environment.
So the motivation for this is simple.
It's that what we do all the time is a group activity.
And what we're doing right now is a group activity that involves sharing an environment, what's shown on this screen, and talking about it.
And the whole post-session discussion process will be another example of just that sort of thing.
So to talk about science at all, or to talk about any kind of social relations, or to talk about anything other than solipsism, we have to be able to talk about how multiple agents communicate about some shared environment.
And so that's what we're going to develop a formal way of talking about.
And there are two things to notice right off the top about this.
One is that the way we've defined interactions at boundaries, they're effectively instantaneous.
So each agent, remember, interacts with its boundary with some set of operators.
And what those operators do is effectively measure, each operator effectively measures the spin of a qubit.
So this is a very fast process.
The other thing that we then need to notice is that if we have two agents and they're communicating with each other classically,
then they're going to be using degrees of freedom of their shared environment in order to communicate.
And that's exactly what we're doing right now.
For example, we're using degrees of freedom of the internet to communicate.
I'm using degrees of freedom of the local atmosphere to talk to my microphone.
And I'm using degrees of freedom of the local photon field to see my screen.
So all communication between agents, and certainly all classical communication between agents, uses degrees of freedom of the environment.
And the environment, remember, is the other system, Bob, that's on the other side of that shared boundary.
So we're going to be interested in how components of Alice use Bob as a communication channel, and in fact, as multiple communication channels.
And I just wanted to quote my colleague and friend, Mike Levin, in his statement that all intelligence is composite.
All of us, all organisms, even single cells, are composite systems that comprise many, many different agents that are able to make different kinds of measurements
and execute different kinds of actions and so have to communicate classically.
So we're talking about all of life here, as well as all of social systems and ecosystems and such things as that.
So the first thing I want to do today is simplify the notation so that we don't have to draw quite such complicated diagrams.
So the picture on the left here is a picture from the last session.
It shows the structure of a very simple agent that makes some measurements using a reference frame called E,
and then writes some results of those measurements to memory using a reference frame called Y.
And those two processes are connected by an internal clock that ticks between the input process and the output process.
And the clock tick corresponds to the expenditure of free energy to write information irreversibly on the boundary.
So the memories are actually written on the boundary because that's where classical information lives in this theory.
So you can think of this whole process from E through the clock and back to Y as a single quantum process or as a quantum computation that maps some sector E of the boundary to some sector Y of the boundary.
And so we can represent it in this much simpler way that's over on the right side as some process Q that maps some sector on the boundary to some other sector on the boundary.
And formally, that process can be thought of as a topological quantum field theory.
Topological here is important.
It's not geometric.
It doesn't assume an embedding in space.
And this will become critically important later on.
And the operation of that TQFT requires a clock tick or it incorporates a tick of this internal clock.
And we can do this because we were able to prove, Jim Glazeberg and Tonino Marciano and I were able to prove last year, that we can always represent a quantum reference frame as a topological quantum field theory.
And this just illustrates the two kinds of transformations between quantum reference frames that are important.
We can take one and divide it into two pieces that commute.
Or we can take a two-part reference frame and we can swap in another part that doesn't commute with the part that we've swapped it in for, but that does commute with the remainder of the reference frame.
So here, R is the reference component of some object identification system.
And we can swap in some different way of looking at the object once we've identified it.
So, for example, if the object that we're identifying is a box that can measure both Z-spin and X-spin, then P and Q can be the Z-spin and X-spin settings on that box that allow us to effectively rotate the filter from this way to that way,
so that we measure vertical spin versus horizontal spin.
And that's really it.
I mean, those are the ways that one can transform quantum reference frames.
Of course, we can do arbitrarily many compositions of this kind of transformation if you do something very complicated.
But they map very simply to TQFTs with the structure.
And you can construct categories out of this and find a functor that's well-defined that maps one category to another.
So it's an example of a nice use of categorical techniques for solving a problem that looks difficult, but in fact, it's very straightforward.
So using this simplified notation, it becomes very easy to see that if we have two systems, Alice and Bob, on opposite sides of this boundary,
and we perfectly align their quantum reference frames, which is what the FEP says they will tend to do,
then they become entangled.
And you can see that they're entangled by seeing that once the reference frames are perfectly aligned,
they jointly implement one quantum process.
And jointly implementing one quantum process just means you're entangled.
The two sides no longer have conditionally independent states.
If one quantum process, which is time-reversible, information-preserving, is implemented jointly by the two systems.
So a lot of things like this become very simple when we think of these processes as just quantum computations going on inside some system,
implemented by the two systems, and how those processes relate across some boundary.
So that's what we're going to do for studying communication today.
Another thing to recall from a couple of sessions ago, or last session, is that if two reference frames, Q1 and Q2, commute,
we can always join them together to form a single reference frame.
And this is just a graphical depiction in this simpler language of how that works.
And topologically, there's no distinction between the left side and the right side.
What I've done is just squeeze the top two green circles together and the bottom two green circles together into one circle.
And that just makes a simple process connecting the top one to the bottom one.
So what we're going to be interested in is situations where this doesn't happen,
where Alice consists of two components that execute reference frames that don't commute.
And so the two components are conditionally independent.
They do each have free choice of reference frame.
And so they have to communicate classically.
They don't share a single quantum process.
So they're not entangled.
And before we go ahead to do that, I just wanted to remind you of some of the no-go theorems that follow from this situation
depicted on the right, where we have a single agent executing a single reference frame,
a single process, a single kind of measurement,
any set of commuting measurements that can be combined into one measurement.
And here are some things Alice can't do.
And we've talked about some of these previously.
So this is basically a reminder.
But Alice can't, using just one measurement,
measure the entanglement entropy across her own boundary.
So Alice can't know that she has an independent state.
She can't know that she's not entangled with Bob.
And that's a useful thing to think about philosophically,
as it applies to you and me.
We can't actually know that we have independent states.
Alice can't measure her own entanglement entropy.
So she can't know whether she has components that have to communicate classically.
She can't measure Bob's entanglement entropy.
So she can't know whether Bob has compartments that have to communicate classically.
And if you think in terms of perception theory,
this says Alice can't know whether Bob consists of separate objects that behave classically.
their behavior can look classical to her.
But she's not able to determine that their behavior is classical,
because she can't measure Bob's entanglement entropy.
She can't measure the dimension of her own boundary.
And recall from a couple of times ago that the boundary includes some sector that supplies free energy
that Alice can't extract information from for further processing.
She can only extract free energy from.
So she can't measure the dimension of that sector.
And so she can't measure the dimension of the whole boundary itself.
And this, of course, means that she can't measure her own dimension either.
And, of course, she can't measure Bob's dimension,
because the only information she can get about Bob
is the classical information that's encoded on this boundary.
She can't reach past the boundary to see how large a system Bob is.
And that's clearly connected to this first point,
that she can't measure the entanglement entropy across Bob,
because the entanglement entropy can only be small
if her dimension and Bob's dimension are both much larger than the dimension of the boundary.
So that's a condition she can't check.
So all of these kind of no-go theorems lead off in interesting directions.
And the only one that we're really going to be interested in here
is the third one, the one about measuring Bob's entanglement entropy,
because we want to talk specifically about how multiple agents,
so multiple components of ALICE,
can access information about Bob's entanglement entropy.
Okay, so recall from the end of the last session
that the last thing we talked about was classical communication.
And we talked about the fact that classical communication
involves assumptions and pitfalls,
and that we have to be very careful whenever we talk about it.
And what we're going to do today is standard practice in physics,
we're simply going to stipulate that these components,
A1 and A2, the separable components of ALICE, communicate classically.
And so we're going to draw it like this.
We're going to draw a classical channel between them.
And that classical channel passes through Bob.
It uses degrees of freedom of the ambient photon field
or the ambient atmosphere or pieces of paper or email
or something like that that's out there in the environment
to exchange classical messages.
And there are a couple of things to note here.
I haven't even written down here.
We're assuming that A1 and A2 share some language
for this classical communication.
That's a big assumption, as we talked about last time.
But I will note explicitly that classical communication takes time.
That's what defines classicality here.
It's causal, so it can't work faster than the speed of light.
This is a topological theory.
We don't have an embedding geometry,
so we can't at this point talk about light,
which is a relationship between space and time,
because we've got time, we've got clocks,
but we don't have any space.
But we can say that whatever passes through this classical channel
requires at least one clock tick on Bob's side.
So it's a process that Bob has to execute,
and executing that process takes time.
So getting the signal from me to you on the internet takes some time,
so the environment's clock has to tick during that.
And all of these assumptions bundled together
turn out to be a fairly serious set of assumptions,
and they involve assumptions about fine-tuning,
about the universe being just right.
And they should make us nervous.
And I just want to leave it at that.
We always assume with complete aplomb
that agents can communicate classically,
but it's not a straightforward assumption.
And it's worth,
any of you who are looking at,
for interesting research projects,
can look into the nature of classical communication.
It's full of hidden assumptions and surprises
and things that aren't at all straightforward,
even though they look like they ought to be.
So there's a challenge.
So why do we assume this?
Why do we assume classical communication?
We do it because we have to,
if we're going to talk about detecting entanglement.
And most of you probably know the history
of the notion of entanglement.
It was first noticed by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen,
ever after called EPR in 1935.
And they wrote a paper, which is infamous,
and called the EPR paper,
in which they argued that the phenomenon of entanglement
made no sense and couldn't possibly be physical.
And since quantum theory included this notion of entanglement,
it couldn't possibly be a complete theory
of what's going on in the world.
And Schrodinger replied the same year
with a very detailed paper
where it introduces, among other things,
Schrodinger's cat as a paradox.
And he explains very clearly what entanglement is
and why entanglement follows from quantum theory.
And he uses that discussion to argue
that the classical notion of a physical state
is not actually applicable to the world as it is.
So he answers the EPR paper very directly.
And this discussion
is currently mostly known as the Bohr-Einstein debate
because, of course, Bohr, already in 1928,
had said in print that the classical notion
of causality in space and time
simply doesn't apply anymore.
And Einstein objected to that vigorously.
But that was 1935.
And it was almost 50 years later
that entanglement was first observed in the laboratory.
Here, the 1982 picture is a picture
of the interior of Alan Asbeth's laboratory
when he performed the first entanglement experiment
for which he finally won the Nobel Prize last year.
And these days, this kind of experiment
is done all over the world
and is even done with satellite-borne sources.
This is the key to quantum security,
quantum secured communication,
as we'll discuss in quantum cryptography
and quantum banking, the quantum internet,
all this other stuff that you may have heard of.
So before talking more about these experiments,
I just want to provide a definition of entanglement.
Entangled simply means not separable.
That's the definition.
So a state, a joint state, A, B, is entangled
if and only if it does not factor
into two separable states.
And that's it.
That's the definition.
And the literature, and especially the popular literature,
is absolutely rife with hype
and various kinds of mysterification of entanglement.
And authors trying to convince you
that entanglement is this amazing kind of woo-woo thing.
And whenever you run across that,
go back to the definition.
I mean, entanglement simply means
this simple mathematical condition
of not separability
or of a state that isn't factorizable.
And that means that the state
does not display classical conditional independence.
So classically, that's the way to think about it.
It's a failure of conditional independence.
And it's ubiquitous in quantum theory,
even though it wasn't actually observed
for almost 50 years after it was predicted.
So here's what all these experiments look like.
They're called Bell-EPR experiments,
after John Bell,
who derived the statistical criterion
for detecting entanglement.
And EPR, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen,
who did this as a thought experiment
and said,
if this occurs in the theory,
it can't possibly be real.
And of course, it is real,
as now amply demonstrated by experimentation.
Here's how they work.
There's a source.
The source produces a state
that is entangled.
And I've written the typical,
what's called a Bell state.
It's up plus or minus down
divided by the square root of 2
just to normalize it.
But up plus or minus down
is clearly not the same as up times down.
So this is not a separable state.
And this state propagates
outward in space and time
to two observers
who have independent laboratories,
for example, on different continents.
In that space-based experiment
that I showed you the picture of
from the cover of Science
a few years ago, 2017, I think.
The truth observers have freedom
to choose their own reference frame,
their own z-axis for measuring spin.
They do a spin measurement.
And they do this over and over and over again.
They accumulate statistics.
And they exchange their results
so that they can analyze
the joint statistics of their experiment.
And they check to see
whether that joint statistics
is consistent with classical probability theory.
And if it isn't
to a statistically significant level,
then they've been able
to detect entanglement.
Now, notice that this process
requires classical communication.
They have to make
their independent measurements
in their own laboratories,
and then they have to exchange results.
Or one of them has to send results
to the other one,
or they both have to send
their results to some third party.
But in all of these cases,
they're exchanging some classical data.
And so we have the assumption
that whoever gets that classical data
knows the language it was recorded in,
and so can do a joint analysis.
So I'll just show you another picture
of this experiment
that's in a standard space-time diagram.
Here, time is vertical.
Space is horizontal.
The two observers are labeled Alice and Bob.
They share a quantum channel
that goes from Alice to the source to Bob.
That's the entangled state.
They do some processing,
and then one of them here, Bob,
sends the results to Alice.
And that's a classical communication.
It takes time,
and it traverses space.
So this step is classical.
So this is why we have to assume
classical communication
to talk about detecting
or using entanglement.
So now I want to represent this
in a different way
using our little picture earlier.
We're going to think of Alice again
as two components,
A1 and A2.
They're separable,
so they have to communicate classically.
They have a classical channel
that goes through Bob,
and they also now share
some quantum channel.
They share an entangled state.
And the entangled state, of course,
is produced by Bob.
The source is part of Bob.
And their detectors,
if you want to think about it that way,
are located on this boundary B,
where their interface with the source
is on this boundary B.
And each of them executes a process
that accumulates data
from the quantum channel
and communicates it
to the other observer
via the classical channel.
Now this picture illustrates
what's called a LOC protocol.
LOC means local operations
and classical communication.
So A1 and A2
are each operating locally
on their boundary.
They're making measurements
locally on their boundary.
And they're communicating
via actions locally
on their boundary
and observations locally
on their boundary.
So for example,
I'm communicating
with my computer here.
We can consider it my boundary.
And stuff is happening
in the environment
that's implemented
by the internet.
And you're receiving
those communications
locally on your boundary,
on your laptop
or whatever it is you're using.
So that's what
local operations means.
And these protocols
specifically involve
classical communication.
And so they're able
to detect entanglement.
And a Bell EPR experiment
is just an example
of a LOC protocol.
how the observers
exchange information
about how they're going
to do their experiments.
They're both going
to measure Z-spin.
They're going to use
independently chosen
reference frames.
And they're going to look
at the output
from some agreed upon source.
So that's all
classically set up.
Then they actually
make their observations.
and then they
classically communicate
their results.
So classical communication
front and back.
LOC protocols
are not limited
to this sort of
Bell EPR
sort of setting.
We can also represent
a scattering experiment
as a LOC protocol.
So here's a representation
of scattering
as a LOC protocol.
And you can see
all I've done
is cut
that previous
boundary
at the division
between
A1 and A2.
And I've then
extended it
in some
external
time,
the time
that is
counted by
Bob's clock,
not by Alice's
clock.
That's what's
meant by
external.
And I've
relabeled
Alice 2
as Alice 1
at a later
time.
So now
what Alice
is doing
is communicating
with her
past self.
Or A1
is communicating
with her
future self.
And they're
each doing
something different.
A1 is
executing
a procedure
that in
the laboratory
we call
state preparation.
She's preparing
a state
that we'll
call
N,
which is
just the
initial state
of some
scattering
experiment.
So for
example,
at the
LHC,
N
is some
state
of two
protons
that are
quarterling
around the
ring at
the LHC
at close
to the
speed of
light.
And
Alice
then later
on at
T plus
delta T
is doing
a different
kind of
quantum
process.
She's
analyzing
the data
coming out
of something
like the
ATLAS
detector,
which is
a multi-particle
counter
that's located
at the
LHC.
So they
share a
quantum
channel,
which is
the scattering
channel that
takes the
incoming state
and produces
the outgoing
state.
And I
recall from
the very
first session
as Feynman
told us,
to understand
this transition
from in
to out,
we have
to integrate
over all
possible paths
that are
consistent
with
conservation
of
spin
helicity,
basically
momentum
plus spin.
all the
different
spins that
are relevant
in a
high-energy
physics
experiment,
including
things like
lepton
number,
which is
basically a
spin.
Now,
how do we
know?
How do we
know what
we have to
conserve?
We know
what we have
to conserve
because Alice
is doing the
experiment,
has a
classical
memory that
allows her
to remember
what she
prepared.
She can
remember
that what
she did
back in
the past
was set
two protons
counter-rotating
in the LHC.
And they
had certain
energies,
and so they
had certain
momenta,
and they
were protons,
so they
had certain
spin variables.
All of
that has
to be
remembered
to make
any sense
of the
output
of the
detectors.
And so
to actually
come up
with a
measured
state
that
makes
sense.
And very
often this
memory
channel is
neglected
by physicists.
And I'm
going to pause
here and let
Ander ask
a question.
Thank you,
Chris.
So does this
imply that
every time you
have a log
channel,
the quantum
part is
a scattering
picture,
like a
unitary
evolution,
even in
the earlier
EPR
picture?
Is that
quantum
channel
portion
always,
a unitary
evolution
scattering
picture?
Thank you.
Yes,
for
essentially
the reason
that
to find
a
classical
channel,
you're
always
assuming
you have
something
that's
protected
from
decoherence
by the
environment.
So
if you're
doing an
EPR
experiment,
you have
to assume
that you
don't have
an environmental
decoherence
between the
source and
the detectors.
And
similarly,
when you're
doing a
scattering
experiment,
you have to
make the
assumption
that the
environment
is not
reaching in
there and
messing
with the
outgoing state
that you're
going to
see or
reaching in
and messing
with the
incoming state
and changing
it in some
way that
re-prepares
it in a
way that
you don't
know,
that you
have no
knowledge
of.
So yes,
you're making
a fairly
strong
anti-decoherence
assumption
in any of
these settings
when you're
talking about
having a
quantum
channel.
Does that
answer the
question?
Yes,
thank you.
Okay,
great.
So
we can
think of
Locke,
we can
think of
scattering
as Locke,
and I
just wanted
to now
emphasize
that
effectively
what
Locke
is
implementing
is two
parallel
memories,
a classical
memory,
which,
as we
said in
the case
of scattering,
is memory
for preparation.
In the
EPR case,
it's memory
for
preparation
for what
the experimental
setup is,
for what
the instructions
for doing
the experiment
are,
and we
also have
a quantum
channel,
which is
effectively
another memory.
It's something
that's extended
through time,
and again,
it's implemented
by the environment,
implemented by
Bob,
and it
involves
Bob's
clock ticking.
So,
whenever we
have two
memories
in parallel,
we can
construct an
error-correcting
code.
So,
think of a
simple
classical
error-correcting
code,
for example,
the use of
parity bits
in exchanging
digital data.
So,
if I send
you a bit
string,
classically,
and I send
it to you
two or three
times,
so there's
some redundancy
in my
signal,
and I send
you a
parity bit,
I say,
okay,
add up your
bit string,
and the
result should
be one.
It's one
on my
side.
If you
add it up
and you get
zero,
there's an
error someplace.
You can use
that parity
bit to
detect errors.
So,
you can
throw out
the bit
strings that
you receive
that have
parity
zero,
and say,
oh,
the
environment
interfered
somehow with
the signal,
or some
eavesdropper
interfered with
the signal
and made
a mistake,
or something
like that.
So,
this corresponds
to environmental
decoherence not
being a good
assumption,
even though it's
classical.
Environmental
interference is
not a good
assumption in
this case.
So,
a quantum
error correcting
code is
basically the
same idea.
I use
some
feature
of the
fact that
I have
two
different
memories
and
that
I'm
encoding
something
in
time,
I'm
encoding
multiple
replicates
of something
in time,
to provide
a way of
checking to
make sure
that I'm
sending the
correct message.
so,
I can,
for example,
consider the
message to
be my
classical
memory,
and consider
the quantum
process as
a process
that tests
that memory.
So,
I remember
that I need
to do
experiment X
and I will
get result
Y.
I actually
do
experiment X
on this
quantum
channel and
see if I
get result
Y.
and if I
don't get
result Y,
then something's
wrong.
Either I
can't trust
the quantum
channel,
or I've
remembered
my preparation
conditions
incorrectly.
So,
I'm using
one memory
to check
the accuracy
of the
other.
And
this
problem
of using
something
about the
environment,
some channel
in the
environment,
to check
memory,
is absolutely
ubiquitous.
And we
use it all
the time.
So,
for example,
look around
your room
and your
room hopefully
looks more or
less the same
now that it
did at the
start of this
session.
And that's
very reassuring.
disturbing.
It reassures
you that
something's not
happening in
the environment
that's
dangerous and
disturbing.
And if you
couldn't do
that,
if your
environment was
constantly
changing,
and there
was no
familiarity
about the
environment,
you wouldn't
be able to
check your
memory.
You wouldn't
be able to
check your
sanity.
So,
even though we
don't think
about our
local environments
as effectively
an error
correcting code,
that's exactly
how we use
it.
We use
stegmergic
memory,
or memory
out there in
the environment,
as a way of
checking our
own memories,
and assuring
that our
memory is
okay.
So,
I talked a
little bit
about quantum
security.
Here's how
quantum security
system works.
Again,
it's a lock
protocol.
We have
some classical
signal that
can be
thought of as
a code,
or a
key,
or a
one-time
pad,
for example,
that encodes
a way of
doing
experiments.
And once
that's been
exchanged,
assuming it's
secure,
then we can
use the
quantum channel
to communicate
information.
And the
classical channel
has told us
what we have
to do
with that
quantum channel.
We have to
make certain
kinds of
measurements
at, say,
particular
clock times
as measured,
and we'll
get information
sent from
the past.
from the
sender.
And the
classical
channel protects
the quantum
channel from
adversarial agents
because anything
that an
adversarial agent
does to the
quantum channel,
if some
agent tries to
eavesdrop,
for example,
on the quantum
channel,
they'll disrupt
the quantum
channel,
and the
results of
our measurement
will not be
what's expected
given the
protocol that
we have
run.
So,
quantum
communication
is secured
by the fact
that interfering
with some
entangled state
actually destroys
the state,
so it's
detectable.
We can
always know
if someone
is trying
to disrupt
our communications,
which isn't
true if we
just have two
classical channels.
Charlie can
always intercept
a message
and then
recreate it,
and that's
not possible
with the
quantum
channel.
So,
let's
refold this
diagram
so that
we've taken
the external
time back
out of it,
and we
have this
picture where
the two
components of
Alice are
just interacting
via their
shared boundary
with their
environment,
Bob.
And now
we can see
that the
source of
redundancy
is not
time,
it's the
boundary
itself.
Just
sharing the
boundary
allows
Alice's
components,
A1 and
A2,
to put
copies of
the same
information
on different
places on
the boundary.
So,
the boundary
now becomes
a resource
for redundant
storage of
information.
So,
Alice 1 and
Alice 2 can
use different
parts of
the boundary
to check
what other
parts of the
boundary say,
to check the
information that's
encoded on other
parts of the
boundary.
So,
they can define
an error-correcting
code on the
boundary itself
using this
lock protocol.
So,
I just want
to leave you
with this
idea
that
using
classical and
quantum
channels together
allows us
to define
error-correcting
codes on
boundaries
that we share
as separate
agents.
And,
leave you
to think
about
what shared
measurements,
what shared
quantum reference
frames,
let us as
agents
see the
same things.
space.
And,
this is what
we'll talk
about next
time in
September.
We'll talk
specifically about
how space
provides us
with an
error-correcting
code.
And,
try to
understand
why space
is treated
as emergent
from something
else,
basically,
from
communication
in most
of quantum
gravity.
So,
thank you
very much.
I encourage
you to use
the interactive
QA and
to attend
the discussion
sessions.
And,
we'll see you
in September.
Thank you.
Awesome.
Chris,
thank you
for the
lecture.
Andrew,
do you have
any
remarks
or
questions?
questions?
Not right
now.
Thank you.
I'll just
ask a few
quick questions
and if anyone
has one
quickly in the
live chat.
So,
you mentioned
the tick
of the
clock.
And,
in active
inference,
we often
hold up
side-by-side
both the
discrete time
models and
the continuous
time models.
So,
do clocks
have to
tick
discreetly?
Or,
how do we
think about
continuous
time modeling?
In this
quantum setting,
they do have
to tick
discreetly
because one
has to be
able to
distinguish
Alice's
preparation
of the
cubits on
her boundary
from Bob's
measurements
of the
cubits on
the boundary.
And,
this process
can be
extremely fast
with respect
to any
kind of
sense of
macroscopic
time.
You know,
your eyes
are responding
to photons
in,
I think it's
hundreds of
femtoseconds.
So,
the
discrete
transitions
that are
effectively
time
measurements
for you
are at
that very
fast molecular
time scale,
much,
much faster
than
our
typical
clocks.
Now,
when we
try to
do very
fast timing,
we're
constructing a
faster clock
than that.
But,
it's a
clock that
we can
only observe
indirectly.
Awesome.
Okay.
Now,
this one
maybe connects
a little
bit to
application,
but with
all the
developments
happening
in theory,
some of
which you're
reviewing here,
and also
in practice
with quantum
computation,
and then
keeping in
mind this
distinction...
Sorry,
I've lost
you.
Back?
I've lost
you,
Daniel.
Okay.
We'll wait
until you're
back.
I can see
you.
No.
Okay.
Okay.
Just repeat
your question,
please.
Yeah,
so,
given these
rapid and
ongoing
developments
in theory
and practice
related to
quantum
information
science
and quantum
information
security,
how are
people
using
this
distinction
of the
classical
stigmatic
memory
and then
the quantum
cognitive
process
to anticipate
how to
develop
information
systems
that are
reliable
going
forward?
I don't
know of
any
instances
in which
thinking
about
quantum
cognition
has
entered
directly
into
any
design
of
communication
systems.
The
ability
of humans
to interact
with these
systems
is just
assumed.
So,
it's just
assumed
that the
user can
interact
with,
say,
a
computer
interface,
which is
the sort
of interface
that will
be provided
or is
provided
to any
quantum
computer.
So,
if you
think about
a quantum
computer,
a practical
quantum
computer,
it has
classical
interfaces
front and
back.
So,
in
thinking
about
interacting
with the
computer,
I'm giving
it some
classical
problem
statement,
for example,
and asking
for some
classical
answer,
and what
it's going
to give
me is a
probability
distribution
of classical
answers,
but I
can,
by running
the calculation
many times,
make that
probability
distribution
fairly tight.
so,
so,
yeah,
I don't
know of
anyone
talking
about
quantum
BCIs
at this
point.
It would
be an
interesting
question.
And,
was it
always
understood
these
sorts of
blind
spots and
axioms
associated
with
classical
communication?
was it
developed as
kind of like
a proposal
or like
a special
case and
more
unpacking
was left
for later?
Or are
these blind
spots things
that we're
now coming
into awareness
of given
what we're
learning in
the quantum
information
sciences?
I think
we're learning
how serious
they are,
but they
were certainly
recognized even
by Bohr
in his
1928
paper.
And,
that's a
very good
paper,
too.
It's called
The Present
State of
Quantum
Theory or
something like
that,
and it's
in Nature.
And,
it's available
on the
web
somewhere.
I have a
copy of
it.
But,
it was
written,
in a sense,
as Bohr's
summary of
the 1927
Solvay
conference,
which was
the conference
at which
everyone doing
quantum
theory at
that time,
got together
to talk
about their
results.
And,
in it,
Bohr
essentially
presents what
came to be
the Copenhagen
interpretation,
which I
think is
probably
unfairly
called an
interpretation.
It's sort
of the
Copenhagen
pragmatic
stance toward
quantum
theory.
And,
essentially,
what Bohr
says is
that if
we're going
to do
science,
we have
to assume
that people
can talk
to each
other.
And,
if we're
going to do
science,
we have to
assume that
there are
instruments
that we can
manipulate
and have
reasonable
confidence that
we know
what
manipulation
we've
done.
So,
if I turn
a knob
from one
to two,
I have to be
reasonably
confident that
I'm making a
particular change
that I can
understand.
and we have
to have
reasonable
confidence
that different
laboratories can
replicate the
same experiment.
And,
if we think
about any of
those assumptions
in purely
quantum theoretic
terms,
then all
sorts of
questions are
raised,
right?
Every quantum
system is
unique.
We have the
no-cloning
theorem.
So,
every scientific
instrument is
unique.
So,
there's no
such thing
as exactly
replicating an
experiment,
right?
That's a
coarse-grained
description of
what I've
done with a
completely unique
quantum system.
And my
brain, of
course, is
unique.
And yours is
too, and
everyone else's
is.
So,
talking about
sharing a
language is
essentially a
coarse-grained
assumption.
and what
the Copenhagen
stance is
all about
is coarse-graining
yielding
effective
classicality.
Or what that
really means is
coarse-graining
yielding a
description that
we can use
in the language
that we
understand.
So, these
are very,
very old
issues that
have been
recognized for
a long time.
But I
think in part
because of the
disaster of
shut up and
calculate,
they haven't
really been
talked about
in the
classroom.
Awesome.
I'll just
read short
questions from
the chat.
We can
pass them to
the discussion
section, but
there's a lot
of great
diverse
questions.
So, Alexi
wrote...
I think I've
lost you
again.
Oh!
The revenge
of Zoom.
Well, we
looked at the
chart earlier
where, like,
Bob was
talking to
Alice.
The
unidirectional
communication.
Okay, good?
Yeah.
Okay, okay,
okay.
The unidirectional.
The third
party is
recording it,
I'm sure.
Alexi wrote,
regarding the
environment for
being used for
error correction,
a symptom of
derealization in
psychological trauma
breakdown, we
don't recognize
the environment
around us and
it's scary?
Makes sense.
Makes sense.
All right, from
Bala.
Nice presentation.
I heard Chris
say, entangled
states are L-O-C-C
for a specific
reference frame.
Is this
entanglement
unitary or is
it related to
the numbers of
degrees of
freedom?
I think
the quick
answer would
be both.
If you have
a complex
system with
many degrees
of freedom,
some can be
entangled while
others aren't.
It depends
on what parts
of the state
are separable.
So, again,
entanglement
is just a
statement about
the
components
of a joint
state that
factor or
don't.
So, you can
have a joint
state that
looks separable
along some
dimensions but
doesn't
know the
dimensions.
And the other
big complication
here is that
whether a state
looks entangled
depends on the
reference frames
that you use
to measure it
with.
And if you
pick entangled
reference frames,
then what we
ordinarily think
of as
entangled states
become
separable.
So, you can
move entanglement
around.
Awesome.
Okay, from
Roland Rodriguez.
Is the
discrete
temporality
only within
the context
of a given
holographic
screen
interface?
With time
being bracketed
otherwise,
beyond interface
systems, is
continuity or
discretion kept
agnostic?
I think, if
I understand
the question
correctly, it's
yes.
If I don't
draw any
boundaries, I
just have the
joint state,
then the
evolution is
unitary.
And in a
sense, time
plays no
role.
And if
unitary
evolution is
perfectly
time-symmetric,
so time
actually drops
out altogether.
Awesome.
So, to talk
about time, we
have to draw
boundaries.
Awesome.
Time must have
a stop,
Huxley.
And I'll
ask one
last question
from the
appropriately
monikered
question
quanderer.
All
communication
is abductive
is a
sentiment that
I've been
using to
develop some
arguments.
Does that
scan for
you?
How do
we connect
what we're
discussing
here with
quantum to
abductive
logic?
Yeah, I
could go
along with
that.
I'd want a
lot more
detail.
All
communication
is essentially
analogical.
I would agree
with that,
yes.
Andrew?
going back
to the
picture,
the
scattering
picture,
so we
have so
far
everything
is topological
and it
certainly
induces,
you know,
breaking the
boundary in
different
sectors.
I suppose it
induces a
topology on
the boundary.
Now, I
have a couple
of questions.
As for the
geometry, and
this might
be getting
ahead,
is it an
emerging
property of
those channels
between
different
boundary
sectors?
And if
that's the
case, then
what does it
mean to have
a QRF for
space?
this is
really the
topic for
September,
but you
do point
out the
fact that
it's
something of
a chicken
and egg
situation.
The way
I think
of it is,
I suppose,
to choose
the chicken
side and
think about
what kind
of reference
frame does
the agent
have to
implement
to see
space on
their
boundary.
And the
reason I
think about
it that
way is
that's a
question I
want to be
able to
ask about
biological
systems.
And this
actually gets
into probably
what won't
be talked
about until
October.
But I
want to be
able to
ask,
essentially,
a phylogenetic
question of
what sorts
of organisms,
where in the
lineage from
LUCA, do
we find
systems that
are able to
assign spatial
coordinates to
their boundaries?
And what
coordinates come
first?
And I
suspect that
that sort
of discrete
location names
with no
metric come
first.
That a
system can
talk about,
for example,
this part of
their membrane
versus that
part of their
membrane,
without even
having any
ability to say
how far apart
they are.
that some
sort of
metric
representation
of this
angular space
comes later.
And that
a radial
space comes
even later
than that.
That's, at
this point,
speculation.
But I think
these are
questions that
we can end
up asking,
given the
right kind
of formalism
and the
right understanding
of what it
means to
be able to
make a
spatial
measurement.
So the
conjecture is
that the
metric would
emerge from
a discrete
network metric
of counting
ticks sort
of thing?
Yeah, I
think that's
correct.
And the
sort of
symmetries of
space that we
see are
very much
tied up with
object identity.
So if we
think about
something like
rotational
symmetry,
let's see,
oh,
I should
stop
screen
sharing.
So, you
know, I've
got this
object, right,
and I
can do
this, and
I say, oh,
you know, space
has this
rotational
symmetry.
But for me
to say that,
I have to
recognize that
this is the
same object,
right?
I have to
implement
object
persistence,
which we
all learn to
do when we're
nine months
old or
something.
but we
tend to
regard those
as separate
things as,
you know,
we learn
object persistence
because space
is rotationally
symmetric.
But we can
view it the
other way
around, that
space is
rotationally
symmetric for
me because I
implement these
constraints that
are called
object persistence.
Do you think
we can understand
phylogenetics as
a whole?
as a kind
of scattering
experiment,
like the
high-energy
LUCA event,
and then
dissipating and
propagating in
a very tangled
bank?
Well, I do
want to be able
to understand
phylogeny in
exactly the same
terms as
embryology.
And Mike
Levin and I
have published
papers about
that, that we
should be able
to view the
lineage of LUCA
in exactly the
same way that
we view the
lineage of the
zygote that
produced us.
So that's why
it's no coincidence
that during
pregnancy, the
development of
the embryo
mirrors evolution
in terms of the
parts that are
developed,
first?
Yeah, this is
the old idea
that phylogeny and
ontogeny are
related in some
way, which
from an embryonic
development point
of view,
they're certainly
analogous in
ways.
sorry, if I
may ask one
last question,
I think it
should be very
quick.
Regarding the
weak rotation,
I'm still a bit
unsure how it
ties to this
diagrammatic
notation that we
had with
quantum channels
and so on.
And there was
a note in the
second session,
we briefly talked
about the
weak rotation
being a
reversal in the
direction of
time.
Is there any
relation to
today's session?
Yeah, I,
whenever we
think about
the flow of
time as
driven by the
input-output
cycle, the
input-output
cycle for
agents separated
by a boundary
is always,
there's always a
sign change,
right?
my input is
your output
and vice
versa.
So, when
we think
about the
Bob's clock
ticking when
Alice does
something,
his direction
of time, in a
sense, points
with respect to
the boundary
opposite to
hers.
others.
But that's
only with
respect to
the boundary.
He sees
information flowing
in and she
sees information
flowing in.
That's the only
point being made
here about
the
wick rotation
as an
operation.
right.
Thank you.
Thank you,
Chris.
Very well
appreciated by
the viewers
and by us.
So, we'll
certainly look
forward to
reviewing the
Q&A and
everybody is
welcome and
encouraged to
join for the
participatory
discussion in
about two weeks
on Saturday.
So, till
next time.
All right.
Thank you.
Cheers.
to

## Il9sBNAia7g

Hello and welcome everyone. It is September 14th, 2023, and we are in the course Physics
as Information Processing. It's lecture five. Looking forward to this lecture and then a
little conversation, Chris, off to you. Thank you. Okay. Thank you, Daniel. And welcome
to session five of Physics of Information Processing. And today we're going to talk about
space-time and particularly about the idea that space-time is emergent from information
processing. And this has now become a very mainstream idea in the quantum information
and quantum gravity communities. And there's still, of course, some people holding out for
the idea that space-time is fundamental. But I would say that at least in these communities,
I expect it's become now the dominant idea that space-time is not fundamental, that space-time
is not part of the basic ontology of reality or something like that, and that instead space-time
is a construct. So that's what today's session is going to be about. So for those of you who
are just joining or who would like a little review, we started this course talking about quantum
information theory and the idea that quantum information theory is actually a new science about
systems that communicate across a boundary. And the systems are always called Alice and Bob
for kind of historical reasons. And emphasize that this new science is topological. It's about
connectivity between systems. It's not geometric. So it doesn't assume a space-time embedding.
So it leaves open the possibility that space-time is actually a construct. It doesn't assume space-time
up front. And in the second session of the course, I think, we talked about how this boundary could
always be represented as an array of qubits. And that what the systems on each side of the boundary do
to communicate is prepare and then measure the states of these qubits. So they communicate by exchanging
classical information via a quantum channel. And this introduces a particular kind of quantum noise
whenever they're used to the reference frames. So it's not necessarily a perfect communication channel from a
classical fidelity point of view. But all of the noise is quantum noise. It's not classical. And it always derives
from differences in the reference frames that are used by the two agents.
We reformulated the free energy principle in this setting. And the free energy principle turns out to be very
simple. It turns out to be a classical limit of the principle of unitarity, which is just the principle that
the way that the information is conserved. And we saw that the approach to perfect alignment between the two agents
or perfect prediction on the part of the two agents becomes more challenging, not surprisingly, as system
complexity increases. So the more complex the communication, the harder it is to predict, as one would expect.
In the last session, we talked about how constraints on thermodynamic free energy
induce compartmentalization in agents. So whenever agents interact with their environments in fairly complex ways,
then they end up being compartmentalized into compartments that have to communicate classically.
And this is solely a result of quantum information theory. You don't have to assume any biology to get this compartmentalization.
But clearly, this is something that we see in biological systems. Not only do we see compartments, we also see hierarchical control,
which is likewise a sort of automatic outcome of the theory for complex systems.
And finally, last time, we talked a little bit about how these compartments communicate
states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states make states
some very specific assumptions about what's classical.
And we'll see later on today what the key assumption that gives you classicality is
as we talk about space-time.
But before I go into the topic of space-time, I want to spend a little time...
Okay, so this...
Sorry, this is where we're going.
We're talking about space-time, and we'll talk about applications to biology next time.
But before we get going on this, I want to spend a little bit of time talking about explanation.
And this is motivated by a question that came up, a very long question that touched on many
different topics that came up in the interactive Q&A last time.
And a fair amount of that question had to do with, directly or indirectly, the question
of what scale-free explanation looks like and how it compares to scientific explanation in
general, most of which is reductive.
So I want to make a short detour into the question of how reductionist theories, which all of you
are probably very familiar with, relate to scale-free theories.
And particularly, the free energy principle is a scale-free theory.
So it's a theory that's unlike most of the theories that most of you probably learned about in college.
So we're all familiar with reductionist theories and the reductionist idea of scientific explanation,
which is really an outcome of philosophy of science in the 20s and 30s.
People like Rudolf Carnap were among the first to actually make precise what this idea of reductive
explanation is.
But the basic idea is that the laws or the dynamics or the formalism that describes behavior at some
micro scale, the behavior of little things, actually explains the behavior of big things.
So the basic reductionist idea is that what the little things are doing is what's important.
And what big things are doing are either emergent phenomena or they're just epiphenomenal.
They're essentially just appearances.
And this defines a fundamental scale.
So the real assumption in any reductionist theory is that there's some fundamental scale at which
the real dynamics takes place and everything else is just an appearance or it's some sort of
emergent phenomenon.
And I try to be very careful when I use the word emergence because it's one of the most ambiguous
words in the philosophy of science and people use it to mean all sorts of different things.
But whenever you say emergent, it always sort of implies the idea that it's emergent from
something.
And so the idea of emergence is essentially a reductionist idea because it at least implicitly
assumes that there's some micro scale from which the macro scale is emergent.
And so the discussions of emergent phenomena are often very consistent with reductionism, even
if they claim not to be.
And we're all taught that science is reductionist.
And there are certainly people who publicly claim that science is reductionist.
Richard Dawkins is certainly a shining example of this.
But I suspect that a lot of scientists just kind of play lip service to reductionism without
really believing in it because they don't really believe that the macroscopic phenomena that
they are studying, life, for example, is completely determined by what's going on at the micro scale
or what's going on at the micro scale plus some stochastic noise or something like that.
So I want to explicitly contrast this with a scale-free theory.
And a scale-free theory is not simply a holistic theory.
It's much more precise.
In a scale-free theory, little things and big things obey the same laws or they have the
same dynamics or they're described by the same formalism.
So it's not that the macroscale is emergent from the microscale.
The macroscale and the microscale actually obey the same laws.
And the relationship between macro and micro is probably best stated as one of implementation.
Macroscale things have microscale components.
And those microscale components are doing something or other.
And whatever they're doing implements the macroscale system and its behavior.
But this implementation is not an explanation, or at least it's not an explanation all by itself.
And the bumper sticker version of scale-free theories is just as above, so below.
Whatever laws you have at the macroscale are the same ones you have at the microscale and vice versa.
So scale-free theories, in a sense, are simple.
It's the same theory at every level of description.
So what is this idea of scale?
And how does it relate to what we've talked about in this course?
Well, what we've talked about in this course all has to do with what an agent can observe on its boundary.
So scale has to do with how information is encoded on the boundary.
And we can describe that scale in many different ways.
Here's a commonplace way to describe it in physics, by a relationship between energy and distance or size.
And you've probably all heard of the Planck scale.
The Planck scale is the smallest scale at which current physics makes any sense.
And in energetic terms, it's defined by energies on the order of 10 to the 19th GeV, which is gigaelectron volts.
The LHC, the Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland, gets to about 10 to the 4th GeV.
So many, many orders of magnitude less than the Planck scale.
So the Planck scale is extremely energetic compared to what we can probe experimentally.
The Planck scale energy of 10 to the 9th GeV corresponds to a distance of about 10 to the minus 35 meters, which is incredibly tiny.
An intermediate scale on this diagram is about the scale of a neutron.
So for example, a proton or a neutron, they have a rest mass of about 1 GeV and a size of about 1 femtometer.
So this intermediate scale is roughly the scale of nuclear physics.
And then if you go to our scale, the scale of things that are about a meter in size, human beings, tables and chairs, lots of animals,
the things we're most familiar with, that corresponds to an incredibly tiny energy.
10 to the minus 5 electron volts is about the energy of a photon of radio, radiation.
And a meter is about the wavelength of long wave radio.
So if you think about visible light, it has a wavelength of about 10 to the minus 5 meters, an energy of about an electron volt.
So it's not surprising that visible light feels energetic to us because it's orders of magnitude above our natural scale of energy,
the sort of the sort of thermal environment in which we exist.
So it's the encoding scale and the boundary that is going to relate theories of things that we see to each other.
And this ends up giving a kind of complicated picture.
If you think of Alice interacting with Bob and measuring things on the boundary...
Sorry, I'm a little bit ahead of myself.
I just wanted to show you a picture of a reductive theory.
This is the Big Bang.
You're all familiar with this.
Something happens at the Planck scale and the entire universe results from it by just a scale change.
So this is a reductive theory.
A scale-free theory is much more complicated.
So here's what a scale-free theory looks like.
Alice interacts with Bob and she's looking at her boundary.
And her boundary states, the boundary states she sees, could be encoded at different scales.
So there may be a small scale, scale one, and a bigger scale, scale two.
And what Alice is looking for is some sort of theory that relates the first scale, the microscale, to the macroscale.
And so it's not that the microscale came first like it did in the Big Bang and the macroscale came later.
These are encodings that can be happening simultaneously.
And the theoretical task is to find theories that relate between these scales.
And these are implementation theories, or you might call them embedding theories from one scale into another.
And what we want as a consistency criterion is for these theories to be constant in time.
So as Bob evolves in time, and so what Alice sees are these encodings on her boundary,
she wants the relationship between encodings at different scales to stay constant.
Because if it doesn't, she'll never be able to figure anything out.
She'll just have this chaotic relationship between things happening at different scales,
and nothing will make sense.
So you have this complicated picture in scale-free theories.
And if you look at this, and it seems vaguely familiar, or even vaguely, even very familiar,
then it should.
Because this is exactly the kind of explanatory structure or semantic structure that you have in computer science.
If you're studying the behavior of a computer, which is just some piece of hardware, some physical system,
then you can describe what that piece of hardware is doing at different scales.
And in fact, what we call the hardware level of description, when we talk about our laptops, for example,
is typically the level of description of circuits of transistors inside microprocessors.
We think of that as the hardware level.
But of course, that's just a description, too, that's layered on top of lots of much smaller scale dynamics,
all the way down to the scale of atoms and eventually nuclei and elementary particles and all that other stuff.
So there's some quantum stuff that's going on that we describe as having a classical hardware level of bit exchange.
And then we describe the behavior of programs on top of that.
So what we want, what makes a computer useful,
is that we can assign semantics to programs,
and we can talk about semantic relationships between programs.
For example, the relationship between the internet protocol stuff that Zoom is doing
and what you actually see on your user interface and hear on your user interface.
That needs to stay fixed over time,
or Zoom becomes incomprehensible and not programmable,
and in fact, not even well-defined as an algorithmic system.
And the same is true for the relationship between the operating system and the hardware description,
or between the operating system and Zoom as a program.
So computer science works in exactly this scale-free way.
And so, in a sense, scale-free explanation is very familiar.
It's exactly the kind of explanation that we have in computer science.
And that's why I refer to the relationship between scales as one of implementation,
because that's a term that we're familiar with from thinking about computers implementing programs.
So what are these theories?
And if we think in biological terms,
we can think of pathways being embedded in a cell,
or cells being embedded in tissues,
all the way up to niches of various kinds,
which may be social niches,
being embedded in ecosystems,
and ecosystems being embedded in the biosphere.
And so we have all of these essentially semantic theories
that talk about how one scale embeds
in another scale.
And if we have these sorts of scale transitions,
we can think of representing the relationship
between transitions at different scales
in terms of the activity of some kind of renormalization group,
which is transforming entities and processes at one scale
into entities and processes at another scale.
And I think in biology,
we can at least put forward the hypothesis
that in all the way from pathways embedding in cells
to ecosystems embedding in the biosphere,
we can put forward the hypothesis at least
that the renormalization group flow
across all of these scales is trivial.
That is that the embedding theories
all have the same formal structure,
that the structure that describes
how pathways embed into cells
is the same structure
that describes how ecosystems embed into the biosphere.
Now, I certainly can't prove that.
I believe that it's likely.
So I think it's an interesting hypothesis to investigate.
And this is an hypothesis that I want to leave you with
as a result of this class is something to think about.
To what extent, in thinking about biological systems
or even social systems,
are the embedding theories the same?
So in thinking this way,
that the physics of the situation
has the same formal structure
as computer science has in terms of explanation,
we're, of course, faced with a problem,
which is that we're not just reconstructing physics.
We're talking about the physics of interacting observers.
We're talking about the physics of communication.
So we're modeling how we do physics.
And that makes our theory self-referential.
And so we have to base the music from Gödel's theorem,
which tells us essentially
that powerful self-referential theories
can't be both consistent and complete.
And by powerful,
I just mean powerful enough to express arithmetic.
So not terribly powerful.
So this becomes an issue that we have to live with.
And we will always be faced with this issue
of having to construct meta-theories,
which tell us how our lower-level theories work.
But we never get to the end of that process.
We never can get to theories
that are both consistent and complete
because our tower of theories
becomes progressively, actually,
more powerful as it goes up.
So Gödel,
in a sense, poses a problem,
but in another sense,
just tells us what life is like as a scientist.
That you can't have everything
all the time
doing science.
But we probably all already knew that.
So let's now talk about space,
end of digression,
and see how these ideas
apply to a system
or a tower of systems
that can construct
a spatial embedding
in its world,
in its observed world.
So let's start out thinking
about a system
that can see its environment,
but what it sees
is a completely uniform environment
where nothing is happening.
So if you have a uniform environment
where nothing is happening,
you can't distinguish
one part of the environment
from another.
So there's no,
you have no sense of space.
So what I want to do
is build up from scratch
what's needed
to have a sense of space.
and then we'll talk
a little bit
about what
organisms are doing.
And I think a very interesting question is
if you look at phylogeny,
at what points in phylogeny,
what lineages in phylogeny
actually need to have
a sense of space?
and what do they have to have
in terms of computational power
to have that sense of space?
So if you just have
a uniform environment,
you don't have a sense of space.
But the first thing
we can do with an environment
is to divide it up
into some number of parts
that are somehow distinguishable.
So suppose we can segment
the environment
into two different parts.
And if you think about E. coli,
for example,
E. coli has a bunch of sensors
on the front
and a bunch of effectors
on the back.
So it can sense much more
about the front part
of the environment
than the back part
of the environment.
So already with E. coli,
you have this kind
of segmentation
of the environment
into parts.
But so far,
nothing has happened
in this environment.
We just have segments
that can be distinguished.
So let's consider
an environment like this
that has distinguishable segments.
What one next wants
to know about these segments
is whether they're
next to each other.
And if we just have
a bunch of segments,
we just have a set.
And a set doesn't have
any order
or any relationship information.
So I've drawn this environment
as a rectangle of rectangles,
but that's just
a representation.
And it looks like
there are relationships
between these rectangles.
But if they're just a set,
then there are no relationships.
If we want to add relationships,
then we have to add them explicitly.
So let's add some connections
between these different segments
of the environment
to turn that set
into a graph
that says explicitly,
for example,
that the light green segment
is attached
to the light blue segment.
And it's also attached
to the dark green segment.
And the dark blue segment
is attached
to the light blue segment
and attached
to the dark green segment.
So now we have something
that's much more
mathematically complicated
than a set.
We have a graph
that has some
connection information.
So we have a connection
topology.
Now, adding this topology
does something
very important.
It breaks the exchange symmetry
that is there
if you just have a set.
So if we just have a set,
it doesn't make any difference
if I exchange,
for example,
the positions
of the upper right
light blue segment
with the upper left
light green segment.
but if we have
this connection topology,
then it does make
a difference.
Right?
I've
twisted the graph
around.
And if I have
to break connections
to exchange things,
then I've actually
changed the topology.
adding a topology,
adding connections,
can disrupt
a symmetry
that's there
if there is
no topology.
So now let's
think about it.
Now we have the structure
that's required
to think about
something happening.
So suppose
that
at some time
as measured
in the
bit counter
time reference
frame
of the observing
system,
something happens.
So a dot
appears in the
light green segment.
And
we can express
this actually
in the notation
of quantum field theory.
We can think of
the light green segment
as a field
and the dot
appearing
is the occurrence
of an excitation
in that field.
And so we can
write this notation
that says
that the green field
was excited
to produce
a dot,
which is
up arrow
green dot.
And
sometime
after that
it may turn
out that
the dot
disappears
in the green
field.
And
some sort
of dot
appears
down
the dark
blue field.
And
again,
we can
write this
in this
kind of
creation
and destruction
operator
notation
that one
has in
quantum field
theory.
And
so this
says
that
the green
field
is no
longer
excited,
but now
the dark
blue field
is excited.
So this
doesn't
imply anything
about these
excitations
being the
same.
In fact,
they're
completely
different.
One is
an
excitation
of the
green
field
and one
is an
excitation
of the
blue
field.
But at
least now
something is
happening
in the
environment.
So we
can think
about what
does it
take for
an observer
to notice
that something
is happening
in its
environment.
it has
to be
able to
detect
a change
occurring
in some
segment
of its
environment.
And that
change can
involve
something
happening or
something stopping
happening in
that segment
of its
environment.
But it
doesn't
yet have
to have
any idea
of what
an object
is.
But we
can add
that if
the system
has a
memory,
we can
have the
system
connect
these
events
happening in
different parts
of its
environment.
So if
the system
has a
memory that
has some
number of
steps,
say,
n steps,
but here
it could
even just
be two
steps,
it can
see
transitions
between
these two
different
states,
where
there's a
dot in
the green
field,
and then a
dot in
the dark
blue field,
and then a
dot in the
green field,
and then a
dot in the
dark blue
field,
and then a
dot in the
green field,
et cetera.
So I've
expressed this
in this
sort of
field theory
notation
over on
the right
side,
and what
this is
is a
flip-flop.
It's an
observed
periodic
behavior.
So this
is the
basic idea
behind a
clock.
So any
observer that
can see
this,
number of
time steps
internally,
can interpret
what's going
on in
its external
environment as
a clock
ticking.
It can
see some
periodicity.
So as
long as you
can have
memory and
the ability
to detect
change,
you can see
periodic behavior
in the
environment.
so you
can see
the
environment
acting like
a clock.
So let's
think a bit
about what
this does
and does
not require.
So seeing
a clock
in the
environment
requires
having
distinguishable
non-exchangeable
sectors of
the environment.
So you
have to have
this connection
topology
that breaks
the exchange
symmetry.
memory, it
requires having
these sectors
implement some
sort of flip-flop,
so something
periodic
happening, and
you have to
have enough
memory to
see that
periodicity.
But it
doesn't require
any sense of
object identity.
activity.
So the
excitation in
the green
part and
the excitation
in the blue
part can
still just
be field
excitations of
the green
part and
the blue
part.
It doesn't,
there's nothing
that says that
those have to
be the same
thing, they
just have to
appear and
disappear in
some periodic
way.
And having
a clock
doesn't require
a metric
space.
You don't
need to have
any sense
of distance
defined on
the environment.
You just
have to have
this segmentation
that is not
rearrangeable.
So this
tells us
something
extremely
important,
which is
that time
is more
fundamental
than space.
Time in
the exterior
environment is
much simpler
and easier
to observe
than space
in the
exterior
environment.
So if we're
thinking
biologically
about
phylogeny,
we might
expect to
see
organisms
that can
detect
periodic
behavior in
the external
environment
long before
they can
detect
spatial
organization
in the
exterior
environment.
And we
know that
organisms,
even down
to microbial
mats, can
respond to
the diurnal
cycle.
So we
know that
organisms, in
a sense, can
detect
environmental
clocks.
Even organisms
that we have
no reason to
believe divide
the environment
up into
spaces or
the sort of
space that
we're used to,
like a
Euclidean
space.
So now
we're
about adding
space to
this idea
of time
and the
environment.
movement.
So the
next step is
to be able
to see
motion.
And being
able to see
one thing
move from
one segment
of the
environment to
another segment,
as opposed to
something happening
in one segment
and then
something happens
in another
segment.
one has to
have this
idea of
object
persistence,
that there's
a thing
that has
an identity
and its
identity
doesn't
change over
time.
And it
doesn't change
when you move
it someplace
else, when it
appears someplace
else in the
environment.
it's the
same object.
So this
is an
idea that
psychologists
call object
persistence,
and it's an
idea that
physicists call
translational
invariance.
Translational
invariance
means two
things.
It means
that if I
have an
object and I
move it to a
different location,
I don't change
the object.
It's the same
object that I
move from here
to there.
So the
location doesn't
change the
object.
And it also
means the
reverse of
that.
It means that
the object
doesn't change
the location.
My
container
remains
invariant even
though I move
the object
around in
it.
So these
are kind
of the
two faces
of
translational
invariance.
And the
two faces
of object
persistence.
As the
object moves
through time,
its identity
remains fixed,
and it
doesn't change
the time
that it's
moving through.
So if I'm
measuring its
motion with
a clock,
moving the
object doesn't
change the
clock.
These are
clearly very
classical
ideas.
and we
talked about
earlier
classical
communication.
And when
we talked
about
classical
communication
in, for
example, the
context of a
Bell EPR
experiment, we
talked about the
observers being
able to write
down some
data on a
piece of paper
or on a
disk drive or
something, and
hand those
data to
someone else.
So this is
translational
invariance.
The data can't
change when
Alice gives it
to Bob.
Otherwise, there
isn't classical
communication taking
place.
And of course,
there's an up-to-noise
built into here.
The piece of paper
might get wet, and
the ink might run a
little bit.
But it's still
the same
message.
There's still
some identity
being assumed.
So object
persistence is
not an idea we
get from
quantum theory.
It's an idea
that we impose
on top of
quantum theory.
And it's this
idea that's
intrinsically
classical.
So we're
looking right
here at the
quantum to
classical transition.
This is it.
this is what
gets added to
quantum theory
to get
classical physics.
It's this
idea of
object persistence.
Now, once we
have object
persistence, we
can kind of
go to town
constructing
space.
And
here's how
we do it.
we all
learned about
object persistence
this way
when we
were six
months old,
doing motor
babbling,
and
observing our
hands, and
feeling how our
bodies worked,
and seeing
objects that
we could
manipulate,
and that
didn't change
when we
manipulated them.
So, this
is the
birth of
object
persistence.
This is
the birth
of
classicality
in human
psychology.
So, now
let's start
thinking about
building a
coordinate
system.
What's a
coordinate
system?
A coordinate
system is
just a set
of labels
that are
attached to
these segments
of the
environment.
And to
build a
coordinate
system, you
have to
have an
origin.
an
origin
means an
object,
something
that's
fixed,
something
that
doesn't
move
around.
And so,
a coordinate
system
requires the
ability to
identify a
stigmatic
memory,
requires the
ability to
find something
in the
environment
that has
a meaning
that stays
constant over
time.
and that's
what a
stigmatic
memory is.
It's
something in
the environment
that provides
us with a
memory resource
that we can
count on
being the
same.
And it's
having this
fixed point
that allows
us to
label these
connected
segments of
the environment
that contain
objects that
move and
be able to
say,
okay, the
object moved
from this
part of the
environment to
another part,
and I can
give those
parts labels
with respect to
this other
part that
doesn't move,
this origin
point.
And once I
have this,
I can
construct other
invariances.
So for
example, I
can consider
an object
that rotates
around this
origin without
changing its
identity.
And that
defines what's
called rotational
invariance.
And I can
also talk
about an
object that
gets bigger
and smaller
compared to
this fixed
point.
and that
defines radial
distance.
And if you
think about
the baby
in the
previous slide
that's doing
motor babbling,
it sees things
getting smaller
as it moves
them farther
away.
So the
visual system
does this
computation
for us
and constructs
this radial
coordinate for
us with
respect to
our bodies
or specifically
our heads,
our eyes,
body.
So in
doing this
very early
motor
activity,
we're actually
building the
spatial coordinate
system for
our brains
that's implemented
by the
hippocampus,
the place
cells in the
hippocampus.
And if I
have an
origin point
in the
environment,
I can also
infer that
I am
moving,
that I
have changed
my location
with respect
to that
object.
And
that's
a considerably
more complicated
inference because
you have to
have a
representation of
the self,
of you,
to say I
moved.
So this is
something that
comes after
you've developed
this spatial
coordinate system.
you have to
be able to
locate,
in a sense,
metacognitively,
a particular
object that's
you in that
coordinate system.
So we're going
to set that
aside and
now talk
about
adding some
numbers,
so adding a
metric.
And adding
a metric
requires another
particular kind
object,
which is a
ruler,
a particular
fixed object
that can be
moved around
and that has
translational
invariance and
rotational
invariance up
to some
transformation,
up to some
tensor.
And in
Euclidean space,
that tensor is
the identity.
So in
Euclidean
space,
you have
perfect
translational
and rotational
invariance.
As you get
into general
relativity,
then the
ruler can
actually change
its length
as you rotate,
or the ruler
can change
its length
as it moves
through space.
So effectively,
your space-time
can deform,
the coordinates
of your space-time
can deform,
and that gives
you the
representation of
mass,
of course,
in general
relativity.
So we
talked several
sessions ago
about quantum
reference frames,
and I used
the example
of rulers
and clocks
as quantum
reference frames.
So now we
see how to
construct those
from observations
and symmetry
breaking
and object
identity,
all of which
we need
to define
a quantum
reference frame
out in the
environment
like a ruler.
And notice
that we don't
need any of
that environmental
stuff to
define those
QRFs within
our own
processing.
And in fact,
the ones that
exist within
us,
we have no
direct access
to.
We can look
at someone else's
brain and talk
about their
spatial representation
system,
but we can't
look inside
our own
brains and
talk about
our spatial
representation
system.
So this
is how we
get a metric
space
from the
ground up.
and we've
talked about
this from a
very psychological
or biological
point of
view,
starting from
sort of motor
capabilities,
motor babbling,
for example,
a measure of
effort, which
gives you some
sense of mass.
mass.
So if it's
easy to move
something, it's
light, and if
it's hard to
move something,
it's heavy.
And we
understand that
when we're six
months old,
because we can
measure how
much force
we're having to
apply with our
muscles.
We have a
reference
internally for
this force that
we're applying,
and we
use that
internal
measurement to
attribute this
idea of mass
to things in
the environment.
We have to
have memory
for manipulations.
We have to
be able to
identify
variances that
define objects,
object
persistence,
and we have
to be able to
build a ruler
that we can
move around
and use to
define a
metric space.
Now, this is
very different
from the way
physicists
approach this.
If you look
at the physics
literature, then
people start
with information
transfer.
They talk
about entanglement
as a basic
resource.
There's a lot
of discussion
of bulk
boundary
duality, and
the most
well-known
one is the
duality between
any
interspace,
which is the
sort of space
you see inside
a black
hole, and
conformal
field theory,
a quantum field
theory on
boundary of
the black
hole.
So things
you can see,
for example,
going on on
the horizon
of a black
hole are
dual to the
geometry and
the interior
by this
mathematical
relationship.
You can use
that mathematical
relationship to
construct a
quantum error
correcting code
by using the
symmetries of
the field
theory as a
resource for
redundancy that
allows you to
represent the
same thing in
different places.
And as soon as
you can do
that, you can
build up a
network of
elements that
look basically
like elements of
a lattice,
lattice, and
a lattice is a
graph to which
you can assign
some metric
relationships and
you get a
metric space.
And in
physics, typically
the goal is to
get Einstein's
equations out of
this, to start
with some
information
theoretic sorts
of constructs and
get the equations
of general
relativity.
But what are
the equations of
general relativity?
I mean, these
are things that
Einstein derived
by doing fairly
simple thought
experiments using
the invariances
of ordinary
Euclidean space
combined with
ideas from
special relativity
about the speed
of light being
constant.
And he added
the principle of
equivalence, which
is the idea
that the
essentially mass
and acceleration
are the same
thing, or
that gravity
and acceleration
are the same,
that weight and
acceleration are
the same thing.
so it's at least
reasonable to
expect that
this inferential
process that's
going on in
theoretical physics
is generating
the same thing,
although in a
very formalized
way, that we
can generate by
thinking about how
organisms deal with
their environments.
And so I want
to leave this
with you as the
second hypothesis
here.
The first one
was the hypothesis
about a trivial
renormalization group
flow across
scales in
biology.
The second
hypothesis is that
these two approaches
to emergent
space-time are
actually giving
us the same
information,
and maybe
starting out with
the same
information, in
fact, that we
may be able to
think about
these fundamental
building blocks
dynamics of
information flow
and entanglement
in terms of
the sorts of
perceptual
relationships that
we've been talking
about in this
class.
So there's
our second
hypothesis
to think about
going forward.
And I just want
to leave you with
the idea that
organisms, at
least, manage
this very
interesting
process
that we
can think of
starting with
this construct
of memory.
Organisms have
memory of
multiple scales,
and it's memory
that allows them
to formulate the
idea that there
are objects.
objects.
And as soon
as you have
objects that
persist, you
have a source of
redundancy.
So you can do
error correction.
And if you can
do error
correction, if you
can move the
same thing from
one place to
another and have
it encode the
same information,
then you can
build space
time.
And as soon
as you have
space time, you
can use the
space time as
more memory.
You can use
the space time
itself as an
error correcting
code.
Because space
time has the
nice ability to
hold lots of
copies of some
informative
structures.
So you can build
libraries, or you
can build computers,
or you can build
the internet if you
have space time,
which gives you
more memory, which
gives you more
object persistence,
which gives you
more error correction.
and the circle
just spins
around.
So organisms do
this.
And the question
is, how does it
get off the
ground?
And next
time we can at
least speculate
about that kind
of origin of life
type of question
in the context
of the FEP
and its
realization in
simple systems
of communicating
observers.
So as
always, I
encourage you
to use the
interactive Q&A.
The fifth
discussion session
with Andrew,
who's unfortunately
not here today,
will be the last
day of September,
Saturday at
5, as usual,
5 o'clock
European time,
8 o'clock
California time.
And then the
last session of
the class will
be the 12th
of October.
So thank
you very much,
and I look
forward to your
questions in the
interactive Q&A.
Thank you,
Chris.
Can I ask
some short
questions?
Sure.
All right.
So first,
from Lana,
wrote,
is the
periodicity
the time
lengths
between and
during the
excitations
built in?
So this was
when we had
the four
cells,
and there
was the
inklings of
a clock
coming into
play?
Okay.
I think
the simplest
answer is
that
if nothing
else is
happening
in the
environment
except this
periodic
behavior,
then
it's not
actually
meaningful to
talk yet
about the
time between
events.
So if I
have a
periodic,
a system
that's
quasi-periodic,
for example,
and nothing
else is going
on in my
environment,
then I can't
distinguish that
from a perfectly
periodic system
because I would
have to have a
perfectly periodic
reference to
know that the
other system
was aperiodic.
And if you
think about
the internal
clock being
driven by
information flow
into the
system,
then something
has to be
happening in
the environment
for information
to be flowing
into the
system and
being counted.
So again,
as we talked
about a few
sessions ago,
the internal
memory,
only gets
updated when
something
happens.
So internal
and external
get tied
together.
And this
is why we
can use
external
clocks.
But it's
also why we
depend on
external
clocks,
because our
intuitive sense
of time is
very malleable.
clock.
And so we
actually, as
humans, use
external clocks
to correct for
the malleability
of our own
intuitive sense
of time.
power.
Wow.
And there's
probably a lot
to be said
for that
procrustean
nature of
having the
chronometer,
the clock on
the wall,
and the
tick,
tick,
tick,
as an
evolutionarily
novel ruler
of time
playing a
logistical role
in time-bound
society.
Yeah.
And, you
know, think
of earlier
clocks that
earlier cultures
have used and
that animals
use.
I mean, we
have the
solar clock,
the lunar
clock, etc.
And, you
know, the
orbit of
Venus clock
that was so
important to
the Mayans
and so on.
So there
are lots of
available clocks
in the
environment.
If you have
the ability
to notice
them and
enough memory
to realize
that they're
clocks.
Awesome.
All right.
Here's a
question from
Upcycle Club.
They wrote,
how does
representing the
network structure
and dynamics
with quantum
embeddings
affect the
semantic
interpretation
of the
network?
The
embedding
theory is
the simplest
semantic
interpretation
of the
network.
So,
and again,
a good way
to think of
this is
through the
lens of
computer science.
You know,
as soon as
you have a
programming language
that allows
variable binding,
then you've
built a
very simple
kind of
semantics
into the
language.
If you have
x as a
variable and
you have
variable binding,
then at
different times
in the
execution of
the program,
x can
have different
causal
consequences
for downstream
computation,
because it's
been bound
to a
different
value,
so it
has
different
semantics.
So the
semantics
of x,
again,
go back to
Gregory Bateson.
The basis
of semantics
is differences
that make a
difference,
make a difference
to behavior,
make a difference
to action
ability.
So
variable binding
gives you
differences that
actually make a
difference to
what the
program does.
So
what
is that?
That
is the
semantics
that's assigned
by your
embedding
theory
between what
the programming
language is doing
and what the
operating system
is doing
and so
forth.
And I
think it's
no surprise
that
the
semantics
of programming
languages
end up
being
represented
with these
very general
mathematical
constructs
like category
theory,
which
are
essentially
tools
for representing
arbitrary
relations
relations
between
systems.
And that's
what embedding
theories are.
They're
theories that
state
relationships
between
systems.
awesome.
And very
provocative
to explore
on the
biological
and life
and on
the
space,
time,
and matter
sides,
which are,
of course,
seamlessly
integrated
through,
if only,
our own
experiences.
Yeah,
this is
another
place where
it's
useful to
go back
to this
difference
between
reductive
theories
and scale-free
theories.
And scale-free
theories are
all about
semantics
because they
represent the
existence of
stuff happening
at different
scales.
And so they
naturally raise
the question
of what
are these
relationships?
What are
these embedding
theories?
theories?
And in
reductive
theories,
there's a
very deep
sense in
which semantics
doesn't
matter.
If you
think that
all that's
going on
that's
important is
the stuff
that's going
on at the
Planck scale,
then you
don't need
any semantics.
And so
you see
this in
late
60s,
early
70s,
old-fashioned
AI,
where
people talk
about
computation
as purely
syntactic.
And this is a
very reductionist
view of
computation.
It leaves
out the
semantics.
And without
the semantics,
the computation
is useless.
It doesn't
tell us
anything at
all unless
we can
map it
to something.
So
we have
this
philosophy
of science
tradition that
tells us that
semantics is
not important.
And we end
up with
tools like
the FEP
that essentially
tell us that
semantics is
all important.
from a
biological
point of
view,
the most
natural
response is,
of course,
we knew
that all
the time.
That's why
we're doing
biology.
So all
of this
ties together.
would you
say that
FEP says
semantics
is important
and then
what does
it say
about what
semantics
are important
or is that
entirely
left up
to the
modeler?
Well,
it tells
you a lot
about what's
important
for the
system
itself.
The system
itself is
dealing with
its environment
and it's
trying to
increase its
predictive
power.
So it's
building a
theory of
the environment
and that
theory is
intrinsically
semantic.
It's about
the environment
and it's
actionable.
The theory
is meant
to drive
action on
the environment
that will
either yield
more information
or get
the environment
to behave,
to do
what I'm
predicting
it's going
to do.
So I
think the
FEP is
intrinsically
semantic in
that sense,
that it's
about an
agent modeling
its environment.
Yes,
and about
the semantics
of action
as opposed
to a
partial
or limited
semantics
of passive
inferers
or semantics
of abstraction
which kind
of leaves
the important
link between
the agent
and the
environment
through sense
making and
decision
selection
basically
unaddressed
because it's
kind of
Descartes
in the
thought experiment
in the
room and
here when we
actually engage
with the
boundary
of the
room,
that's
where we
start.
Yeah.
Yeah,
the FEP
completely
destroys
this
classical
notion
of the
passive
observer
as does
quantum
theory.
There are
no passive
observers
in quantum
theory.
So this
is a
construct
that we
inherited
from a
classical
worldview
that is
seriously
misleading.
A lot
more to
say, but
that's a
great place
to end.
Thank you,
Chris.
Okay,
thank you,
Daniel, and
thanks to
you all,
and ask
questions.
See you next
time.
Cheers.
We'll see you
next time.
to
Thank you.

## bSPQ3BkqTh4

Hello and welcome everyone. It is October 12th, 2023, and we are in the final lecture,
session six in Physics as Information Processing with Chris Fields. So Chris,
thank you for this journey. Exciting to get to this final lecture, which will be followed only
by the last discussion for this go-around. So it's really awesome. And to you for this lecture.
Thank you, Daniel. And welcome everyone to this last session that I'll be doing
with a focus on biology. And just to give a brief review, as usual, we've focused in this course on
generic quantum systems, by which I mean just any quantum system that has some number of degrees
of freedom. And we really haven't made any assumptions about these systems other than
the assumption that both interacting partners have sufficient degrees of freedom
that they can be considered separable. So their boundary is small with respect to the total size
of each of the interacting systems. And I want to emphasize again that the approach we've taken
is completely topological. So we haven't assumed anything about embedding in space.
And as we've characterized these systems, we focused really on two things.
One, the amount of information that the two systems can exchange. And that amount is determined by the
size of their boundary. It's determined by this number n, which is the Hilbert space dimension of the boundary.
And as we've discussed now in several of the sessions, we can think of this boundary as a collection of n qubits
via which the two systems A and B communicate. The other feature of the interaction on which we focused
is the reference frames that are used by the two systems to interact with this set of qubits.
And it's these reference frames that assign the information that flows between A and B
meaning or functional significance or actionability or however you want to
refer to the idea that when a system gets some information, it does something useful with it.
So those are very generic kinds of ways of characterizing an interaction.
You can think of it as a qualitative characterization, the semantics of the information,
and a quantitative characterization, the amount of information. But other than that,
we've left the nature of these systems open. And this characterization allowed us to reformulate the
free energy principle in quantum information theoretic terms as the principle that interacting systems
behave in a way that will asymptotically align their reference frames. And we saw that full alignment of reference frames
is equivalent to entanglement. So the FEP drives systems toward entanglement, which is not surprising because that's
what happens to generic quantum systems. They may start out separable, but if they interact long enough,
they'll become entangled. So we've had a discussion that is really very generic.
Now we showed a couple of sessions ago that under these very generic assumptions, we got some interesting outcomes.
And one is that if systems have sufficient degrees of freedom, under the action of the FEP,
that they will be driven toward making a diverse set of measurements of their environment because they're trying to get information about it so that they can predict what it's going to do.
And that as they add ways of making measurements, they'll come up against a non-commutativity of their measurements.
And this may be due to intrinsic mathematical facts about their measurements, and it may just be due to their limited supply of free energy.
So either way, what this induces is compartmentalization and the requirement for internal classical communication on internal boundaries.
So I just wanted to reemphasize that this is a result of basic physics.
And we see compartmentalization, of course, ubiquitously in biology.
But this suggests to us that features of biology that are very familiar actually follow from fairly deep physics.
And compartmentalization is one of them.
We then talked last time about space and time and the computational requirements of on any system that is able to perceive an external clock or perceive an external spatial layout.
And we discussed this from a very kind of developmental psychology point of view.
We discussed it using essentially the kinds of terms on the right here, as opposed to the kind of language that's much more technical and mathematical that's used in physics to derive space time as emergent from information transactions.
But we at least hypothesize that both of these are ways of getting to the same sense of emergent space time.
And one important outcome of this discussion was that systems can perceive external clocks,
so external periodic behavior with fewer computational resources, so before they're able to perceive spatial layouts.
And we'll get back to this later.
So organisms and maybe other complex systems seem to manage a collection of capabilities that are all mutually dependent.
So memory depends on having layouts of persistent things that can be distinguished.
So it depends on space, and it certainly depends on time.
Space gives structure to persistent objects.
Memory allows you to identify persistent objects.
And objects, in turn, give structure to space by being located in different places.
And objects enable the fundamental requirement for memory, which is some form of error correction,
so that one has enough redundancy in the memory to check to see whether a memory has been degraded.
So organisms seem to manage a physically very important process,
which is the use of space-time and memory as a basis for cognition.
You'll recognize these four functions that are mutually interdependent,
as underlying complex cognition across the board.
And you can't really do complex cognition unless you have these capabilities.
So today we're going to put some of these things together in a discussion of biology,
and end by looking forward to future directions, not just in biology, but in all of quantum information theory.
So let's talk about biological systems, living systems, which of course includes us,
but also includes all other organisms and communities of organisms and so forth at multiple scales.
And I want to put forward a fairly radical hypothesis that living systems are just generic quantum systems
that the FEP has driven to a high level of computational complexity.
So what does this belief say?
It suggests that living systems are just quantum systems that have enough degrees of freedom
and a sufficiently complicated internal dynamics that the FEP,
by requiring them to predict what their environment is going to do next,
has driven them to make complicated measurements and complicated inferences on the basis of those measurements
that enable fairly complicated actions on the environment.
So these are systems that you would characterize as computers,
essentially information processing systems, with a high degree of computational capability.
Now this is clearly as much a philosophical hypothesis as an empirical hypothesis,
and that's due in part to the fact that we don't really have a good definition of what a living system is.
We can just point and say, you know, that's a living system and that thing over there isn't.
But beyond that, we don't have much of the theory.
And of course, people have worked on a theory of what is life for decades.
But there's not a lot of agreement.
And so this is, in a sense, a definitional kind of hypothesis.
And we test such kinds of hypothesis by seeing if they're useful conceptually
in the theory to help us understand what living systems are doing.
Now, as soon as we put forward something like this, inevitably the question comes up,
are living systems really quantum systems?
Or are they classical in some intrinsic sense?
And this question is really an artifact of two things.
One, the continuing association between quantum systems and microscopic systems,
which is, of course, traditional.
Quantum theory was developed to deal with microscopic phenomena.
It was first tested as a theory of microscopic phenomena.
And it's only in the past couple of decades that quantum theory is being applied to big things,
to cosmology, for example.
So there's a long tradition of association between quantum and microscopic and living systems,
or mesoscopic, much bigger than atoms, bigger than molecules.
So, and they're not nearly as big as cosmological systems.
So they're somewhere in between.
And those systems have traditionally been regarded as classical.
And even chemistry, even biochemistry, is still taught in a very classical way.
So we're not used to thinking of these things as quantum systems.
But at least in the approach we've taken in this course, all physical systems are quantum systems.
And classical information exists only on boundaries, only on boundaries between systems.
And it only describes their interaction.
And I want to emphasize, I mean, I've said it before, but since this is the last class, I want to say it again,
that this is not a universally held view.
It's a view that's becoming more common.
And I think a generation from now, it will probably be the dominant view of things.
But it's not fair to say that it's the dominant view now.
It's, I think, quite fair to say that it's a view on the rise, especially in the quantum information and quantum gravity communities.
But from a strict empirical perspective, we know a number of things.
We know that accurate molecular dynamics calculations require quantum theory.
We know that a lot of biologically important molecular processes use quantum coherence.
We know that things like hydrogen bonding can only be understood using quantum theory.
We know that cellular free energy budgets are way too small to support fully classical information processing.
If we think of information processing in terms of what proteins are doing or what other molecules are doing in terms of changing shape.
We know that shape changes in proteins and other molecules underlie all cellular information processing.
So if we think of them as actually implementing cellular information processing, we have way more information processing than could be funded classically.
And finally, we know that human cognition exhibits contextuality.
So human cognition uses quantum coherence.
It's not a classical causal process in all cases.
But this is still a very nascent field.
And it's a field with a lot of potential.
And I think, again, a generation from now, quantum biology is going to be regarded as a very mainstream endeavor, even though it's something of a small emerging field now.
And I'll just show you one picture in support of this third point.
This is a plot of measured free energy usage converted to numbers of bits processed at one kilohertz for a number of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells,
all that I could find a few years ago that had good kaliometric measurements, versus the log of their area, their membrane surface area.
And the thing to note here is that these cells are processing classical information at pretty low rates, kilohertz to gigahertz rates for a thousand bits at a time.
And we know that a lot more is happening in cells than that.
Cells have many more than a thousand proteins.
And those proteins are all moving all the time.
And if that motion is processing information, then there's not nearly enough classical, not nearly enough thermodynamic power to power all of that information processing.
So let's now talk a little bit about life and living systems and what they look like.
Here's a view of living systems from the point of view of genome diversity.
This is a few years old, so it's out of date by now.
But it tells us a lot qualitatively.
It tells us that almost all genome diversity is microbial.
That the sorts of organisms that we're familiar with, medium-sized organisms like us, animals and plants, have only a tiny amount of genome diversity.
So we think of ourselves as pretty diverse.
We think of ourselves as quite different from other animals, from flies or worms or sponges or something like that.
But in fact, we're not all that different from them.
We share many, many proteins with all of those other organisms.
We share the same cellular organization and so forth.
We're not, in fact, all that different from plants.
And we're much more similar to the fungi than to the plants.
So we get a very biased view of genome diversity when we just look at familiar large types of living systems.
Most genome diversity is buried down there in the microbial world.
This isn't the only way we can look at life as a diverse set of organisms.
We can also look at it in terms of a cell lineage.
The fact that we're all related at the DNA level tells us that we're all descendants of a common ancestor,
which is usually called Luca, the last universal common ancestor.
And Luca is generally modeled as being a cell, more or less like a bacterial cell, so fairly simple.
But the point of looking at life as a lineage is that we get a diagram that looks very much like the cell lineage
from an embryological situation, much like the cell lineage of our own bodies growing from a fertilized egg.
And in particular, looking at life as a lineage shows us that not only do we share DNA with all other organisms,
we actually share a membrane, a cytoplasm, that's continuous in time all the way back to Luca,
and so continuous in time between us and bacteria.
So if you look at life this way, you realize that life is in a sense all one organism,
all one connected structure that's developed over time through division, cell division.
And so we're very closely related to all other parts of life in the same way that different cells in our bodies
are closely related to each other.
The time span is just longer.
I mean, here are the time spans three and a half or four billion years between us and Luca.
These lineages have been diverging for that long, but they're still continuous.
And in particular, they form a continuous cell membrane.
So when you think of life in this way, we realize that we are reasoning from just one example when we think about terrestrial life.
And this strongly limits what we can say about living systems, what we can say about biology,
that we really only have one example, the lineage that descends from Luca here on Earth.
And at some point, we may have more examples.
And there's certainly groups working on artificial organisms that aren't part of this lineage,
that are constructed from parts derived from this lineage, but aren't members of this lineage themselves.
And that may tell us something new about life.
But if we think of life this way, we see something very important, which is that as life grows, its boundary gets bigger.
And since the boundary of a system constitutes its informational environment,
its dimension getting bigger means that more information flows into it from its environment
and more information flows out of it into its environment.
So as life develops from Luca, it gets a larger and larger informational environment.
And this dimension of its boundary grows and grows.
Now, what that means, if you go back to our original picture of two interacting systems,
is that the number of the dimensionality of the physical environment is decreasing.
And we think of the physical environment as increasing in size.
We have the expanding universe and all that.
But what's increasing in size is space.
And if space is emergent, then that increase is not a real increase in degrees of freedom.
What we're really interested in is the Hilbert space of the physical environment as distinct from the Hilbert space of life.
And as life gets bigger, it literally, quite literally, eats the physical environment and turns it into more life.
So there's less physical environment around.
So the trajectory of life is toward a bigger informational environment and a smaller physical environment.
And as the physical environment gets smaller, you might imagine it gets easier to predict.
And as the informational environment gets bigger,
you have more information with which to predict the behavior of the physical environment.
So this all hangs together very nicely with the free energy principle.
Here's another picture of this same thing.
If we start with some boundary here on the left labeled B around some system labeled S,
and it's embedded in an environment E,
then as S makes copies of itself through some process like cell division,
then it starts to fill up more of E.
It's actually converting degrees of freedom of E into degrees of freedom of its copies that it's made of itself.
And if we think of some larger boundary drawn somewhere in E,
here on the right side, I've labeled that B prime,
what happens is that B prime gets slowly filled up with copies of S,
and it starts to look like a large organism.
And that's what life is doing in the physical environment.
It's making a bigger boundary for itself at the expense of degrees of freedom of its physical environment.
So we can ask, what drives this process?
Why is life doing this?
Why is it making copies of itself?
And the answer to that question, at least one answer to that question,
is the free energy principle drives it to do this.
And I'll just show you some simulations from several years ago
of a cell population in this upper left panel.
The green cells are stem cells that divide,
and they've been embedded in an environment that's safe on the left side
and 100% lethal on the right side.
So they're embedded in an environment that's conducive to life on one side
and very dangerous as you get toward the middle.
And the purpose of these simulations was to study what happens
when the stem cells are able to divide and create not just other stem cells,
but create specialized progeny that don't divide.
So somatic progeny that don't divide and hence have free energy resources,
thermodynamic resources that they can devote to doing something other than dividing.
Cell division is incredibly expensive when it comes to energy.
So if you take that energy and apply it not to cell division,
but to protecting the stem cells,
you can allow the stem cell population to expand.
And that's what these other simulations show.
The blue cells are somatic cells that have very varying ability to protect the stem cells.
And if they're fairly good at protection,
and they're fairly hard to kill,
down in the right bottom quadrant,
you can actually get a population expanding well into the highly lethal part of the environment.
So this shows you the FEP in action.
What the stem cells are doing
is constructing a very predictable neighborhood
around themselves in the environment
by dividing to make progeny that don't themselves divide,
that just sit there
and help protect the stem cells.
So the stem cells are now living in a safer, more predictable environment,
and that allows them to invade more and more of their physical environment
by having this fairly benign informational environment.
So this is the FEP in action,
driving the expansion of life
at the expense of the physical environment.
So that lets us go back to this question
that was raised last time
about the mechanism of these scale transitions
that we see ubiquitously in life.
Life gets bigger and bigger
as time goes on phylogenetically
and as time goes on developmentally.
We start with some molecular pathways
that somehow get assembled into a cell.
That's the origin of life question.
How does that happen?
And about 2 billion years later,
cells start to group together
to make multicellular organisms.
Now, bacteria group together
to make facultative multicellular systems
like microbial maps 3 billion years ago,
very, very early on.
But we don't see the emergence
of obligate multicellulars
until much, much later,
before the Cambrian explosion,
but still less than a billion years ago.
And from there,
things get more complicated very quickly.
So one has large multicellular organisms.
They develop complicated social relations
that probably first emerged with social insects,
but are certainly well-developed in invertebrates,
including in mammals.
Organisms group together
in very complex ecosystems.
And recall here that it's now known
that all multicellular organisms
have obligate microbial symbionts.
So all of our bodies are, in fact,
very complex ecosystems
populated by many, many different species of bacteria.
And that's true not just for us,
but for trees and insects and worms
and sponges and everything else.
So organisms,
from a body point of view,
are themselves ecosystems.
And organisms organize themselves into ecosystems.
And these ecosystems come into contact
across the entire biosphere.
So processes as simple as the wind
disperse organisms as small as bacteria
all over the planet.
So this scaling of life
toward larger and larger organizational structures
is, in a sense,
the major thing for biology to explain.
And the hypothesis that we floated last time
was that this transition
from very small scales
to very large scales
uses the same mechanism over and over again,
or a mechanism that has the same structure
over and over again.
So the renormalization group
is trivial, basically.
It's just the identity
operating at different scales,
or mapping from one scale to the next.
So the question is,
can we approach this in any way?
Does this make sense?
And to try to make sense of it,
we can go to the one real developed theory
that we have in biology,
which has been formulated
by Dawkins and others
as universal Darwinism.
This is just kind of an abstraction
of the modern synthesis
between Darwinian evolution and genetics.
But universal Darwinism
is incredibly simple.
It's very obvious.
It says,
if you have systems
and they can copy each other,
they can copy themselves
and the copies can diversify,
then if you want to know
what's going to happen
at the population level,
what you will find
is the systems
that copy themselves
and diversify most efficiently
will win
because there'll be more of them.
So they end up dominating the population.
And winning gets called natural selection.
But natural selection
is not an extra part
of the Darwinian process.
It's just the outcome
of efficiency,
of the systems
that copy themselves
most efficiently
coming to dominate
any population.
So there's no sort of
kind of hand of God
or whatever reaching down
and selecting some organisms
and not others.
And of course,
when Darwin put
the idea of natural selection
together,
he was thinking
very explicitly
of the analogy
of a gardener
or a farmer
selecting the crops
or the animals
or whatever
that the gardener liked best
and keeping those.
And that's where
this selection metaphor
comes from.
But there's no real process
of selection
in evolution
by natural selection.
It's just copying
and diversifying.
But this clearly
is just the outline
of what a real
mechanistic theory
would be
because we need
to have a story
about what copying
is
and what diversifying
is
and what efficiently
means.
And in particular,
to address the question
that we raised
a couple of slides
ago,
we need to know
whether these mechanisms
are the same
or at least
isomorphic
of the same form
at different scales.
So,
that's what I want
to talk about
for the next little bit.
let's start
with copying.
Up until the 70s,
copying
in biology
really meant
DNA replication
and
to some extent
cell division.
replication,
but the focus
in evolutionary
theory
was on
DNA replication.
And in the 70s,
it was realized
that
whole genes
could be
duplicated,
so whole genes
could be copied.
And then
shortly
after that,
it was realized
that particularly
in prokaryotes
where genes,
functionally related genes
are next to each other
and chromosomes
often
in what are called
operons,
that
operons
could be duplicated
and so entire pathways
could be duplicated.
And as genomes
began to be sequenced
and structures
of genomes
were understood,
it became clear
that genomes
could be copied.
And
of course,
we have two copies
in each of our cells
with the exception
of red blood cells
of our complete genome.
But
some plants,
for example,
have six or eight
or even more copies
of their genome
in each of their cells.
So
there's
large-scale
genome duplication.
Cell division
is
clonal duplication
of cells.
Organismal reproduction
works by cell division
in all known systems.
Colonies or societies
of organisms
reproduce themselves
in part
through cultural transmission.
and entire
niches reproduce
themselves.
For example,
in processes
like
forest evolution
or desertification
or even
urbanization,
we see
humans reproducing
the same sorts
of niches
in city
after city,
for example.
people.
So
these forms
of copying
have the kind
of hierarchical
dependencies
that one might
expect.
So to duplicate
pathways,
you have to
duplicate genes.
To duplicate
cells,
you have to
duplicate the genome.
To duplicate
organisms,
you have to
duplicate cells.
and this
suggests
that this
copying operation
is indeed
scale-free.
That
each
level,
the copying
operation at each
level enables
the copying
operation at the
next level.
Now,
with diversification,
we see much
the same thing.
In the early
days of
the modern
synthesis
and still
in the
work of
people like
Richard Dawkins,
diversification
is generally
thought of as
random.
So mutation,
for example,
is thought of
as random.
And
here I have
Barbara McClintock,
who is kind
of the hero
of non-randomness
in
doggedly
over decades
pointing out
that
much of
genome
diversification
is not
random at
all.
And
that
genomes
actively
diversify by
moving whole
clusters of
genes around
and
duplicating
them or
just changing
their positions
so that
they're under
the influence
of different
local
control.
gene and
genome
level.
You have
active
diversification
by various
processes.
Enzymatic
processes
or, as
McClintock
showed,
is transposon
mediated
mechanisms,
which are
enzymatic
at the
bottom.
Cells
actively
diversify by
lots of
different
mechanisms.
systems.
And in
the 70s,
Carl
Woes
was, in
part,
personally
responsible for
pointing out
that in the
microbial world,
there's a lot of
horizontal gene
transfer.
and, again,
no one believed
him for quite
a while.
But now it's
broadly accepted
that microbes
exchange DNA
very frequently
and across
large distances
phylogenetically.
And this is
how things
like microbial
resistance to
antibiotics
spread so
quickly,
or one way
that it
spreads so
quickly.
And it's
a tremendous
agent of
essentially
speciation
to the extent
that that
even makes
any sense
in the
microbial
world.
Of course,
in our
cells,
we have
functional
differentiation.
As mentioned
earlier,
there are lots
of symbiotic
interactions
that lead
to diversification
in cells
by radically
altering their
local
environments.
And, of
course,
sex is a
mechanism for
diversification.
Organisms
actively
diversify in
many different
ways.
The most
obvious one
is just by
moving around,
by moving to
a different
environment.
The organism
is exposed to
different inputs
and is allowed
different outputs.
And so it
can move into
a different
direction,
morphologically,
genetically,
etc.
organisms can
regulate their
own
evolvability
by altering
things like
DNA repair
systems or
activating
transposons.
Again,
these are
sorts of
things that
went very
much against
the grain when
they were first
discovered but
are now pretty
well accepted.
And, of course,
organisms can
learn and so
can diversify
their behavior
by diversifying
their computational
capabilities.
And social
groups, of
course, actively
diversify in
many different
ways.
And organisms
are increasingly,
non-human
organisms are
increasingly regarded
as having cultures
that they pass
on intergenerationally
by intergenerational
learning and can
exchange with
other groups.
So,
diversification
is active
and occurs
at every
scale.
And,
again,
diversity,
although this
is a bit
less clear
than in the
case of
copying,
diversification
mechanisms
at one
scale enable
diversification
mechanisms
at other
scales.
So, for
example,
transposon
mediated
mechanisms
enable
horizontal
gene
transfer
in
microorganisms.
And the
FEP
tells us
that efficiency
is actually
about
intelligence.
because the
FEP
drives
systems to
build good
models of
their
environments
or the
behavior of
their
environments.
And what a
good model
lets a
system do
is reach
a single
goal by many
different means
because it
allows, in a
sense,
planning.
and it
allows
flexibility
and adaptability.
And I put
William James
here on this
slide because
he was the
first, as far
as I know,
to define
intelligence as
this ability
to use
different means
to reach the
same goal.
Now, in
evolution,
that's long
been known,
and it's
called
convergent
evolution.
When you
see two
lineages
adapting to
a single
environment
with very
different
genetics and
very different
morphologies,
and often
the organisms
will end up
with similar
morphologies
that work
well in that
environment,
but very
different
genetics and
very different
biochemistry.
So,
throughout
evolution,
we see this
phenomenon of
functional
convergence
balancing
structural
divergence at
many, many
different levels.
So, we
have
multiple
genes for
very similar
proteins.
We have
multiple
pathways that
do more or
less the
same thing.
We have
different cell
types that
support the
same basic
functions.
We have
tissues that
have, that
are fairly
different, but
that have the
same functions.
For example,
eyes and
different kinds
of organisms
that allow
vision but have
very different
structure.
And, of
course, we
have functional
convergence and
social relations.
And if we
look at how
cells interact,
traditional
evolutionary
theory really
focuses on
competition.
evolution.
But we
now know that
cells cooperate,
that they
exchange resources
in various
ways, even
across vast
differences in
phylogeny.
For example, the
interchange between
plants and
fungi, or
between bacteria
and us.
cells, we
know that
cells, in
a sense,
persuade each
other by
secreting
things like
hormones that
cause other
cells to do
different things.
Cells
deceive each
other.
For example,
microbes that
are trying to
escape the
immune system.
And cells
coerce each
other.
Cells even
kill each
other when
they detect,
for example,
genetic
defects.
So, these
sorts of
social and
economic and
even political
ideas are
useful for
describing living
systems from
the level of
cells on up.
They were
developed in
social settings
to describe
what goes on
in human
societies and
then extended
to other
animals.
And now
it's very
clear that
they extend
to individual
cells.
So, when
we think about
social and
intelligence,
we can think
about social
intelligence even
at the level
of individual
cells.
And we
see these
sorts of
competition,
cooperation,
resource exchange,
etc., even at
the level of
microbial mass,
so biological
structures that
are 3 billion
years old.
Now, of course,
intelligence is
necessary, but
it's not sufficient
for being
selected.
protected.
It won't
protect you
from impacts
of asteroids
that happen to
land on your
planet, which
has happened
often in the
evolution of
the Earth.
And we're
now trying to
figure out how
to predict and
prevent such
things.
But it's, you
know, who
knows whether
we'll be
successful at
that.
intelligence is
necessary when
it's viewed in
this FEP sort
of way.
Intelligence is
what lets you
build models
that enable
you to predict
the environment.
So where does
this leave us?
By thinking
of evolutionary
theory in
terms of
scale-free
mechanisms, we
seem to have
a picture in
which we start
with quantum
systems with a
certain level of
complexity, and
the FEP actually
gives us scale-free
biology, or
something very
close to scale-free
biology.
And that's very
interesting because
the FEP, of
course, is a
generic principle.
It just says that
systems do what
they need to do to
keep existing.
And this way of
thinking gives us
some predictions.
One is that we'll
find compartmentalized
problem-solving
everywhere because
the FEP drives
compartmentalization,
and the reason is
just non-communativity
of measurement
processes.
it predicts that we'll
see hierarchical
organization everywhere
in the same way we
did on that first
compartmentalization
slide where once
you have a number of
compartments, you
need a meta
compartment that, if
nothing else,
distributes free
energy.
So some sort of
very basic attention
system.
And we see
attention systems, of
course, throughout
biology.
technology.
It predicts that
living systems will
have very limited
classical data
structures.
So since they have
to write classical
data on their
boundaries, and
their boundaries are
much smaller than
they are, then
they'll, and because
writing classical data
is expensive, that
living systems will
tend to use as
little classical data
as they can get
away with.
Since classical data
is needed for
thermodynamic
irreversibility, where
we see thermodynamic
irreversibility, that's
where we look for
classical data.
We saw that
organisms will be
able to detect time
first before they
can detect space.
So we can expect
organisms to have
clocks even before
they can represent
space.
And of course, we
see things like
diurnal variation
throughout biology.
And finally, the
FEP predicts this
asymptotic collapse
of separability back
to entanglement.
So it predicts that
living systems will
eventually degrade and
become indistinguishable
from their
environments.
And we know that
happens at the cell
level and the
individual organism
level.
You know, we call
it death.
death.
So the FEP seems to
give us a lot of the
features of biology.
And it gives us these
features in a scale-free
way.
And it derives them
from this very basic
physics.
So where does that
leave us?
I think it leaves us
here with a challenge,
not just to thinking
about the FEP,
which is what this
course has been
about, but to
quantum information
theory in general.
And that challenge is
to evolve from the
kind of conceptual and
theoretical utility that
we've been discussing
in this course, and
which is very well
developed in the
physics community, to
some sorts of
empirical and
technological utility.
technology.
And I've listed three
areas here where QIT is
very active, one in
quantum gravity and
cosmology.
And you're probably
familiar with things like
string theory that
sort of fairly famously
seem not to be
empirically testable.
people.
And the quantum
gravity community is
enormous, many
thousands of people
working in this area.
But coming up with
theories that can be
tested empirically at
the scales that we can
actually do experiments,
so at accessible
energy scales, for
example, has proved to
be very difficult.
So this is a real
challenge to the field,
is somehow
getting not just to
empirical testability,
but to some sort of
technological utility.
And you can imagine
that if the main
prediction of
quantum gravity is
that space-time is
emergent, that
there could be
enormous utility in
that.
Some ability to
manipulate the way
space-time emerges.
The second area, of
course, is quantum
information in
computing.
And here, massive
resources are being
put into
technological utility.
And I think it's
reasonable to expect
that we'll have
useful quantum
computers within a
generation, at any
rate.
So there, I think,
the field is going
quite well.
And the last area,
what we've talked
about here, is
quantum biochemistry
and biology.
technology.
And this, I think,
is an area with
enormous promise
that maybe some of
you will actually
contribute to
making this area
more useful
technologically and
more accessible
empirically.
at least we have a
picture of how
these different
areas fit
together.
So that's
it.
Thank you very
much for
participating in
this class.
Andrew will be
doing...
well...
Sorry.

Sorry.
Could you just
repeat the last
30 seconds from
and or will be...
Chris?
Andrew will be
at his last
discussion session
on Saturday,
the 20th of
October, at the
usual time, 8 a.m.
Pacific time.
And the interactive
Q&A is open.
I really appreciate
your questions.
I try to answer
them.
And thank you
very much.
Awesome.
Can I ask a
question or do
you want to call
it here?
Sure.
Go ahead.
All right.
Inks wrote,
Chris spoke last
time introducing
the mechanisms of
scale transition.
I'll read your
question and then
I'll fix the
cropping on the
live stream.
Chris spoke last
time introducing
the mechanisms of
scale transition
of these
essentially semantic
theories about how
one scale embeds
in another scale.
I would love to
learn more about
this, especially
in terms of
natural language
semantics and
human cognition
semantics versus
machine learning.
Wow.
Well, that's a very
good question.
Oh.
I think that's a
very relevant
question given
the sorts of
machine learning
that we see
deployed in
systems like
chat GPT.
And especially
as these
systems start
to associate
language with
images, for
example, and
as such
systems are
embedded in
robotic
systems that
can actually
move around
in the world
and interact
with real
objects.
I think
one of the
key questions
in natural
language semantics
is to what
extent does it
depend on
reference?
To what
extent do
the meanings
we attach
to words
or the
usages
that we
allow
for words
depend on
our ability
to connect
words to
external
objects?
And to
what extent
do those
abilities
rely on
connections
between words
themselves?
So if you
think of an
LLM like
chat GPT,
by itself,
it's just a
statistical
model of
relationships
between words
as used
in some
corpus of
text, which
is large,
of course,
but we
can debate
its
representativeness.
And so
that's a
model of
semantics
that's entirely
self-contained.
It's entirely
relations between
different pieces
of language.
Whereas when
we start to
connect those
words,
statistics,
to images
or better
yet to
actual
objects
that are
interacted
with not
just visually
but haptically,
for example,
by a robot,
they start to be
connected to
external reference.
And
that
transition I
think is going
to be very,
very interesting
to watch.
and it's
just starting.
So we all
have ringside
seats on
an incredible
experiment in
semantics.
And
so
that would
be my
response really
to that
question is
keep your
eyes on this
experiment
and see how
it goes
because it's
bound to
tell us
something about
how
semantics
really works.
And I
suspect that
there will be
enormous
opportunity to
start relating
the results of
that experiment
to what we
see in
developmental
psychology,
for example.
Wow.
Awesome.
All right.
Tucker asks,
Areas of
macroscopic
quantum
mediated
phenomena in
biology that
get Chris
Fields excited?
I think
the one that
excites me the
most right
now is
just this
question of
how cells
are managing
to do the
information
processing that
they're doing
and
how much
of it
they can
accomplish
or
I think
the right
way to put
it is
how can
they get
away with
so little
classical
information?
And
I don't
think we
have the
cell biology
yet to
answer that
question,
but I
think asking
the question
may help
us design
the right
kinds of
cell biology
to look
for an
answer.
And our
cell biology
has been
organized around
the idea
that the
structures that
we see
are essentially
static,
that they're
classical,
and that
they're
constructed in
a way that's
thermodynamically
irreversible.
But if we
think of
what we
measure as
not
necessarily
reflecting a
static
structure,
I think
we'll start
to
conceptualize
it differently
and build
models of it
differently.
I mean,
clearly when we
look at things
like protein
structure,
we're looking
at snapshots
of something
that's very
dynamic.
And when
we look in
a chemistry
textbook and
we see
pictures of
this
conformation
that changes
to that
conformation,
we think of
those as
static,
stable
structures,
that that's
kind of a
switch.
But it's
not actually
a switch the
way a light
switch is.
It's a much
more dynamic
process.
And the
kinds of
molecular
dynamic
simulations
that allow
you to
study that
process are
incredibly
complicated
and time
expensive
and uncertain
in resolution
problems and
other things.
But I
think thinking
of these
as kind
of fluid
reversible
processes
is going
to change
the way
we think
about them.
That's a
great point
and it
reminds me
of the
more
physics
based way
of thinking
about the
paths that
could happen
between
observations
or the
statistics
based way
of samples
of a
dynamical
process.
And in
biology,
we know
that even
if we take
a snapshot,
okay,
this organism
is one
centimeter
today,
it's two
centimeters
tomorrow,
something
changed.
So we
know there
is a
developmental
process,
then we
know there's
an ecological
process,
and then
there's an
evolutionary
context,
eco,
evo,
devo.
And then
from that
more biological
understanding
of contextual
developing
organisms,
all of
these different
biological
phenomena
actually help
us expand
our space
of measurement
and analysis
for material
that on
one hand
some people
may have
called
inanimate,
but then
they have
their own
dynamics,
different
time scales,
and so
bringing some
of those,
like the
challenges
of measuring
and observing,
intervening in
historical
and biological
things,
gives us a
bigger
understanding
even on
measuring
and summarizing
and analyzing
ensembles
or scales
that don't
immediately
appear to
have that
kind of
historiosity
like pieces
of silicon
or carbon.
Yeah,
that's well
put,
and I
think we
have the
same problem
as we go
up in
scale also.
We tend
not to think
of things
like societies
as living
systems,
but in
one sense
they clearly
are,
and to
the extent
that we
can think
of these
structures
that are
much larger
than we
are
individually
as
living
systems,
cognitive
systems,
et cetera,
I think
we'll
understand
their
dynamics
better.
Okay,
final question.
Upcycle Club
wrote,
how can
a quantum
system
detect
and respond
to quantum
context
shifts,
switches,
which are
changes in
the measurement
basis or
the entanglement
structure of
the system?
Well,
the answer
here is
simple and
not very
informative.
It's by
making
measurements,
which is
all that
quantum
systems can
actually do.
And
making
measurements
that follow
probing
actions
that
try to
push the
boundaries
of the
model of
a context.
context.
You know,
when having
this discussion,
I always
like to
go back
to the
frame
problem
in
artificial
intelligence,
which is
the
problem
formulated
in the
late
60s
of
predicting
what won't
change as
the result
of an
action.
so it's
sort of
the inverse
of the
problem
of predicting
the side
effects.
And if you
can predict
all of the
side effects,
you can
predict what
doesn't
change.
So it's
equivalent to
the question
of predicting
all the
side effects.
And context
change is a
side effect.
And it's
often an
unobserved
and maybe
unobservable
side effect.
that if
you have
a model
that says
I'm working
in this
context,
then you
can
intentionally
probe the
boundaries of
that model
and see
if you
can actually
alter the
context you're
in as a
way of
discovering
what context
you're in.
And,
you know,
humans do
that in
social settings
all the
time.
But I
think this
is something
that we
need to
think about
happening at
many different
scales.
I suspect
that cells
are doing
this all
the time.
We just
don't know
how.
There's so
much to
say there.
It just
makes me
think of
the paradox
or the
tension
between
expecting
the expected,
expecting
the unexpected,
and life
needing to
expect both
of that.
Right.
So,
thank you,
Chris.
It's been an
amazing lecture
series.
Many people
in the live
chat are
very appreciative
and we'll
look forward
to their
submitted
questions and
their
participation
in the
final discussion
coming soon.
So,
thank you,
Chris.
Till next time.
Okay,
and thank you
all.
Bye.
Ciao.
Bye.




























Thank you.

## cxJuA012HvM

Hello and welcome everyone. At the Active Inference Journal, we are eagerly seeking
contributors who would like to help improve the transcripts, named entities list, and topics
discussed in the ongoing Chris Fields course Physics as Information Processing. Right now,
it's May 2023. If you're already planning to spend time on this course, we hope you'll consider
working with the journal as well. This is a unique opportunity to build editorial skills
and make high leverage open science contributions to the Active Inference ecosystem. Specifically,
this work entails listening carefully to the course, lectures, and discussions, and making
corrections to the AI-generated transcript. For this, we use AssemblyAI. For example,
for the transcript of the first lecture, see this link here. This is what the transcript looks like
on the GitHub. We have a markdown file that allows line-by-line editing, and we use this markdown file
as the basis for further rendering and translation into different languages, as well as training on
language models and other functions. We're also building out the list of entities named, that is,
people and topics. So here we have people named, and already from the background video and first lecture,
we have dozens of names that have been mentioned, and we have topics discussed. So this will continue to
grow and that will improve the scholarship and the relevance of this work as we note so many of the
interesting topics being mentioned. All the transcripts and materials related to this course will be
published open source. If you want to see what that looks like or what that can look like, check out the
earlier transcript of the Mark Solms live streams, where we enrich the transcript with images and tables
of content as well. So this is a really important open science way to improve the impact of the live
streams and the videos that we have, and it is also really important for accessibility.
We have synchronous meetings for the Active Inference Journal in the Active Inference Institute's Discord
on Mondays at 13 UTC, although most of the work on this project is done asynchronously,
for example via the GitHub links above. If you're interested in participating in the journal on this
project, please let us know by joining the journal channel on the Discord or by emailing activeinference
at gmail.com. Dave, what else would you add to this?
Working on detailed editing of a transcript is a great way to learn the material in depth and
particularly to spot things that you might have thought you understood that you didn't really
understand. So do it. Great, great points. Totally agree. All right, so looking forward to
people's participation here and till the next update. Thank you.
you

## SV0glS6stuA

Hello, welcome to the course Physics as Information Processing taught by Chris Fields
with Andra Aguirre as a course assistant hosted during 2023 by the Active Inference Institute.
This video is an overview of the course website. It's going to cover some of the key pieces of the
website and ways to participate. The course homepage hosts the key links and a written
course overview. On the course syllabus page, there's a table with each row being one session.
So here you can see the topic and the preparation for each of the six lectures and you can see
information about the six discussion sections which will be following each lecture by about two
weeks. Each lecture and discussion, you can click this blue icon and go directly to the video to
re-watch it or watch it live or you can go to the playlist to watch all videos sequentially.
So that's one way that you can participate is watching videos live or re-watching them.
On the questions and answers page, there's a form that you can submit. You can say, what is time?
And if you submit that question, we'll get it on the back end and Chris Fields will answer the question
and then the question and answer will come up to the public front end. And along with the transcripts
of all sessions, these questions and answers will be part of the publication that we prepare at the end
of the course. So we heartily encourage all questions and answers. It's a really easy and important
anonymous way for you to contribute. Lastly, you can go to register to join discussions. So if you want to join those
live interactive discussion live streams about two weeks after each lecture, you can complete this form
and we'll add you to calendar events. So thanks again for your interest in the course, Physics is
Information Processing, and we hope to see you either watching and re-watching the videos, asking questions
and answers, and maybe even registering to join the discussions. Thanks and see you there.