SPEAKER_00:
hello it is July 7th 2022 it is cohort one textbook group week 10 chapter 5

so we're having the first discussion of chapter five we'll have two weeks of discussing chapter five then in our last two weeks of july talk about more general thoughts that we have on chapters one through five and look forward to the second half of the book um

here there's two new columns this first one is if you'd like to join for chapters one through five cohort two beginning in september 22 and that will be in parallel with also this first cohort continuing for chapter six through ten so just put a check mark if you want to stay in otherwise we won't like include you in that cohort

okay so um there's only a few questions prepared for chapter five so let's start with any general thoughts that people had about chapter five like how is this chapter similar or different from the previous ones and what is the function of chapter five here

Or what did they think was an important overall aspect of this chapter?

And then, of course, anyone who can capture questions that people are asking here, just add them.

But other than that, it would be awesome to hear, like, what did people think Chapter 5 was doing?

Or what did they wonder about the material or related to it?

Ali, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
I think chapter five needs a lot of neurobiological background and without necessary requisites.

It can be probably daunting chapter.

And unlike other chapters, which are at least the previous chapters, which concern themselves with mathematical formalisms, here in chapter five, for the very first time,

we encounter some empirical evidence or the empirical reasons behind modeling active inference as such.

So it's a very important chapter in my opinion, but at the same time, without any prior neurobiological background, it could be a really daunting chapter as well.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Thanks for the summary.

Mike.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it was an interesting choice to go all the way to the human brain to illustrate how some of these concepts would map to biological systems, as opposed to starting with more simplistic organisms and kind of working up from there.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah very nice point any other overview thoughts and then we can just like scan through it and look at the order of a few things and then continue to write questions again like as you're hearing them or like as you're just wondering but let's um

yeah hear any other general thoughts if anyone wants to raise their hand and then look at the order of the chapter okay well the chapter is titled message passing in neurobiology

message passing was brought up in a previous chapter in this box 4.1 in a formal yet slightly non-standard notation without examples just generally the quote anyone have any thoughts on

Jeff?


SPEAKER_05:
Uh...

Yes, I kind of disagree with the quote.

I think recently we've learned that plants actually sense and act on what they detect in the environment.

For example, certain trees, when they're being munched on by, say, like giraffes, will emit molecules that will disperse in other trees

Since this is essentially an alert signal, we'll start producing compounds in the leaves that make the leaves taste very bitter and thus discouraging foraging.

and so forth and so on.

And also, I think it's clear that plants sense and act and respond to their environment and act in order to maintain their integrity as individuals or as groups in the example I just mentioned.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Agreed.

also the quote might have like a little bit of hyperbole slash comedy like two types of animals plants so it's about nervous systems ali


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, and one other thing about Rodolfo Linus is in one of his most famous books, Eye of the Cortex from Neurons to Self, actually he describes thinking as an internalized movement.

And it's a very interesting way to describe thinking, in my opinion, and it directly relates to this active inference framework.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah putting his quotation here might be quite relevant cool and then i added a 2017 paper with friston and calvo about plant and predictive processing framework and then here's a like a non-active paper but about more on the behavioral side which is kind of the view from the outside

without denying the view from the inside as well but it's just related to behavioral modeling okay in the uh introduction they write let us take a step back from the technical material of chapter four which as um Ali and others have reminded us was like even at the beginning was like you can bypass this chapter if you don't want technical detail so

Maybe somebody had read it even one, two, three, five.

And maybe they did or didn't look at the appendix.

Turn to the process theories accompanying active inference.

Drawing a distinction between a principle and a process theory.

does anyone have any thoughts on that like how as they're reading the book are they thinking about where free energy principle is related to active inference how does introducing that that kind of broad map territory slash principle process distinction here help transition the book towards focusing on these empirical cases

Ali, with a hand raised, or anyone else?

Okay, just one.

Yeah, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, sorry.

Just one thing I forgot to mention about that quotation is an interesting research has been emerging that's kind of bestowed consciousness to plants as well.

One of the articles, one of the early articles for that is Insights into Plant Consciousness.

So in fact,

we don't necessarily limit it to just human or even animal consciousness and we're beginning to relate consciousness or any other aspects of nervous system to plants as well.

So that's one additional remarks about that previous quote, sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and the mathematical like frameworks for behavior and consciousness that are integrative will allow comparisons of different kinds of behavioral systems and that like leads people wondering about consciousness and all these other areas um so mike and then anyone else yeah so um tying that back to um the part of the chapter that you were on previously in terms of moving from


SPEAKER_01:
principle to process and you had highlighted that the latter allows us to develop

hypotheses that are answerable to empirical data.

So I think this is the first instance in the book where they are making a serious effort to tie out to real world observations as opposed to saying, here's a framework for how things might work and how the pieces might be connected.

Now we're going to take that framework and think about

Can we identify things that we see in real systems, in this case in the human brain, and tie those back into the ideas that we put forth previously?


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, totally agree.

It's like partitioning off the principles from the earlier chapters.

Like in principle, those two sides of the equation are equal because of how the axioms of math are.

Or like in principle, one could do this with a Bayesian graph.

And then that is like, in principle, you could do a linear regression with a least squares error minimization.

Nobody can make any data set that says that you can't do that.

and then there's how that least squares regression works on empirical data so they're saying for chapter five we're going to look at with all the architecture developed a few specific neural systems and talk about how they're um the best current

uh understanding that they have of how these neural systems can be modeled with models of the uh structures like we've seen before and they're saying we're not trying to write a neuro textbook here but to touch kind of like with both feet the empirical modeling

And then the systems that they are going to model are like effector systems, so motor control, subcortical structures like the thalamus and basal ganglia.

So these are more like...

functional outcomes of the nervous system, specific anatomical structures of interest, modulation of synaptic efficiency or efficacy, which is like a micro anatomical or like a neurophysiological mechanism of interest and something that is an important like leverage point and something that is being modified and found to be changed in different situations.

And then

relationship between decision making and movement generation which is also something that has come up in those um 46 live streams on like motor active inference decision making active inference so what did uh well let's check if there's any questions written okay um

what could anyone say about the cortical layers or what was in figure 5.1 mike so i was just observing that um in


SPEAKER_01:
the start of chapter four they said well you can skip this chapter if you don't want to get deep into the math and then here we are at section five two in chapter five i think and they refer back to the message passes passing uh structure that was set up in chapter four yes good point


SPEAKER_00:
And it's like, well, if you can skip the details of the formalism to look at the examples, or you could skip the examples, any linear,

text, 140 characters or textbook or, you know, live stream or anything, it's always gonna be some sort of linear presentation question and with a densely linked and interdisciplinary area, then like the linearity becomes challenging.

So maybe with more, you know, with some notebooks or some other rendering or educational way to,

have the ordering or have the, of course, the connections between sections be a little bit different.

The first system that they're focusing on is the cortical column.

Does anyone have like any thing to add on cortical layers or the role of the cortex, even if it's just something that they've heard about?

Well, I think that this Numenta line of AI and many of the other... Oh, Ali, go for it.

Yes.


SPEAKER_04:
I just want to say that for the past couple of decades, or probably several decades, cortex has traditionally been thought of as the seat of both consciousness, intelligence, and also, of course, cognition.

Recent studies have shown that, especially studies such as Mark Somm's research, has shown that, in fact, consciousness actually stems from literally the brain stem, not necessarily the cortex.

So there are some challenges about the exact function of cortex, and the debate goes on.


SPEAKER_00:
nice okay here's a little bit on the cortex so it is the outer frontal part of the mammalian style brain insects don't have cortex though they share a lot of the same architectures and so on so this is like neuron tracing

And there's kind of two levels of organization that people are modeling in the cortical models.

The first is based upon the histological observation of the layers.

These are six layers of cells, and there's a lot of development and all different functionality between the different layers.

One important thing to note is it's not that they're the layers of a Bayesian hierarchical model.

It's not like each one is up and down, up and down.

So this isn't a predictive processing architecture happening simply with these six layers.

This is not a six-layer model.

In fact, they're connected to each other sparsely within a column as it's shown here in 5.1.

So that's like the micro anatomical structure of the cortical column.

And it's called a column because it's like the layers are also arranged in this repeating way.

And there's just like a lot of different layouts for different regions of this cortical tissue type.

and in certain situations it is organized like linear columnar structures.

which is often seen as like one of the evolutionary um local Maxima of like depth of processing and sparsity of connections laterally so those are the two levels of analysis that are being and as Ali mentioned like people yes have gone to the consciousness angle or they've just argued that this is kind of like the massively paralyzable but also like deep recurrent

contextual, et cetera, the enneagrams, like the patterns that could be activated, the dimensionality is potentially super high, so it could play a role in memory, signal processing.

And the two levels that people look at the connections between, like anatomically by taking these images or by doing like stainings and stuff,

anatomically and functionally is within the column where there's certain kinds of relationships and then across columns where there's certain kinds of relationships.

So any thoughts or questions on that?

But like, that's just like why the cortex is being studied.

And that's like a little bit of how like the neuroscientists

have been approaching this and why this is one of the important systems with a lot of theoretical modeling and empirical evidence and relevance as well.

JF?


SPEAKER_05:
I remember many, many years ago taking a course in physiology on the visual cortex and the whole notion that the brain has some kind of structure.

I always thought it was fascinating because I feel that the brain is a huge hack, patches upon patches upon patches brought in by evolution.

there would be some structure in it is interesting.

But within those structures, as this picture shows, it's very messy.

I would never implement a system with this kind of wild interconnectivity.

So I'm very curious about how much we can infer from what is really

mildly structured but highly messy architecture in terms of the the process theory that we're trying to uh to elucidate from anatomy and the functionality of the brain nice thank you mike


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that makes me think that some of that messiness is in support of redundancy.

And so how do we think about redundancies in systems in the context of active inference?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and neural systems, of course, have amazing, in some dimensions, ability to have redundancy.

Other times, seemingly, there's points of failure, Jeff.

Okay, okay.

All right, so just on the left side.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, sorry.

On the comment about redundancy, I agree, but it's worse than that.

Every part often plays many different roles and participate in different functions, which makes it quite a tangle in terms of functional analysis of parts of the brain, what they do and whatnot.


SPEAKER_00:
So 5.1 is showing a more like pure Bayes graph with the annotation of the kinds of cells that are in the anatomical layer.

So this is like...

a visualization of the anatomy based upon the regions that it connects, gets inputs and outputs from, and then the microanatomy labeled according to cell types.

then with a similar but not exactly concordant there's not a statistical test proposed for how concordant these are it's not a statistical argument it's not exclusive of other framings of what this anatomy is doing here are labeled with different parameters from the base graph architectures that have been explored in the previous chapters compatible with message passing implementations that other papers have addressed that aren't here

these are like architectures that recapitulate some of the functional and macro structural and micro structural aspects so this is like computational neuroscience and it's using these models that actually have an underlying structure that is providing utility and interesting re-framings of the anatomy

And as the model statistical architecture begins to recapitulate aspects of the CyTO architecture, there's no specific threshold where it's like, oh, well, now it's an argument that it's doing that function.

Like...

People get tantalized by it having some, oh, we made this network structured like a brain, or we made this network structured like a mushroom, or we did the ant colony optimization.

So just because like this works for what it does, doesn't mean this works for what anyone wants it to do.

It's just in this huge space of bio-inspired model architectures.

in um five two they move a little bit from the consideration of the columnar architecture which are cell populations to um looking now like still the superficial to deep are the six layers of the cortex but now a few of the variables are highlighted and their relationships and so the um um

ascending and descending prediction error in a predictive processing framework which is like often graphically seen going up and down bottom up and top down effects here is being shown in the context of the columnar cortex where like errors from one like let's just go to where they um the ease are the errors

And the Gs are predictions.

And I guess we can find out what mu is, but basically like this architecture within and between columns could be like this being like the base variable being estimated and a hierarchical nested model of that and a hierarchical model of that.

So this is like a generalization statistical architecture that has compatibility with the neural architecture of the brain.

And it does like a pure statistical function.

And that pure statistical function has like resemblance with some things that the brain region is believed to do.

So that allows this statistical model to be explaining and predicting and useful about the brain, which is like what computational neuroscience does.

So that was the first one of the systems that they focus on.

Then, yeah, I guess this was... Then effector systems.

Okay, let's see if we can kind of quickly look at all the systems.

What?

Did anyone see or what would they like to say about figure 5-3?

Neuroanatomy associated with active inference in modulating spinal motor reflexes.

um okay so five one was the columnar architecture and that was described in terms of what cell types were in it here they're gonna pick up on one of those cell types which is like the computational role the expectations encoded by this cell type that's found in this layer of the motor cortex

And so different regions of the cortex have different apparent functions, asterisk, asterisk, asterisk, but there's like a visual cortex and a motor cortex and so on.

So this is in a motor region of cortical architecture that plays a certain biological function.

The expectations are subtracted from the incoming proprioceptive input

in the horn of a spinal cord.

This is like lateral cut through a spinal cord.

The horns are like the butterfly parts.

And so there's a differencing between the incoming intensity of proprioception and the brain expected expectations.

And then the error drives muscle activity in the direction of suppression.

So the motor activity is like reducing the divergence based upon the sign and the intensity of the compromise between the brain's expectations potentially arising within like layer five from these BET cells and the incoming sensory information, which can be modeled as like Y

I think mu is probably the mean of that expectation.

I don't know what part it was mentioned.

And then here's the expectation, the difference between these two.

It's like a causal system flow, but like a little different.

You're getting a five out of 10 pressure.

You're expecting a five out of 10 pressure.

The motor reflex is not engaged.

You're getting a seven out of 10 pressure.

You're expecting five out of 10.

there's like a negative two difference or you know whichever way you want to be subtracting there's like a two or a negative two difference and then that triggers like some motor neuron units to fire and then that proportionally brings the um expectation into alignment with the measurement

um they're gonna just like that example hinged from a cortical layer and cell type here is going to be hinging on the cortex and looking to an output region of the cortex which is the striatum and then they're gonna do a more detailed model of a basal ganglia because it's been modeled a lot more and then also have like just a textual um treatment of the thalamus

so there's multiple papers on dopamine and active inference and so um from 2012 and then 2015 like this is a really interesting area of research with dopamine because dopamine is like classically described as the reward molecule

reward more dopamine lower reward lower dopamine um so isn't the whole mean inactive that we replace the reinforcement reward learning paradigm with a different imperative that has elements that reflect pragmatic value but that isn't the um overarching

imperative for policy selection and so these papers show how like in the context of a generative model with expectations and preferences and dopamine signaling something related to the predictive processing of stimuli under a mildly optimistic world model good events and surprising events are still associated with dopamine release

but, and things that are going worse than expected are still associated with like dopamine drops.

But that actually is like a more unified way to talk about dopamine's empirical outcomes, as opposed to the reward learning, which has to hypothesize all of these like modules that translate different kinds of things into reward.

Jessica?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah no i think similarly to these i don't remember where i read this but it's like the brain like in regards to like the dopamine coming it's like it's also like the anticipation on of doing something and like the fact that you're going to get that dopamine kick and

Like you get, basically you get a release by anticipating something.

And that maybe a little bit connects also with the active inference.

So the fact that you are anticipating something and, you know, it's like you expect that to happen.

And so you get that release of the dopamine in anticipation of the event happening.

So I-

Don't know much, but I'm thinking it could be connected with having a predictive, unexpected free energy or something.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Good insight.

Rohan?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I'm not, well, I'm not a biologist, but okay, so I just want to clarify.

There are other systems in the body apart from just the brain alone, right?

So you have like the autonomous or what is it, parasympathetic nervous system that controls your heart rate.

your respiration and other things and they and also you have stuff like adrenaline and not adrenaline that do produce responses and other hormones also that produce responses like okay for hunger or satisfaction and we we basically have figured out how to modulate these things to

solve modern issues for things like obesity or something like that.

And there are treatments available that modify these hormones levels, right?

So is this not a very limiting perspective to look at dopamine alone as the only thing?

And my other question would be, how does that convert into say motor commands?

So I just increased dopamine levels without any stimulus whatsoever.

Let's say someone's taking a drug.

So that does not necessarily translate to a motor command, right?

So how does it do this?

Is there like a specialized system that figures out, okay, so here's a previous action, here's increase in dopamine, and here's how we modulate to further increase dopamine.

And where exactly do you set limits on this process?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, the two questions were about interacting physiological systems, and the second one was about dopamine's role in motor selection.

Blue, go ahead if it's related, or if you want to address anything.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, no, I just wanted to respond.

The dopamine response is so... There are a lot of interactions that are happening in the nervous system.

Dopamine is one of the best understood, I think.

It's one of the ones that we've studied for a long time.

Um, and the, if there's like an overload of dopamine, the action can actually be nonspecific and that's what we see in Parkinson's, right?

So it's like an overload of dopamine into that system and, and it fries it out.

And then you get nonspecific, um, action in the nervous system, motor action, the tremors and stuff.


SPEAKER_00:
um yes good call and that like question about um like um non-purposeful behavior and dopamine on the positive and on the negative like failure to engage initiate action relating in like catatonic behavior and then like hyper motor activity associated with um repetitive motions of various kinds

like don't be dopamine is known to be different in people who are experiencing that differently and modified by drugs that target that like system so um but to the first question about like pluralism with respect to physiological systems for sure this model does not exclude that in fact its flexibility

is its advantage because the inputs to a brain region, now we could say, well, at this time scale, it's electrochemical.

And at this time scale, it's going to be just noradrenaline.

And someone says, well, how could you only model noradrenaline?

You say, okay, let's look at the model with noradrenaline and this other one and the unmodeled component.

so it will allow integration formally of physiological mechanisms that genuinely interact and as to why people write like specific papers about specific hormone systems it's just like what is chunked off in that fractal and then also one important note is like um colombo and wright have written about how like we don't need a monolithic theory of any neurotransmitter any brain region

There might be like features or components of dopaminergic systems that it just explains and predicts that they do reward.

Taken lightly that the explanation is just, of course, our explanation of a biological system.

And also you raise like beyond the brain, there's also glia and other cell types.

So yeah.

The cool thing would be a framework where we don't a priori exclude factors that are important, but just to kind of go quickly through the example and get to that motor action.

So this is an output from some putative processing that happened in the cortex.

And now it's projecting into some dopaminergic regions in the subcortical area, like the basal ganglia.

um it's going to be a model involving outcomes o the difference between the preferred and the expected outcomes the sigma squiggle expected free energy evaluated for a policy and the posterior over policy is the bold pi um the figure is like shown after a lot of the description but um

here is where they refer to the high and low dopamine state so also like the movie slash book awakenings is about um people who have like um atypical dopamine signaling and then they're given l-dopa and they like come and like get re-invived with life and stuff um rohan


SPEAKER_06:
yeah so well this is a little more general but okay when so we have the marco blanket and there are some internal states and the marco blanket basically connects us to the external states right uh or samples from the external states and then modulates the internal states accordingly uh

OK, so my question is, I think if the first imperative is survival and the first imperative is to keep this system in homeostasis, which is composed of multiple interlocking and interacting complex components, how exactly would you translate these multiple signaling modalities with multiple hormones?

into maintaining homeostasis with something like free energy.

Because some of these things are not compatible entirely.

You would have to have some sort of translation mechanism, right?

So let's say the adrenaline is jumping really high and into dangerously high levels, but we only know it's dangerous because there is some system that is able to predict that, okay, it should not go above this level because it's going to screw up something else.

in the system right right so multi-scale optimization and not over optimizing one lower level parameter at the cost of some higher order parameter yeah but then you come come to the curse of dimensionality so how many uh different things are you going to take up before it becomes completely useless absolutely good question empirical question


SPEAKER_00:
about what computational hardware, what measurement data sets, what sparsity of system graph, what extent of application of heuristics, how accurate you need that model to be in the empirical setting.

None of it in principle addressed by just the equations.

All of it related to how they're actually implemented at what scale.

Just to quickly complete through here though, this is about the depletion of dopamine is being observed, creating this akinesia, failure to move, and exogenous dopamine promotes impulsive behaviors of multiple different kinds.

This is what it looks like.

Dopamine as again stated here is balancing, modulating the balance as a neuromodulator between inferring what to do and what not to do.

And so these two graphs, both of them are getting outcomes from the cerebral cortex of the observations expected under a policy.

So those could be considered like predictions about future sensory states.

here um and the gamma is this um uncertainty that's being represented by dopamine in in a like in this uncertainty function of dopamine um in the direct pathway the policies and the difference between the preferences and expectations sigma swiggle with a tilde

are being evaluated as part of the expected free energy of future policies.

And that is resulting in the selection of policies.

So that could be like thinking through all the chess moves and then picking the one with the lowest expected free energy.

Here, the output in the indirect pathway feeds into the prior vector E, habit.

And then that influences policy through this acting anatomically proposed through this other region, not defined with a specific variable.

So again, this is not like saying like necessarily even just what it's doing.

This isn't the full model.

The papers read more, but that's like the two pathways of action selection.

And it's compatible with the empirical evidence from pathology and from pharmacology and genetic studies in animals other than humans.

And this is how it could be modeled with a base graph that recapitulates some of the architecture and the function.

Then they describe the roles of some different neurotransmitters that have been modeled in ACTIV.

And what kinds of phenomena

those measurements have been used in models um and then a one last important part it was in the section with the basal ganglia that was uh talking about this so they show the graph of the basal ganglia and then only in this last paragraph do they describe the thalamus so just say we're just going to do one paragraph on it

but basically the thalamus has these two divisions and then they provide the um interpretation that these two divisions of the thalamus could reflect first and second order statistics on other types of senses and policies so that's like um

a unique prediction that potentially modeling observed neural responses or the bold signal from like the blood oxygen use in that region

you'll make a better model if you fit into these categories rather than reward or rather than familiarity or any number of other criteria.

So just simply fitting better is not the whole substance of validating the formalisms described earlier, but it's part of the empirical grounding and examples of like unique predictions and explanations that are provided by active inference.

But that was the Thalamus part.

And then in this very short section five, six, they talk about how a lot of our interfaces are continuous, like sensory apparatus and motor apparatus have continuous aspects, but then in the cognitive and decision-making domains,

there's often much more discreteness.

Even if there's multi-scale discreteness resulting in like a very finely graded continuum of alternatives, still there is discreteness involved.

And this was explored a lot more fully

in the 46 live streams, active inference models do not contradict folk psychology, where they really clarify, this is motor active inference in the continuous domain.

This is decision-making active inference in the discrete domain.

Here's what a hybrid model looks like.

Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, do I still have my hand up?

Sorry.

It's been up.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So then they just basically say,

Some of these models dealt with continuous phenomena, like specifically the reflex arc example.

Hashtag active inference in continuous time, bigger 4-3, etc.

And then other models presented in this chapter are compatible with discrete alternatives, like discrete variables, for example, policy selections.

If there's two modeled policy outcomes, then this is like a discrete model or the observations could be happening through discrete time.

So it's like different opportunities for discreteness and continuous models and variables to be integrated in these architectures.

Then in summary, they're outlining the points of connection between the message passing

implied by the generative models of chapter four which we asked you not to read gently and the neurobiology of inference action and planning and then here's going to be like a summary figure for the chapter

The top row is showing some computational motifs that are plausible or compatible with different subsets of cells and regions in cortex.

The bottom region are showing some extracortical structures.

On the left is the basal ganglia shown from one of the previous figures.

So it's a subcortical structure within the brain.

Here is a spinal cord.

cross-section and one can imagine that like other structures within the brain and outside the brain would be amenable to also this kind of graph and they're just doing like kind of linking now even the models together

And then showing the difference in planning, like on the left side, the basal ganglia is getting this preference difference is connecting to the expected free energy.

So future policies are being evaluated on the basis of their future ability to align with preferences in this pathway.

Here, that's planning.

Habits are when the preference versus...

expectation difference, but the outcomes themselves are going to E and habits are being followed, which could be seen as multi-scale habits and that's influencing policy.

And then here's where that kind of continuous decision and modulated handoff between more planning-like and more habitual is being related

to the motor implementation of the expectations of the proprioceptive loops so like i want to be sitting still and then all of your muscles in a healthy situation are like not moving versus like i want my leg again speaking like loosely slash you know with it i want type word but just like i want to lift my leg that model

the expectations have to be updated to allow the leg to realize being up using a non, we don't have to say, well, it's more rewarding for the leg to be up.

We can just say, this is a computational architecture that facilitated that and generalizes to like multi-step planning.

And then there's been multiple papers, 2017 and beyond, that summarized and elaborated on different aspects of this.

More complex continuous architectures, more complex motor and discrete interfacing, more complex decision making, active inference, of course.

Rohan?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I'm just wondering, a lot of this has to do with high-level, more abstract behaviors or kind of abstract behaviors, right?

So is there any attempt been made to apply this to something simpler, like the autonomous nervous system?

Because not every signal goes to the brain, right?

Some of them just go to the spinal cord.

And we know this because if there's spinal damage, you can't...

Sometimes people can't walk or they have trouble breathing and so on.

Or in other animals like the cuttlefish, for example, the changes in the pigmentation of the skin is not dependent on brain activity.

It's just...

Yep.

Autonomous.

Right.

So does this, has there been any attempt made to apply this to much more, you know, those kind of systems?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, how simple or complex a system is, is kind of a, it's kind of like how complexly we approach it because people have been modeling single cell

um graphs if that could be seen as the simplest electrochemical decision maker as well as um morphological computing and yeah there's probably a paucity of published models on autonomic nervous system active inference models so there are many opportunities because they cited a huge amount of the neural empirical work here

with the goal being to summarize the tip of the iceberg, but there aren't models like this for every single function or region or anything, nor even if there were, would it be the end of research in that area.

So yeah, there's a lot of open space to build specific models, which is exactly what section six and beyond and part two will take us to, which is to go from like identifying it, we can quickly find out whether it's been published or not, and then build that model with the inputs and outputs that people are seeing as relevance.

Rowan?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I'm sorry for monopolizing this question time.

So I'm just curious, has this been applied to

non-biological systems in any way because that seems to be something that we could easily do right because we have plenty of data right now okay so can we is there anything like a better

vision model than a convolutional neural net for example or some sort of swarm robotics uh attempt using something like this or even like uh game playing or something because i would be interested to read yeah many many of these things have been um sketched or are in progress we have our project ideas in these like last minutes


SPEAKER_00:
there's a lot of room for building projects and there's a huge value to creative ideation of like areas where it could be applied and also value for checking the literature for where it might've been like a model could be reused.

Like a visual foraging model that was from about cultural acquisition of pattern preference was repurposed for our ant stigmergy model just by adding a pheromone trace.

So there isn't like a cookbook on what is out there or how models could be modified.

We hope that with active blockference and documentation, it'll be clearer and clearer for people to build generative models and compose them and explore different modules.

So it should just be done.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Okay.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Any last thoughts or questions on Chapter 5?

And then next week we'll return to the more specific questions.

Ali?

And then anyone else would like a closing thought on Chapter 5?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I just want to mention Thomas Parr's speech in, I think it was a few weeks ago in the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience Berlin, which I'm putting the link here, in which he explained most of these topics and some more in perhaps a more accessible way.

So if anyone wants to, yes, that's it.

If anyone wants to watch it, I think,


SPEAKER_00:
that can help in understanding the content of this chapter nice thank you yep looks like a good one to watch and using like the same figures so that's pretty maybe we could you know annotate like the figure to say at this time step here's where it's described um

Okay, so those who want to, feel free to stay in this room for .tools.

Otherwise, thanks for joining and see you next week.