SPEAKER_00:
Welcome everyone.

This is the Active Inference Institute quarterly roundtable number three in 2022.

It is September 28th, 2022.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

The Active Inference Institute is dedicated to learning, researching, and applying active inference.

You can find us at some of the links here on this slide.

This is recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so we can be improving our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

Today in the quarterly live stream number three, we are going to have three broad sections.

They won't be too long.

There will be a lot of time if you want to add any other notes in the live chat or maybe even if anybody wants to say hi in live chat and

join the live stream itself.

We're going to first have Institute scale updates.

We'll talk about some changes in development at the Institute level.

We'll then talk about projects and the education and research endeavors that we've been involved in and that have been developing over this quarter.

And then we'll close with some next steps and affordances for getting involved.

Let's go first to the Active Inference Institute AII updates at the Institute scale.

All right, I'll just give some overview and then Alex or Yvonne, feel free to add more.

We're continuing to work with FreedFrank in a pro bono capacity to help with the legal side of formalizing our incorporation as a nonprofit.

We are formalized in terms of what members we have, our five founding members and some of our governance structures.

currently we are on the stage of selecting and electing the board of directors so at this point at the end of september 2022 we are extremely actively seeking self-nominations as well as suggestions for people who might like to serve in the board of directors especially with expertise or experience serving on board of directors

for nonprofits and any other relevant experience related to governance, financial, nonprofit, education, and research.

Following the selection of the board of directors, the board will then select officers who are in more of a direct operations role at the Institute.

And we've also joined the Delaware Alliance for Nonprofit Advancement, DANA, to provide us with access to nonprofit resources and support.

Alex or Yvonne, want to give any comments?

If you're talking Alex, you're muted, but I see yellow.

Okay.

Okay.

Carrying forward.

We are continuing to develop our Institute branding.

First, we are working with some external expertise on some logo and brand redesigns for the Institute.

This is really exciting and more will be announced when the work here is ready to be shown.

So enjoy the black, white, and red and the current fonts and layouts that we have while you can.

they'll still be there, they'll still be around.

And we've also updated our website with a restructured short description of the Institute, which I'll just read now, and then Alex or Yvonne, please make any extra comment or provide any context.

The Active Inference Institute is dedicated to learning, researching, and applying active inference.

We provide avenues for connection and integration with broad audiences and disciplines.

The Active Inference Institute provides a setting for people to aid each other in pursuit of a better understanding of active inference.

The Institute organizes education, research, and communication to advance the progress and public awareness of frontier knowledge in active inference and closely related topics.

We structure our strategy with the building blocks of participatory open science, accessibility, and service to our epistemic community.


SPEAKER_01:
to yes yvonne yeah sure uh as a as a institution we are educated to um having understanding or in a broad audience about active inference what is it what how

we can use it and as we know that active inference is applicable for a lot of fields and domains we are open to the community from all of those fields and domains


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Yeah, agreed that one of the best ways for a connection to be made between Active Inference and some other field is

kind of the micro engagement when people from that field get involved and get involved in learning, and then they'll see all these affordances for connecting active inference theoretically and in practice to their area.

It's not like there's just a tree and the connections are ready to be pulled at first sight.

It takes a little integration and including different communities in the conversation.

That's what we're happy to be building and working on, and also in a participatory way where people's feedback is really welcome and people's engagement is essential.

So we'll continue with a few more notes on the Institute scale, and then we'll talk more about projects that are happening at the Institute, all of which people can get involved in if they would like.

So just a structural note.

As a summary, the focus and functions of our institute are research, education, outreach and engagement, and methods.

and these foci are playing out across multiple scales there's the participant scale which is the human and their engagement with the institute there's the institute scale which is the system of interest that we're able to enact policy in at the institute level and there's our broader epistemic community which includes the really exciting and growing active inference community

and all the amazing developments happening in that area, as well as more broadly and more distally, many adjacencies that have been identified or have not been identified ranging from neuroscience and medicine to machine learning, computer science, ecology, robotics, all these amazing areas we have discussions around.

And we have two organizational units that are kind of like departments.

They are organizational constructions that help us coordinate projects and efforts and allocate attention around our two primary missions and foci, which are research and education.

So EduActive is the organizational unit

that hosts education projects whereas the research unit hosts research projects and we uh we joked about having a a kind of competition or an opening of window for renamings but uh as anyone who has watched these roundtables know we show up on the day of with what we know that day

So your engagement or suggestions and ideas are always welcome, and that's how we update, that's how we learn.

But that's just reflecting some of our structural learning and updating.

That's the institute level.

Anything else to add here, Alex or Yvonne, or we'll continue on to the project scale.

All right, let's talk first about education.

This is going to be education at the Active Inference Institute and project updates over Q3 2022.

First, the Active Inference textbook group.

So we've been having two concurrent cohorts of the Active Inference textbook group.

The first cohort of the textbook group began in May 2022.

And over the following three months, they completed the first five chapters of the textbook.

and now that first cohort the intrepid adventurers the early forgers are continuing on in chapters six through ten which is where the textbook turns towards model building and recipes for model construction which has been really exciting and we also in september 2022 began the second cohort of the active inference textbook group so this is some people who are rejoining from the first cohort as well as many many new people joining in

And it's another concurrent cohort that's starting from the beginning of the book.

So this is the kind of minimal templating of a continuous delivery textbook group format, where as more and more people are interested and curious to learn about active inference and increase their familiarity and competency in engaging and positive social environments, we will be able to have the familiarity

of people who have taken the cohort experience of the textbook group before to then return, for example, as facilitators or in other roles and therefore scale the continuous delivery of textbook group experiences around the Parr, Pizzulo, and Friston 2022 textbook, but also around other texts that may be arising.

As we work as a group,

We're in a shared epistemic niche and we provide a whole host of value added services that deeply enrich your learning.

So if you're currently spending one or more hours per week or month curious about active inference, especially curious about this textbook,

Your learning and your contributions will be leveraged if you join a textbook group cohort.

We curate and we compile and address questions that we're having relating to different parts of the textbook.

And we've created just an amazing repository of questions that grows every day.

And they contain questions that are confirmatory and basic.

What does this word mean here?

Or what do you think this means?

All the way on up to speculative and research oriented or application oriented questions.

So questions are really important part of learning and they're really important part of the textbook group.

And also through being in the textbook group, one becomes more familiar with a variety of ontology scaffolded learning approaches that we use in the Active Inference Institute related to our work from the very beginning with the active inference ontology.

So for example, here's equation 2.5 with the variational free energy.

And here we have just a screenshot of what the annotation looks like

in the shared knowledge resource in the coda for those who are learning and discussing equation 2.5 and there's a whole host of other information questions that people are having and what does this mean and what are the relations to other areas but this kind of a learning environment allows people who have different backgrounds in math or the formalisms or in some of these other theoretical domains that come into play in relationship with active inference to have a really exciting

space where we're all learning a ton so it's been awesome to have two concurrent cohorts going in the textbook group and we're looking forward to in the close of 2022 to have the first cohort complete the book

and then have the second cohort get up to the midpoint.

And then in the beginning of 2023, we will likely continue with the second cohort, chapter six through 10, and begin a third cohort and see where things are at in the active inference world then.

Any comments or thoughts on the textbook group?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, sure.

Text book group is a very valuable tradition for education.

And when you learn something and you get feedback from your peers, you have more understanding.

In our groups, we are providing a lot of useful instruments that help to understand not so clear theory as active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome, and one kind of note or seed for the future is the textbook is open source, which is awesome.

It increases the accessibility and downloadability, but it also offers some incredible future opportunities in terms of remixing the book, transposing the content into GitHub,

re-rendering translating doing some amazing secondary work with a textbook and again seeing that as templating for future versions or other textbooks so that's the textbook group onwards we go on once once again the main goal of this activity is to help understand our main idea

and we plan to do this activity on a regular basis and you can join us wherever you want and wherever you are ready thank you Yvonne very true all right in July 31st 2022 we had our second applied active inference symposium on robotics there were two live streams of about four hours each

and there were a handful of co-organizers from within the Institute and from outside the Institute.

We had a whole range of formats, presentations, roundtables, and discussions.

The two sessions are shown here, and when somebody else is talking, make sure to post the links in the YouTube live chat so people can go check them out, or they're available just on our livestream CODA page.

there were about nine presentations of around 20 to 30 minutes each, people talking about specific applications of active inference.

So if you're wondering where is active inference being applied or how can active inference be applied, this symposium gives nine case studies and settings from the robotics domain where active inference is being applied today and tomorrow.

And at the end of each session, we also had a roundtable discussion that was really interactive and connected the dots and provided some context beyond the more research-oriented presentations that were happening for the bulk of the presentations.

So for those who are interested in applications of active inference or in robotics, this was a really exciting event.

And this is also, we hope, a tradition to continue applied active inference symposia.

where people who want to co-organize or present on their applications in knowledge management or in medicine or in ecology, we can convene and coordinate around these symposia and have different formats.

So we're currently working to transcribe the products of this symposium and make them citable proceedings.

Any thoughts you have on this, you fellows?


SPEAKER_02:
I think that robotics in terms of applied field is one of the most straightforward application of active inference and possibly in future providing real breakthroughs in results of robots that will use active inference as a framework for their

robotic cognitions and so on.

And as we saw it from that communication, there are different groups of researchers all over the world.

They are interested in communication, they are interested in presenting results.

And hopefully more people next years will join in with robotics, active inference robotics movement.

And in some days, in close future, we'll see really great application and like autonomous robots based on active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you.

All right.

Speaking of the Active Inference Journal.

So the goal of the Active Inference Journal is to increase the accessibility and the indexability, citability and utility of live streams and various audio visual material produced.

in and around the Active Inference Institute.

So currently we've been working on around four specific streams and events to improve and template our process that we're hoping to build and scale on further.

What we do in the journal is we take the outcomes of the live stream, the audio visuals of the live stream, and we get a primary artificial intelligence, AI generated transcript, and then engage in a sequence of enrichments, editing, and curations.

So we edit the transcripts by listening carefully to the audio and making sure that the speaker's sense is to the extent possible captured.

And then we also develop, for example, appendices and other scholarship around the document.

So when somebody mentions a paper or when somebody mentions a person, those kinds of information can be included.

And the discourse can be connected to the active inference ontology in cases where the terms are being used.

And again, that will enable more accessible searching in the language of the live stream.

For example, people have asked questions that somebody might want to query again, or might want to hear someone's response at a given time too, and cite that or just learn from it.

And then also it's really important to have such standardized pipelines for transcription in order to enable translation into different languages.

Ways that you can get involved in the journal if you're interested or curious in this area, whether you have editing or proofreading experience or not.

There are many affordances to edit transcripts, so listening carefully to the audio and providing suggested edits on texts.

And also we're especially interested to research and develop methodologies for the journal process.

So anyone familiar or curious about AI-assisted transcription and translation, modular publications, decentralized science and DeSci, the usage of Git as a versioning system, any of these areas, we would welcome your engagement in the journal project.

because that's the direction that we want to head and that is what is going to unlock some of the potential of the 200 plus live streams that we've already carried out and the many hundreds that we'll carry out in the future it will enable these past and future live streams to be able to be searched cited translated and used more broadly

So if you want to join the meetings for the journal project, they're on Mondays at 13 UTC in our Discord.

So a few next steps I mentioned before, but I'll just give a quick shout out to at Carpathy, who recently for the Lex Fridman podcast spun up a site using the OpenAI Whisper platform and made transcripts for all Lex Fridman episodes.

and so we imagine something similar because in our coda for the live streams we have 200 plus journal discussions research presentations we are ready to be open ai whispered or other pipelined

So if that is something you're curious about, or Karpathy, or others, if you want to come get involved, you're absolutely welcome.

There's a lot of learning and accessibility and rigor that can be improved with these kinds of rapidly emerging text engineering developments.

Any other comments you want to make on ActiveJournal?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, and these 200 plus videos, there are a lot of useful information, very valuable.

And if it will be extracted, it will move forward the whole understanding of everything.


SPEAKER_00:
Totally agreed.

There's ways of saying and conversing in the live streams that certainly are clearer restatements of and developments beyond what is in the written literature.

So especially as we move towards a multimedia future and a more participatory and inclusive science sector, it's important that we have the systems in place with low human bandwidth to be able to improve and distribute scholarship on these topics.

All right, moving on to the live streams themselves.

So we had one month off in July from live streams where we just chilled, read other papers, not these papers.

And then we've had a bunch of great live streams so far in Q3.

We had guest streams with Brett Anderson, with Ronan Tamari et al, and with John Verveke.

And we discussed...

papers in the live stream series on inactive cognition, abductive logic, and active inference, and active inference as ecological communication.

We also have a wide range of really interesting live streams coming up, including on Bayesian mechanics, on

neural networks on all kinds of areas of active inference application and a lot of really exciting theoretical developments also.

So if you want to be involved in live streams,

In the YouTube live chat, you'll find the past and upcoming streams.

So one way to get involved is to watch, listen, share, comment, and be involved that way.

If you want to play a role, for example, speaking on a live stream or helping contribute to the preparation around the live stream, that can also be incredibly important.

as well as making connections and recommendations for whom we should invite so that we can have a really powerful and diverse range of guest streams and papers selected for the live streams.

So live streams have continued in their educational function.

and um just wanted to highlight um each one of these projects there have been many people to mention and i hope that we can um

by next quarterly lab meeting, have some clearer pathways for making those clear, but just wanted to in bulk acknowledge everybody who contributes to the weekly meetings for live stream preparation and organizing, and those who join the stream, as well as those who help prepare content and coordinate questions for the live stream in the background and may not be on


SPEAKER_01:
video themselves so that's the live streams we continue on there any other comments just once again one obvious thing the more you the more you involved in any any of any our activity and live streams is uh

extremely useful for understanding and to see the way of application of active inference.

The more you're engaged, the more you understand this topic.


SPEAKER_00:
Great point.

And sometimes just scanning the titles of the papers that we discussed in the 50 papers that we have discussed, almost 50 by the end of the year,

And these are curated selections, usually with the authors joining and almost always with a dot zero video where people who cared made background and context to make it as accessible as possible.

So this is a unique learning resource.

If you have a regime of attention and availability or capacity

for these topics, or you're curious and think you might, it's going to be a really unique learning resource for you to check out our past videos.

And then if you're curious about media production, communication, you want to explore short formats, you'd like to facilitate a discussion in a non-English language, you want to make an animation video, there's so many affordances that we can support.

So if you're curious about those areas, just get in touch.

Okay, continuing on.

Education, internal systems thinking, ongoing activity.

Yvonne, I'll let you describe it.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, we also have not actually related to Active Inference, our activity, and this August we launched a four weeks session for system thinking course, part of it that related to the role concepts.

we for four weeks we can't cover the whole the course but just a second we can't cover the whole course but four weeks for understanding the role concept is

Fair enough.

We also run this October next cohort.

And for previous one, we have good feedback from our participants.

Could you show next slide, please?

Thank you.

and next this october we start a new cohort and here is a link for participation will also it will also take four weeks and during these weeks we consider

concepts from system thinking course and we'll apply these concepts to your projects or maybe for even live projects.

And next one, we have this activity with our partner, Institute for Augmented Intelligence in Entrepreneurship, Engineering and Management.

And this fall, the EM Institute launched four courses.

Now these courses are available for free.

And we also encourage you to

discard these courses for sure you will find a lot of a lot of useful information also related to the active inference as a evolutionary theory awesome yes so this systems


SPEAKER_00:
engineering and systems thinking activity helps us learn about roles and how to apply them in projects.

And we are applying them in Active Inference Institute projects.

So it also upskills participants and gets them ready to take on more involved and responsible roles.

in our institute and it's all a co-evolutionary dance as the institute formalizes and gains resources and establishes itself in the niche then such roles will also be the ones that we can support all right any other comments

Onto the research.

So the previous updates were from education, just to briefly summarize.

Textbook group, two ongoing cohorts.

Active inference robotics symposium with eight hours of presentations and discussions.

Active inference journal, working towards accessibility and indexability of all of our speech products.

Livestreams continuing.

and systems thinking education activity ongoing open to all of these projects your involvement on to the research so it's been a great quarter for research first we'd like to highlight our active blockference development

Active Blockference is an open source package that is implementing classic and novel Active Inference models within the system simulation framework of CAD-CAD.

So we have a few updates on Active Blockference.

First, Jakub Smekal,

presented a poster at the IY 2022 third international workshop on active inference so congratulations Jakob for this awesome poster presenting it in person and to all others who have been contributing to development on active blockference it's um

Really great to see the development of this project and also a lot of other work in the Active Inference community.

So please check out IY if you're curious to see what is cutting edge in Active Inference research.

They really did a great job in getting some of the best projects in the space.

Also,

active blockference has received some funding through the gitcoin gr15 round that just completed so our gitcoin project was active blockference an open source package for cognitive modeling in web3 and we specifically framed

how we could utilize cognitive modeling approaches integrating active inference and cad cad for cognitive modeling in web 3 ecosystems so big appreciation to everyone who provided even one

to this funding opportunity.

And in several weeks, we'll know the final amount that we've received after the quadratic funding algorithms have all been applied.

But suffice to say that we have some money in our tank to develop active block friends.

So, there are many ways and areas people can get applied in.

There are weekly meetings.

There are weekly meetings at 12 and 17 UTC on Wednesday in the Discord.

And also, we discussed this with Jakob today, Mondays at 18 UTC.

is going to be a code development specific session.

So if you want to get a little bit more technical and collaborate with Jakob and others on the CAD-CAD active inference modeling, then Mondays at 18 UTC is a great synchronous time

At 12 and 17 UTC on Wednesdays, those are slightly more open sessions where we can also split off and have a technical development, but we talk about a whole range of areas.

So I'm going to mention some areas and then tasks and how we're going to use some of our funding to accelerate development.

These are just showing a few of the areas where we believe cognitive modeling could be used or might be important or relevant to consider, ranging from a range of social settings, education, governance, legal, online work, stigmergy, and so on, to a host of Web3 cases, so DAOs, decentralized finance, d.school, d.sci,

ethereum a lot of other areas in web 3 and then also uh on the ground with the ants in terms of developing the active infra ant model for ant colony foraging and ultimately larger task allocation questions these are all areas where we see the active block friends package

as being able to address them eventually and what it takes to address an active block for its model in one of these cases and settings is for someone with domain expertise or knowledge to provide the bridge building from one side and then the package to develop the generalized capacities from the other side so working from both ends

to enable really powerful domain-specific applications of active inference while building modular structure of the active block inference package so that those functionalities can be used in other settings.

For example, a navigation setting that might arise from our work on ant foraging might be used in a different context in another non-ant setting.

So that's a little bit about how we approach the development of the package.

We think about the functionalities of the package, modulars as modules that can be invoked and functions that can be called.

And then we develop different settings for cognitive modeling.

There are a range of tasks that people can get involved in.

ranging from CAD-CAD and active inference technical tasks to a whole host of package level and documentation and community engagement tasks.

So if this sounds like a cool direction or you would just like to learn more, then please join a synchronous meeting or get in touch another way because this is a super exciting area of development.

We hope that active block inference can be a really important package in this area.

And so come be involved.

With the funding, what we're going to be experimenting with in the coming weeks and months is a task-based payment scheme.

So individuals or small teams will propose how much funding they would like to receive for what specific tasks.

And there's a form that will be filled out.

And so we can show you that if you join synchronously.

Completing that form

will raise your task request to consideration.

And then if the task is approved and you complete it as laid out, you will be paid the amount that you requested.

So if funding ever felt like it was a rate limiting step for your involvement in learning or applying active inference and contributing to open source public goods, then consider it differently now because we can support this type of work

And we also see some really exciting opportunities for people, for example, to propose tasks around applying to other grants or to including more developers or more documenters or people who want to make active BlockFronts live streams.

There's a million areas where people can develop here.

So join the weekly meetings is the best way to get involved there.

Any other comments on BlockFronts?

Okay, then just one.

last research update this is not presenting all the research happening in the institute this is just to kind of raise a few projects up we have had a project on cognitive modeling frameworks and their comparisons the goal of this project is to understand similarities and differences with active inference and other cognitive modeling frameworks so the approach that we're taking here is to review and assess different cognitive modeling frameworks

in terms of their features, their functions, their elements, their areas of application, and so on.

And that will help us understand similarities and differences amongst frameworks, as well as more formally and historically integrate active inference with other models.

So this is one of a research task.

that could open up quite broad vistas for application.

Anyone who's curious or engaged in cognitive modeling would be welcome to get involved with this project.

And one can even see the pathway here, kind of like the epistemic chaining example in PyMDP.

If someone identifies that there's a common cognitive modeling framework,

that has features ABC and is used in domain F, then domain F becomes an area of application for active inference if functions ABC can be implemented better in active inference than the initial framework.

So that kind of work on the landscape of cognitive modeling is a really important precursor to understanding where and how, and with an emphasis on which functionalities, it even makes sense to talk about applying active inference.

And we hope and expect and prefer that there will be active inference applications that haven't been within the range of traditionally considered cognitive settings.

For example, I'm not sure how often in multi-scale ecology cognitive modeling frameworks are used as a simulation tool.

Now we know that active inference is being applied in those areas.

But there are also areas where cognitive modeling is already happening and it may or may not be using active inference.

So those represent adjacencies whereby developing the connection between how they're doing it today and how it could be done, people will be opening up really large areas for active inference application and also massive areas of attention and support.

So this is kind of a cool direction.

Any notes on this or anything else on research?

All right, let's just go to some last steps and close.

If anyone in the live chat has any questions, they're welcome to add them.

So next steps for the Institute.

Well, on the engagement and outreach frontier, we continue to grow and develop.

We host most of our communications at our Discord, which has over 450 members now.

Our Twitter, as well as our podcast and video channels are all growing in terms of their niche.

So if you...

support us on any of these platforms and can share or just even tell one person that can be quite helpful and always provide us with feedback on how we can improve our environmenting, our engagements with external interfaces.

And then just to provide a summary of some steps and directions for how we go from Q3 on beyond to Q4,

Any of these areas, if you are interested or curious, please be involved.

The earlier and the more involved, simply the better and the higher leverage point that is for the future.

We are continuing education and research.

It's the main focus of the Active Inference Institute and we will always continue education and research.

We're also during these months undergoing a really creative and unique organizational development opportunity, for example, around assembling the board of directors and some of the early decisions around governance and organizational structure.

So if you have input or want to be more involved here as well, otherwise just to know that it's happening.

We are looking towards several directions

in the end of 2022 and to really come into in a new way in 2023.

We're looking towards increased participation in projects and learning groups, as well as the development of an internship program that will help structure your engagements with a mentor and in a project specific way so that you can stay engaged and also have something clearer to point to about your engagement with the Institute.

We are continuing to, as we finish the first cohort of the textbook group, think more and more about active inference course development.

So we'd encourage anyone who wants to partner or be involved in that area to get in touch in the journal project.

And in a slightly different way in the textbook group, we're working towards the captioning, the subtitles, and language translations where possible.

And especially with our new organizational structure, we're looking towards funding opportunities and partnerships.

So if you have any thoughts or capacities...

or feedback in these areas they're all super important areas for the institute going forward and it would be really appreciated as we are a participatory open science institute and only recently received our first small amount of funding through the gitcoin grant for blockference

to explore new avenues of partnership, funding, service, and beyond that we have not done.

So what hasn't happened yet is not too strong of a prior on what we may do in the future, if that makes sense.

We'll be doing different things.

And I hope that you can be a part of it because it grows and changes in co-engagement when and only when people get engaged.

That's interactionism.

This is not instructionism.

So if you have any excitement around these topics or any others that you would want to have on here, then getting in contact with us will be a great first step.

Join our Discord, join any of the synchronous meetings.

email us and we can start a conversation that way.

Well, that is all for this round table.

It was a short quarter.

It was only like a few months.

from our previous livestream.

Time went by quite fast, and a lot did happen.


SPEAKER_01:
So, once again... Next quarter promises to be more active, and...

As you understood, we are very open to participation.

So see you in the class.

See you on our synchronous meetings in Discord.

Subscribe us and share.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Alex, any last comments?


SPEAKER_02:
I can only repeat that the participation of people who will join us in future is the main focus for us and everything what we are doing is related to help others to

learn about Active Inference to learn Active Inference and find ways to apply it and we are on open-endedness path and actually we don't know what will be in three months from here but we will adapt and provide

possible affordances for ours to join and learn.

So welcome.


SPEAKER_00:
Indeed, welcome to those who are and haven't joined yet.

And a big appreciation again for everyone who's contributed through the Institute to make things how they are today.

So thanks Yvonne and Alex.

See y'all later.

Thank you.