## 7_JLMK3agpA

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome everyone to actin flab live stream number 32.0 at the actin flab the paper we're discussing is going to be stochastic chaos and markov blankets and it's november 7th 2021 let's play our theme

Welcome to the ActInf Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

At this short link, you can see our past and upcoming live streams.

And here on the main tab, the live stream calendar for 2021, we're here in early November.

We had our fourth quarterly lab roundtable summarizing the kinds of projects that you can get involved in and what we had done in the previous year, what we're looking forward to next year.

And then the first two weeks of discussion are going to be on November 9th and 16th for this paper that will be discussed tonight.

In stream number 33, we'll have Abel's paper, Thinking Like a State, and we haven't set the papers yet for 34 and 35.

The goal of 32.0 is to learn and discuss this paper, Stochastic Chaos and Markov's Blankets, 2021.

By Carl Fristen, Connor Hines, Kai Oldshoffer, Lancelot DaCosta, and Thomas Parr.

And just like all the dot zeros, this is just an introduction to some of the ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

And especially if you have any experience or you want to learn more about any of these areas and help improve our presentation or understanding of it, that'd be very helpful.

You can join a live stream or just come get involved in some of the aspects of the lab because...

are things that we want to understand but also there's a lot to learn and in the coming two weeks we're going to discuss this paper so i'm daniel and i'm in california the big questions of this paper are related to the general

discussion in the active inference and free energy principle literature and beyond what is a good model of thingness in a chaotic dynamic and dissipative world so do we think of things as as they are in the snapshot or do we have to think of them through time at what spatial or temporal scale or with what kind of measure stick does it make sense to talk about things

And then how does the result of that first question, this model or approach to thingness speak to system sentience, which is gonna be a word that is used in this paper.

And notably, this is not being defined in terms of feeling like experiencing, it's defined in the paper as where internal states look as if they're inferring external states.

So perhaps closer to what Dennett would call the intentional stance.

this is sort of just pragmatism meets anti-dissipativism third point what is a markov blanket and how is one modeled and identified or defined statistically this is going to be the technical bulk and contribution of the paper so

Anyone wants to learn more and help us present some of the technical details, which we're going to go through in this lecture, but total disclaimer, if it's not accurate or it's an incorrect generalization.

A word that wasn't a keyword per se, but maybe is just a qualitative entry point is this idea of flow.

And here we have people flowing like a

long time exposure in a subway station and there's water flow which has several aspects the water itself is moving but also there's the flow of energy there's information flow and then there's this psychological concept of flow and so different aspects of these could be said to be flowing in different ways

and people jump across these different areas.

So wouldn't it be cool if there were a quantitative model that kind of incorporated some of what was meant by all these concepts, including a science of

perhaps perception, cognition, and action.

So the big picture is how are we going to connect kind of physical flow models to potentially other kinds like macro systems and informational and even psychological or behavioral.

The paper is Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets, 2021.

And two of the aims and claims of the paper, of which there are definitely multiple, so this is just a few of them,

In this work, we attempt an end-to-end derivation of a Markov blanket, starting with a normal form of stochastic chaos and ending with a functional form of a synchronization map.

The second aim or really like a summary of the paper is we conclude with the discussion of the implications and generalizations of the following heuristic.

So not necessarily formal, but more like using empirical simulation.

or approximation proof of principle for understanding simulating and characterizing an elemental form of sentience in systems that self-organize to non-equilibria so that is where sentience comes in and again this isn't saying that because we did some matrix math we think it has phenomenological awareness sentience is going to be more like intentional stance it's resisting dissipation perhaps it's acting strategically given the affordances in its niche

So one really relevant paper for Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets is the paper Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes with multiple of the same authors.

And this one was put on archive on

june 25th 2021 and then this one looks like it was received by the journal at july 9th 2021 so um one question is like to to what extent are these complementary are these requisite or are they somehow related to each other or are they two independent kind of dimensions of advance

There's some overlapping areas, but also there's some different areas.

So that would be good to learn about.

So there's the keywords of the paper were Bayesian, thermodynamics, information geometry, variational inference, and Markov blanket.

So let's go just one level deeper into the flow example.

We have a lot of fields like

math, physics, information, computing, thermodynamics, geometry, a few other fields where there are models of physical flow.

so everything from heat engines and heat flow to quantum and classical computation clouds and everything else so this is a engineering experience and ontology and um from multiple different areas of mathematical formalisms that sometimes map very closely to the real world or not

Then there's these, again, flow models or process models for mental flow.

For example, thinking about attentional allocation or informational processing.

And the big idea, which is proposed in Frishton et al.

2006, at least one...

phrasing of it in an image that gets referenced back many times is this idea of like a winged snowflake and so below the phase boundary so above the temperature of melting ice the droplets are unable to enact policy so they simply fall from phase and then they become rain

But above the solid phase boundary, so below the freezing point of water, there are the snowflake structures.

So there's an organization.

And then...

one can imagine that if this shape above the phase boundary is able to enact action on the environment, first, if nothing other than by chance, you would find that there'd be, for example, persistence of the most adaptive action policies.

so that is the exchange and the interfacing of active systems with their environment that precludes the phase transition so that's the winged snowflake example of early or friston and it will come back at the end in a pretty interesting way

So one of the first keywords is Bayesian.

Here's RevBase, and we've talked a lot about Bayesian things.

So just to kind of pick a few new images, here's some overlapping between frequentism here,

and Bayesianism here and some of the overlap.

So it was just kind of interesting to look at and what exactly does it mean for a theory or for a statistics to be Bayesian explicit modeling of priors.

And here's the sort of classic Bayes theorem, which

just not going to go into right now.

I'm sure there's awesome resources to learn more about Bayesian statistics.

And just sort of the way that it becomes meaningful is just embodied how we want to be able to bring our full knowledge to bear on scientific questions or any other kind of question.

We want to be able to

integrate different kinds of data sets and have models that can be able to receive data as well as generate it.

These things are all tractable in modern Bayesian frameworks.

Thermodynamics is the, quoting Wikipedia here, branch of physics that deals with heat, work, and temperature, and the relation to energy, radiation, and physical properties of matter.

So there's the sort of thermodynamic

patterns or laws and the way that they relate to statistical mechanics.

So how the kind of jostling of molecules leads to the ideal gas law or kind of work capacity in temperature engines.

And then just looking around, there was kind of just some old ideas, some new ideas.

So this is something we've talked about before with

it's decision-making, but also it's, um,

how we think about chemical reactions in terms of the lower activation energy is the kinetic product.

That's like the one that is easily jostled to.

And then the one that has a higher activation energy is not favored to occur, but then it sometimes can be like a lower thermodynamic product.

So releasing more delta G. And then if we're going to have some sort of an information thermosynthesis, what does...

delta g informationally look like like what is the informational imperative the title of the paper has stochastic chaos so just found a few different citations on it and it's an idea that has been going back since before 2000s so i don't know when the exact beginning was but it's been around so that was just one

question for uh the authors or for anyone who's knowledgeable about it what is uh the scope of stochastic chaos and how how do we think about the relative importance or meaning of solving one category of dynamic systems so what is stochastic chaos stochastic

subject to probabilistic variation in one way or another and we'll kind of like look at multiple ways that that can come into the picture through sampling or approximation and then chaos which is sensitivity to small changes which is summarized at least in one way by the lyopinib exponent which is a measure of how closely separated points either converge or diverge

as a feature of the shape and the type of the matrices that describe the systems another keyword was information geometry so i'm definitely not the person to give a specific definition it would be great to learn more from someone who could link this to the specific

modern advances, so a few people who have emailed us.

But John Baez, who is a professor in the UC system, wrote on his site, which has a whole curriculum on information geometry, not that I've taken it, but heard it was good.

Information geometry is the study of statistical manifolds, which are spaces where each point is a hypothesis about some state of affairs.

This subject, usually considered a branch of statistics, has important applications to machine learning and somewhat unexpected connections to evolutionary biology.

This image, it just kind of was like, if these are dimensions of something abstract, that projected down onto the graph paper is going to look like a triangle.

And then this shape, which maybe is kind of like a saddle shape, or if the two distal parts are connected, it's like a tetrahedra in a way.

then that projected down from a specific angle is going to look like a right angled square but from a different angle it would have a different profile so the same tetrahedra rotated in different ways can project down into a different geometry so kind of interesting to think about that with

Information and if you're measuring several axes of information you have an informational tetrahedra as if it doesn't need to be Saying that it is actually that way One of the other keywords was variational Bayesian inference and this was from the slides of 26 and some also good blog posts that others have written and

It was defined in this blog post by variational inference methods that consist in finding the best approximation of a distribution among a parameterized family.

So it's kind of like finding the best linear model for a dataset.

This is a way to fit more

complex data and models, but it keeps it constrained within a family so that you're just tuning the knobs that, you know, interact in a good way versus all the possible degrees of freedom in modeling, which is basically infinite.

And then two ways that Bayesian approaches can be deployed, there's probably many more than this too,

There's the sampling based approach or the Monte Carlo like gambling approach, which is like pointillism where it kind of samples.

And then this, if the underlying distribution, you're kind of agnostic to it.

If you run this properly and the underlying distribution has the right properties, you can sample something that's totally adequate for making good decisions.

And then the alternate approach, it's kind of like the SVG approach, the variational inference.

You kind of have a library of cat or of mammal subunit vectors.

And then that vector set gets...

fit in a way that's more tractable than just this sort of endless sampling, oh, what if there was a whole body and you just missed it type questions.

However, if there was a whole body in your library or the family of functions you were trying to fit were only whole body, then, I mean, you can have a mismatch there, just like you could fit any other model incorrectly.

So the Markov blanket is one of the terms that I think many people are curious about, certainly ourselves included.

And from number 14, live stream number 14, we talked about this continuum slash development of the concept from the way it was phrased by

markov by the way we're still trying to figure out which one uh slash exactly which contribution the father and the son made towards the development in pearl 1988 in the uh textbook uh the

shown here, and this is where computational methods start to come in and some of the pure math assumptions get deployed in real data sets.

So then the Markov blanket is defined as the set in a Bayesian graph of insulating nodes.

So moving from this matrix representation towards this graphical Bayesian representation.

And then there's some of the developments by Carl Fristen and others, which this paper is part of, that do a few different things relating to connecting, separating the blanketing states

into incoming sensory and outgoing action so partitioning of the blanket as well as implementing some of these components of principle of least action which is not implicit in just mere statistical insulation on a bayesian graph so we'll talk about some of that stuff but i think there's enough to cover in what this paper here adds and

Number 14, number 20, number 26, many other papers that we've discussed and many that we haven't have very insightful uses as well as criticisms of the Markov blanket concept.

So what is the free energy principle, this keyword?

One way to answer it, since it's a keyword in many papers is

What are three possible attentional regimes that you might be able to expect will reduce your uncertainty about this question?

Because if you're not worried about this question, it's all good then.

But if you are, you want to reduce your uncertainty.

So what are the actions to reduce your uncertainty?

Well, the third sentence of this paper that we're discussing here is...

in brief the free energy principle is a variational principle of stationary action applied to a particular partition of states where this partition rests upon conditional independencies which is the other side of the coin of uh which which things influence each other and which don't kind of two sides of the coin there

There's then a link to Citation 15.

So Citation 15, if you want to go one more layer into establishing whether this is a meritous claim or not, there's Fristons 2019.

monograph free energy principle for a particular physics particular being specific but also referring to particular or autonomous states as they're known and also much discussion has occurred since this paper so look forward to seeing how it develops

And then a third possible attentional regime would be to come participate and contribute with ACT-INF Lab because every day we are reducing our uncertainty about terms as well as any participant can attest.

And we're always trying to improve our informational niche through projects like educational courses and ontology development so that the questions that people ask

every day.

Like what is a Markov blanket?

Why does it matter?

What is the FEP?

Why does it matter?

There will be awesome resources to share about those questions.

One other piece before we jump into the paper is just a little bit of matrix math vocabulary.

So I hope that I'm

just even quoting the definitions correctly, because I'm not super familiar with a lot of these distinctions and would think that there's a lot more expertise that people could share, which would be awesome.

So the Jacobian matrix and the determinant is a construct in vector calculus.

and what's relevant here is that it's the matrix of the first order partial derivatives so if you have just like a lump in space you can take the partial derivative it's like putting a ruler and finding the derivative of a certain axis of a certain variable at that spot and so you can find the partial derivatives of higher order models the hessian matrix is defined as the square matrix of second order partial derivatives

a function or field it describes the local curvature of a function of many variables so same idea it's like how the the linear slope and then also the curvature so that can tell you a lot in especially a certain case that's going to come into play in how this paper defines its analysis approach

specifically the Laplacian approximation.

So the abstract.

In this treatment of random dynamical systems, we consider the existence and identification of conditional independencies at non-equilibrium steady state.

These independencies underwrite a particular partition of states in which internal states are statistically secluded from external states by blanket states.

The existence of such partitions has interesting implications for the information geometry of internal states.

In brief, this geometry can be read as a physics of sentience, where internal states look as if they are inferring external states.

However, the existence of such partitions and the functional form of the underlying densities have yet to be established.

Here, using the Lorenz system as the basis of stochastic chaos, we leverage the Helmholtz decomposition and polynomial expansions to parameterize the steady state density in terms of surprisal or self-information.

We then show how Markov blankets can be identified using the accompanying Hessian to characterize the coupling between internal and external states in terms of a generalized synchrony or synchronization of chaos.

We conclude by suggesting that this kind of synchronization may provide a mathematical basis for an elemental form of autonomous or active sentience in biology.

Okay, cool.

How will that happen?

Here's the roadmap.

The first section is the introduction.

The second section, from dynamics to densities, makes the connection between dynamical models

densities which takes one towards flow like if you have water in the ocean of different temperature and densities you can do the flow modeling section three is the helmholtz decomposition which we've also revisited elsewhere and it relates to splitting apart a vector field into two components one that's kind of like hill climbing and one that's more like curvature

The Lorenz system, a classic complexity model, is brought up and used as an initial case for this kind of dynamics to densities plus Helmholtz decomposition.

Then some further systems other than the Lorenz are analyzed.

Then the Laplace and systems other than the Laplace are analyzed.

section four Markov blankets and the free energy principle talks about sparsely coupled systems and specifically where the different partitions are engaging in some type of synchrony which is going to be like correlated action conditioned upon the blanketing states

That leads to a discussion of particular partitions, boundaries, and blankets, and a kind of revisiting using a simulation analysis of Markov blankets.

The last section is about the free energy principle and mentions active inference, so it's pretty interesting.

Just to start with the data availability statement, they wrote that the code used to run the simulations and create the figures for the paper are freely available in the DEM toolbox of the MATLAB package SPM12.

So if anyone maybe wants to like do SPM live with us, that who knows how to do it, that'd be awesome.

SPM stream, it'd be great.

So let's start with the introduction slowly because there's gonna be some more technical parts later.

The last sentence of the first paragraph of the introduction is, from this, one can elaborate a physics of sentience

or Bayesian mechanics that would be recognized in theoretical neuroscience and biology.

So imagine if the top half were redacted.

What do you think would allow for, quote, the elaboration of a physics of sentience or a Bayesian mechanics?

So not possible.

or it's already been done, who did it?

Or, well, it would have to have this attribute.

It'd have to be able to run on this type of computer, or it'd have to have this many variables or fewer.

So what are we looking for here?

What would justify this sentence that they started the paper with?

And why would it matter?

Which is kind of tied up with maybe what would be the motivation for developing it, however much effort it involved.

Why would it matter to have a physics of sentience?

Well, why did it matter to have a physics of heat?

Let's pull back one more sentence.

The internal states can then be cast as representing in a probabilistic fashion external states.

So that's what they're going to elaborate a physics of sentience on from this partitioning of internal and external states, but not just any partitioning, a particular partitioning where internal states can be cast as representing external states.

So this is kind of a minimal representation.

We have internal and external states, and we're not going to define them as even action or sense partitions in the blanket yet.

Just there's some partition between internal and external states.

And the question is, is this how you think the world is partitioned or how our statistical models are partitioned?

What is this partition?

And we've talked about that in a few different papers, and that's going to be a big part of this paper.

Then we can pull back one more sentences in the abstract, or I mean, in this first paragraph, where they define the free energy principle, which we read previously.

And then specifically, if the states of a system

whose dynamics can be described with random or stochastic differential equation , possess a Markov blanket, then an interesting interpretation of their dynamics emerges.

The conditional independence in question means that a set of internal states are independent of another external set when conditioned upon blanket states.

and so that is the blue here is the precondition for the red claim which is going to be what is the basis for in the author's words elaborating a physics or sentience so that is kind of where we're going in this paper agree or disagree there's going to be a lot of specific points where one can

raise a qualm and that's totally okay and i think a lot of the uh discussion i hope will be very interesting with people seeing which parts of this presentation resonate with them or their understanding or not those are the big questions what kind of blankets line up with different parts aspects or partitionings of the world map is not the territory etc

What makes some partitionings in the world act informationally, like inferentially, anticipatorily, predictively, etc.?

Why are some partitions able to be CPUs and other partitions are just divided halves of a cup of water?

How do partitionings of variables that model the world lead to a physics of sentience and action?

there another way to get to a physics of sentience and action is there another way to do physics they describe their approach to part one um by applying the helmholtz decomposition which

we're going to return to.

So this is just kind of a preamble and we'll talk more about some of the keywords, but they're going to apply the Helmholtz decomposition to the solution of the Fokker-Planck equation describing the density dynamics of any random system.

And then later on, they're still summarizing part one and they're going to say, we approximate the flow from the yellow part with a quadratic expansion, which means the steady state density reduces to a Gaussian form.

it's kind of like if you fit a quadratic model a x squared plus bx plus c to some data set it's not a statement that the data set is going to have a derivative that's linear and then a derivative of that that's a constant that's not

part of the data set of the world, that's about the quadratic model, which is a very constrained model set that you chose to fit.

And maybe other models would have fit it better.

Other ones would have had more or fewer parameters.

But you knew something about the form of the solution because you constrained it to a certain set of parameterized equations, which is why they talk about variational inference.

And then they're going to show that for a Lorenz system subject to appropriate random fluctuation, there's going to be this third state, which is independent of the first two states or dimensions.

And this means that the third state has no blanket states and therefore there's no particular partition of interest.

So one question for anyone who maybe understands the formalism, just why does this claim specifically matter?

So section 2.

The aim of this section is to get from the specification of any of a random dynamical systems in terms of its equations of motion to the probability density over its states in the long-term future from any initial conditions.

We are only interested in systems that have a limit set.

In other words, systems that possess an attractor.

We want to describe systems that do not necessarily visit all possible states, are not necessarily time reversible, are stochastic in nature, and potentially chaotic.

In short, we are interested in stochastic chaos in systems with a pullback attractor.

And then there's several citations from the 90s and maybe that's some of the earlier models of it.

that's how they describe it and then they show this formalism where the langvine the change in the state of x that's kind of like a derivative uh sign sometimes is equivalent to like a flow and then these faster fluctuations so kind of like a wave and a ripple but that's going to describe the change overall of some location and then that is

equivalent to the Fokker Planck density dynamics so they're the same thing that's the equal sign so that I can't say whether this is just a total tautology super obvious or whether this is a conclusion that was only more recently understood that would be helpful to know but that's one of the baseline

equivalences in the paper it's going to be you can have a specification of a random dynamical system like here's the set of equations that describe how this sensor is returning data and then turn it into a flow in a density estimation framework so the Fokker Planck

they write the dot product the dot notation indicates a partial temporal derivative in the absence of random fluctuations i.e.

gamma equals zero the attractor corresponds to a limit set namely the set of states onto which the solutions of one converge so

uh there's kind of like uh some steady state attractor which is when there's a heat differential like there's a it's warmer outside it's cooler inside and then there's some point where the thing gets zero

the flow shows exponential diversions of trajectories with positive lyopin of exponents i.e real positive eigenvalues in the jacobian of the flow the system can be said to be chaotic so there's systems that kind of converge nicely when they're pulled away a little bit so let's just say that it stayed the same temperature inside and outside in that previous example then that equilibrium would be like pretty nice because it would return to it if it slightly

were moved away from it.

But there's also systems where nearby points diverge.

And that's a measure of this approximated by this lyopinib exponent.

And then the question is, for systems that do have positive leading lyopinib vectors, then what happens to those low

models and then what happens when there's a reinstating of the random fluctuations how does that sort of system that would be chaotic if it were allowed to just

somehow deterministically evolve.

So it's like you're fitting the underlying model and it's a little noisy around it.

And then you swap out the actual scattering of the real world populations of deer and rabbit for just the partial derivatives that you were estimating

And then maybe you see that there's some bifurcation in the population density.

But of course, any real population is either going to experience one branch or the other of that bifurcation.

So that's kind of the modeling that they're working on.

And then when you go from that dynamical systems approximation to the flow, if the flow shows exponential divergence of trajectories, we can impute stochastic chaos.

so they take one of the classic systems of deterministic chaos the uh and dynamical chaos the Lorenz system which is kind of a butterfly looking attractor and they um uh first show the trajectory of Lorenz attractor with and without this reinstating of random fluctuations

so we know that there's a divergence lyopinib divergence that's making the system chaotic when there's no random fluctuations so what happens when that is reintroduced the middle panels show the corresponding solutions in the three-dimensional state space illustrating the butterfly shape of the limit set so

even when the, in the random attractor.

So the deterministic one is the kind of clean butterfly.

And then the one with a random fluctuation, the points are outside of the butterfly.

It's a slightly different shape.

but then it still illustrates, it's not a, you know, an X in the state space.

So it still is kind of following this, but just it's, of course, it's not following the exact tracks that it's on because there's a random fluctuation term, but it still is going to have a certain geometry because this is a model, hence information geometry.

So that's going to get some transformations and approximations.

Lower left panel plots the fluctuations in the potential evaluated using the Laplacian form.

This is kind of formalism that is going to come later, but expresses the self-information as an analytic function of the states.

And then the states, I was not exactly sure why they were called states rather than dimensions.

So if anyone has a thought on that, that'd be interesting.

And then the lower right is the potential function of the first two states, basically, or dimensions, is shown as an image with the trajectory superimposed.

So this is kind of the, this smoothly varying global potential plot with the lighter and the darker representing different values.

There's this like dynamical butterfly that's fit from the resampling of the true Lorentz.

All right, so the key insight from figure one is that the underlying system, this is kind of a key complexity

insight that the underlying system can have very simple and defined rules yet unpredictable dynamics so in the case of dynamical equations it's systems like the lorenza tractor and many other systems that are just very simple and they only have a few parts yet they result in these very incredible and rich behavior and then there's also kind of like

simple rules, complex outcomes, ants and humans.

So just a simple rule can be underlying something that's giving an extraordinarily complex pattern.

And yet, if we measure these systems empirically that have some simple rules underlying them, but there's also this random fluctuation or we don't sample at all.

there will be some but not overwhelming noise there will still be dynamical patterns to pull out so we can still reduce our uncertainty about the location of future points by using a statistical model that we define that doesn't even have to be similar to the generative process so

if someone said well you get money for getting predictions closer to the actual position of the sampling even if your model that you're fitting to it is like a neural network or is this kind of model that we're going to discuss here rather than a differential equation that's actually the true generative model you can still do better than just guessing within this cube so section three goes to the helmholtz decomposition and they write um

So that was the previous section was, we can regard the deterministic Lorenz system as describing the expected flow of a random dynamical system that is subject to random fluctuation.

That was what we just talked about.

The flow of such systems, which possess a non-equilibrium steady state density, can be expressed using a generalization of the Helmholtz decomposition into...

dissipative, which is irrotational and curl-free, and conservative, which is rotational, divergence-free components, where the latter are referred to as solenoidal flow.

For an introduction to the generalization of this Helmholtz decomposition, see Appendix B of 16, which is Bayesian mechanics, stream number 26.

So,

We're looking for where P dot, so the partials of P, partial derivatives of P are zero.

So where is that flow equilibrium?

Well, that is going to be a function, f, that has a few terms, including one that's, I think, introduced in this paper, the housekeeping function.

But it has two terms that are the classic Helmholtz decomposition, which is the solenoidal, the tangential current, that's just the isocontour, and the gradient, which is kind of like the up and down.

So that's how a total current in electromagnetics gets decomposed.

And it's related to kind of fundamental vector field math.

So let's go and uncover what was hidden by this gray box.

So we have the Fokker-Planck steady state P of X equals zero, P dot of X is zero.

There's some function that's going to be a decomposition of that into a solenoidal and a gradient flow component, the Helmholtz decomposition, and then this housekeeping term, which is in an appendix, but didn't go into in super depth.

So curious about what that is, but it results in this whole flow term.

Here is the fancy I. Maybe it's a fancy J. The first dissipative part performs a Riemannian gradient descent on the negative logarithm of the steady state density, which can be interpreted as the self-information, which is the negative natural log of P of any given state

or as some potential function so that's kind of like how surprising is that state the second part of the flow is the solenoidal circulation on the isocontours of the steady state density and then the third term is this housekeeping term that accounts for how changes in the flow operator change so it's a um extension of the helmholtz decomposition thinking about how to solve dynamical equations

So this is from ActInf 26, the synchronization map.

And I'm not going to go into the whole thing because you can check out 26, but the key question is about this sigma, this synchronization manifold between the internal and the external states conditioned on the blanket states.

so how do you insulate yet have anticipation across that insulation and then also from 26 this is kind of what it looks like to see a stochastic trajectory decomposed into a gradient and a rotational component

All right, 3.1.

Our objective is to identify the functional form of the self-information or potential function that describes the non-equilibrium steady-state density.

So why?

That's how surprised you should be.

That's the potential function.

That's sort of the...

the fund the fundamental frequency of both the solenoidal and the gradient so it's an important variable to know but how is self-information measured or calculated how does the self-information for different non-equilibrium steady state or equilibrium steady states compare

what does it mean for self-information to be high or low so to be surprised or not so first they um in formalism four address this set of questions basically for one simple er case which i'm not super familiar with the matrix math so we'll leave it to others to evaluate some of the technical details so then they um follow up and say basically uh

we could solve that easily without that correction term that arises when flow operators are a function of the states indeed it is this state dependency that underwrites stochastic chaos so that's like the double pendulum the reason why it's a chaotic system is because the states at the time depend on the previous time in a way that generates chaos so there's so much dependence over short term that things can diverge really fast

this present this presents us with a more difficult problem the problem can be finessed by using polynomial expansions of the flow operator and the potential as follows for n states up to polynomial order m so they're going to use polynomial expansion approximation on a complex underlying flow functional polynomial expansions restrict and scaffold our model selection approach to a manageable size and tractable computation so it's kind of like the taylor series and the volterra series and other

polynomial expansions which can fit functions often that are very complex well and so this is showing the Taylor approximation to a sine wave and it's showing how the first approximation gets you like between

one and negative one the red line might be totally more than enough but with only a few more terms being added all of a sudden it starts fitting really well further and further out so that doesn't mean it can go forever but the um polynomial expansions can be very powerful in the numerical case like just doing good enough with quick and dirty as well as in the analytical case

Here's a figure from SPM 2007 textbook, which is a great textbook, by the way.

And it's talking about the Volterra series as a general nonlinear input state output characterization system.

So NB, nota bene, good note to you.

Volterra kernels are synonymous with effective connectivity.

And then they write.

This is from the SPM12, so later than this, but right up.

From the point of view of regression models, modulatory effects can be modeled with nonlinear input-output models, and in particular, the Volterra formulation described above.

Because the kernels are high order, they embody interactions over time and among inputs and can be thought of as explicit measures of effective connectivity.

An important thing about the Volterra formulation is that it has a high face validity and biological plausibility.

The only thing it assumes is that the response of a region is some analytic non-linear function of the inputs over the recent past.

This function exists even for many complicated dynamical systems with many unobservable state variables.

So, cool.

why does it matter to do a polynomial expansion of the functional form of the solution to this flow problem the parameterization in five allows for state-dependent changes in the amplitude of random fluctuations encoded by the leading diagonal of the flow operator with that functional form of the polynomial it is straightforward to solve for polynomial coefficients the flow operator by solving the following simultaneous equations for a series of sample points

Some of the keywords that are from SPM and elsewhere that might come into play to learn more about these topics are expectation maximization optimization, parametric empirical base, dynamical systems identification, and generalized linearization schemes for fitting GLMs to nonlinear systems.

And then something that's not as much in SPM, but comes into play later with active inference, and hopefully we'll be able to demonstrate this in the literature as we sort of sift through it, is that action planning amidst uncertainty and feedback with the environment radically changes the nature of that kind of flow estimation problem.

You can't use the same model necessarily for the...

leaf on the stream as something like the winged snowflake that's actively resisting so how good is this approximation to use the polynomial expansion of the fitting of the random fluctuations of the random dynamical system that is chaotic inspection of the lorenz system suggests that a second order polynomial approximation is sufficient given the flow is second order in the states

This ansatz, so, vocab, ansatz, an assumption about the form of an unknown function which is made in order to facilitate solution of an equation or other problem, has an interesting implication.

If the self-information can be approximated with a second-order polynomial, it means the non-equilibrium steady state is approximately Gaussian.

This is known as the Laplace approximation in statistics.

Here we generalize the notion of a Laplace approximation to cover not just the quadratic form of the log density, but also the solenoidal flow that underwrites non-equilibrium dynamics.

Big if true.

It has to be.

So here's the Helmholtz decomposition.

So now we're taking that solution that we had earlier

and thinking about it in terms of fitting only up to the second order polynomial expansion of the flow solution.

So that is, as they say, what is known as the Laplace approximation in statistics, and it's in SPM textbook two.

Here's the actual flow decomposition of the Lorenz system.

the solenoidal flow is red, the gradient flow is blue, and the correction term is gold.

The flow is shown as a quiver plot at equally spaced points.

So it's kind of like the vectors of different direction at different points.

And then the right is the same, but for the Laplacian based upon...

the one on the left here.

The key difference is that the dissipative part of the flow operator and Hessian are positive definite, in the case of Laplacian, which means the gradient flows converge to the maximum of the non-equilibrium steady state density.

This is reflected in the blue arrows that point to the center of the space.

So even though the gradient of the real flow is pointing all the different directions because it's kind of like a mixing flow, so there's all the vectors are going in different directions.

But then in the Laplacian second order polynomial expansion, the blue arrows are all pointing to the center or to some manifold that's much more compact.

So it's kind of like a converging solution, even though the actual system, we defined it to have stochastic chaotic properties.

So here's SPM looking at the Lorenz tractor.

Alas, poor Lorenz.

I knew it, Horatio, a model of infinite citations, of most excellent fancy.

It hath returned to the pull-back attractor a thousand times, and now how abhorred in my imagination it is."

So that's modified from Hamlet.

because right after that seemingly very cool solution they say indeed the equations of motions we have written down are deterministic implying that there is no stochasticity in the sample paths of the process assuming a fixed initial condition this speaks to the fact that helmholtz decomposition of the deterministic lorenz system is not a description of a dynamical system with random fluctuations i.e systems in which the dissipative part of a flow operator is positive definite

we therefore need to look beyond the Lorenz attractor so that takes us to appropriately 3.3 for beyond the Lorenz system so okay cool now beyond the Lorenz system we go to the chaotic Laplacian so figure three this is um a trajectory kind of like a point list trajectory of three states kind of three dimensions comprising a Laplacian approximation

to a stochastic Lorenz system.

So here it's second by third, first by third, first by second of the nest density.

So it's showing three projections like the GEB cover onto a two-dimensional and notice how the light is in the center.

So it's like they're getting pulled back to the peak of the Gaussian on each dimension.

So that's the non-equilibrium steady state, which by construction in the Laplacian is a multivariate Gaussian.

That's super key and extremely interesting.

The middle panels show deterministic and stochastic solutions as a function of time, while the right panel plots the same trajectories in state space.

The shape of the attractor retains a butterfly-like form, but it's clearly different from the Lorenz attractor.

What do you see when you look at this attractor?

Be honest.

But it has a butterfly-like shape.

And the generated trajectory has some similarity with the underlying generator function.

But it has such a nicer form to solve.

And then the lower left is the self-information, the potential as a function of time based upon the analytic form for the equations of motion and the deterministic trajectories of the previous panel.

And then the flow of the Laplacian, which is the approximated expansion, nicely solvable, et cetera, against the Lorenz, that's the true flow, is evaluated at 64 spaced points.

It can be seen that although there is a high correlation between the flow of the Laplacian and Lorenz systems, they are not identical.

So not super visible, could have provided like an R squared or some other information, but clearly they are drawing from the same manifold.

So if this is good enough to stay alive, then c'est la vie.

Upper panels, let's just focus on those.

So this is, again, the projection onto two by three, one by three, and one by two of three of this multivariate Gaussian Laplacian approximation, which makes it really nicely solvable.

So one can then estimate the Lyapunov dimension

which is approximating to the Hausdorff dimension, which in this example was 2.48.

So the Laplacian approximation was used to sample and then estimate the Lyapunov dimension.

And then it turns out that that compares very closely 2.43 and 2.48, which in the grand scale of things where above one means chaotic system,

It means that the Laplacian expansion has some of the nicely solvable characteristics of the generalized Laplacian, like the multivariate Gaussian and the easy computation, yet it also identifies this system as chaotic because it still gives a positively operative exponent from this sampling.

In short, the flows of the Lorentz system and its Laplace approximation have an attracting set width between two and three dimensions.

For our purposes, the Laplace approximation is easier to handle than the Lorentz system because the functional forms of the flow and potential are immediately at hand.

So...

Pretty interesting.

Figure four.

So now this recalls our earlier discussion of the Jacobian and the Hessian.

So let us recall.

The Jacobian is the first order partial derivatives.

The Hessian is the second order partial derivatives.

Okay.

So we have the Jacobian, the Hessian, and the covariance derivative.

between these three dimensions so the lorenzo tractor was in three dimensions okay it was in state one two and three that's kind of why there's it's like thermodynamic states so they are dimensions though so the lorenzo tractor was this like kind of you know ant flying around in space in three dimensions so we fit a polynomial expansion specifically to those three dimensions the measurements of them now for those three dimensions

we can talk about their correlations in the first partial derivative and the second partial derivative and the covariance.

That's in the top here.

In this example, the third state is independent of the first pair where the independence rests on the directed coupling from the third to the first state.

And so it's logged to show the sparsity.

Do you see where we're going with the Markov blanket?

See how this third state is not part of the Lorenz system underlying differential equations.

It's actually just a total figment of the Laplace approximation model, but it's quite an interesting pattern.

The middle panel shows slices through the steady state density over the two states at increasing values of the remaining state.

so the only correlation in play is between the first and second state so this is related to sphericity error correction and evaluation and it's a topic that is discussed in spm textbook but basically spherical errors are the ones where the two axes are not correlated but then when there's non-spherical errors then there's you get a different shape

lower panel the correlation is illustrated in terms of the conditional density over the first state given the second so this is kind of showing that by and large it's doing well largely confined to the 90 credible intervals would be good to see some you know simulation statistics and raw data on that

So, again, alas, I knew him well.

The preceding treatment leverages the simplicity of the Laplace approximation to stochastic chaos in which sparsity constraints on the Hessian are easy to identify or implement.

Now, just like Lorenz was dropped, now this is going to be going beyond the Laplace system.

So...

Not going to go into too much detail here, but that's a section that people could explain more about, or we could look at more in the dot one, the dot two.

So 3.5 summary.

It is important to not conflate the simplicity of a Ness density with the complexity of the underlying density dynamics.

In other words, when prepared or observed in some initial state, the probability density can evolve in a complicated and itinerant fashion on various sub-manifolds of the pullback attractor.

So the map is not the territory.

That's something that has come up many times.

The Laplacian is not the Lorenz, but the Laplacian is a good approximation to the Lorenz in their simulations.

Figure six.

So now the chaotic Laplacian system is, it's kind of shown in a time series way where this is the true relationship between the first and the second state.

So let's go to here.

So we see the first and the second state.

Here's like where there's this non-spherical error.

And so this is kind of like an interesting like coupling in the model.

that's independent of the random fluctuations and so that represents something very deep about the structure of the Laplacian approximation to the Lorentz now using the Laplacian in a generative capacity there's this initial misattunement in their

setup it starts somewhere far from the pullback attractor and then like the correlation evolves through time and then they say the density converges to the steady state density after about 16 seconds however it takes a rather circuitous route from this particular set of states okay so that's interesting it starts with like they were differently correlated

because of they starting in a weird place and then they found their true correlation structure, note that the average density over short periods of time can be highly non-Gaussian, even though the density at any point is by construction Gaussian.

Something to think about.

So then we get to, finally, Markov blankets.

So they repeat the analysis, but now they approximate two Lorentz systems that are coupled to each other through their respective first states.

So the first and the second states were coupled.

So it's almost like one of our coupled states we're going to couple out now.

This induces a richer conditional independent structure from which one can identify internal and external states that are independent when conditioned upon blanket states.

So what does it mean to sparsely couple systems?

And what are these quote first states, the first dimension?

Figure seven.

So now there's generalized synchrony in a Laplacian system.

So this is now the same figure as figure three, like this, except now we're looking at the generalized synchrony.

So now there's a synchronization manifold in the first dimension.

state when those two got linked up so now there's more lines because there's like two coupled chaotic systems but the middle is showing that their state spaces are coupled and this is illustrating the degree of synchronization and then again showing that their flows are correlated no stats figure eight now instead of having

three by three in the matrix correlation and covariance in the first and the second derivatives now it's six by six so here is now the identification of using the log of the jacobian and the hessian to identify different partitions so that partitioning between the one and the four between that first state of both is the one that we knew about that's like

the one that was wired into the system.

But then the other ones are showing other correlation patterns.

Now, I don't know why this four and five connection is not included in a box, but these are the partitionings.

And so,

The sparsity structure of the covariance supports a particular partition into internal states five and six, dark blue, active fourth state, the one that induces, the one that connects here,

sensory first state and external second and third state this partition is illustrated here and the remarkable thing is that despite their conditional independence there are correlations between internal and external states and here between the second and fifth states so interesting patterns showing these evolving through time nine so now they're going to look at the partial correlation of states

and showing that the Hessian is recovered.

So here is like that Hessian on the top right.

And then now they're going to show that it's recovered.

It's a little bit light, but it's showing how these, so these squares are showing the partial correlation coefficients and hopefully pulling out the similar structure as identified here.

And then like the strong correlation, well, yeah, we'll investigate that more in the dot one and the dot two.

And then showing how like the third and the sixth state, for example, so that's like three and six, they're not supposed to be coupled.

And so then they initially start off with a high correlation because maybe they start in the same neighborhood, but then they converge towards a zero correlation.

So that is sparse coupling.

um it does not depend upon gaussian assumptions about the non-equilibrium steady state density it implies that the dynamical influence graphs with absent or directed edges admit a markup blanket which may or may not be empty these independencies can be used to build a particular partition using following rules capture the flag figure 10.

So here's where we see kind of the classic bacteria example, but now it's two bacteria communicating.

I'm not sure if it was always that way.

And then here is a little bit more of a coupled systems with two times three, which is pretty interesting.

So here is where we see the Markov blanket as we've seen it before, but also in a new way.

How great.

Here's some technical definitions of the Markov blanket.

So not for tonight, but for another night.

So, um, here's a question they ask themselves.

Why, why, one might ask, why does a particular partition comprise four sets of states?

I don't know.

Why is the tetrahedra the smallest polyhedra?

Who knows?

In other words, why does a particular partition consider two Markov boundaries, sensory and active states?

So why can we skip straight to the Friston blanket rather than just identifying the Pearl 1988 or the Markov...

earlier model.

The reason is that the particular partition is the minimal partition that allows for directed coupling with blanket states.

So that again is from figure 10.

And the key thing to note from figure eight is that there are profound covariances between some internal and external states, despite the fact they are conditionally independent.

So we're defining like nodes that are not connected are conditionally independent.

That's how the Bayesian graph works.

so here one and four get correlated get a connection with each other that's this connection right here right there and right there so now they're coupled one and four so even though some of the internal states are so now it's like the external states are at minimum two and bucky fuller famous quote unity is plural at minimum two the internal states have to be at minimum two

external states have to be at minimum two so that's pretty interesting because they yeah um yeah the particular partition is the minimal partition that allows for directed coupling with blanket states okay and then um they're the second the fifth states are highly correlated yet are twice removed

And so this is leading to a general synchrony through partial coupling of dynamical systems.

Note, this is their words.

Note there is no claim that either the original Lorenz system or coupled Lorenz system possesses a Markov blanket.

The claim here is that there exists a Laplace approximation to these kinds of systems that in virtue of the zero elements of the Hessian feature Markov blankets.

So...

Oh, how many days.

The having a Markov, being a Markov, modeling a Markov.

No claim.

A Laplace approximation approach to systems identification can add constraints and make the problem easier to solve.

The Markov blanket is arising literally within the Laplace approximation, which is just an approximation.

It's not a description of the system.

So,

onto the free energy principle.

The existence of this any particular partition means that one can provide a stipulative definition of the conditional density over external states being parameterized by the conditional expectation of internal states given sensory states.

We call this a variational density parameterized by expected internal states mu.

So going from the minimal coupled systems

to there are still some persistent covariances and these covariances partition out into a Markov blanket.

What if the expectation of the internal states were of external states?

other words or in words for every sensory state there's a conditional but it has to be conditioned on the blanket state which is how the whole thing is set up in words for every sensory state there's a conditional density over external states and conditional density over internal states where internal and external states are conditionally independent this admits the possibility of a diffeomorphic map between the sufficient statistics of the respective densities

The existence of this mapping rests upon a continuously differentiable and invertible map, which is linear under a Laplace approximation.

So diffeomorphic is like stretchable.

So that allows some of these formalisms to arise.

Again, it would be awesome to hear what other people can bring to the table about this, but this is like the energy minus entropy form, the divergence term plus the self-information about the policy, and then the accuracy minus the complexity.

So it would be awesome to learn more about this.

Okay, the font got a little out of control here, but this functional, the big one,

is going to be expressed in a few different forms so it's an expected energy minus the entropy that's energy minus entropy self-information plus kl divergence okay self-information plus kl negative log likelihood of particular states and the kl divergence accuracy minus complexity okay accuracy minus complexity it's also in the machine learning context evidence lower bound elbow this is the basis of the free energy principle

Put simply, it means that the expected internal states of a particular partition at non-equilibrium steady state can be cast as encoding conditional or Bayesian beliefs about external states.

Equivalently, the flow on the internal manifold can be expressed as a gradient flow on a variational free energy that can be read as self-information.

This licenses a somewhat teleological and directed description of self-organization as self-evidencing, in the sense that the surprisal or self-information that constitutes the potential is known as log model evidence or marginal likelihood in Bayesian statistics.

So, wow.

Great FEP work.

What does it mean to talk about the physiology perspective here though?

So what does it mean for self-evidencing in a biological context?

The blood vessels want to observe themselves working?

So now in section 5.1, getting hopefully towards the end here, in alternative, this is later in section 5.1, in alternative and deflationary perspective,

rests on noting that free energy gradients are also the gradients of self-information.

So the organism wants to be minimally surprised about some chaotic pullback attractor.

So whether or not things are wacky out there or not, having this updating flow model

that comes to a pullback attractor that is of the approximation that the modeler controls is very important and the organism wants to be minimally surprised about the expectations and preferences that it has over observations and that is defined with some technical details here so this formulation of gradient flows is simpler and shows that they're effectively minimizing a different sort of prediction error namely the difference between particular states and the expected values at non-equilibrium steady states

This leads to exactly the same gradient flows, but a complimentary interpretation in which autonomous states are drawn towards their steady state expectation.

Heuristically, one could imagine this kind of stochastic chaos as apt to describe the motion of a moth attracted towards a flame, but constantly being thwarted by turbulence, i.e.

solenoidal air currents.

Because active states influence sensory states and possibly external states, this would look as if the particle, e.g.

the moth, was trying to attain its most likely state in the face of random fluctuations and solenoidal dynamics.

This perspective emphasizes the active part of self-evidencing, sometimes referred to as active inference.

So, how cool.

First in 2006, the winged snowflake. 21.

like a moth to the flame 5.2 so they um

give more summarization here about that sequence that they took of constructing the laplacian approximation with a quadratic form and then looking at that first and second partial differential uh partial derivatives matrices the jacobian and the hessian looking at the conditional independencies then the generalized synchronization synchronizing

given the partitionings, and then suggesting that there's some diffeomorphic, like, stretchable connection between the internal and the external states conditioned upon all of that.

And then that's the Bayesian mechanics.

which internal states on average parameterize beliefs of a bayesian sort about external states okay so some of the implications in the last few slides here so clearly the worked example based upon sparsely coupled lorenz systems does not mean that a conditional synchronization map exists or is indeed invertible which would allow the tail of two densities the recognition and the generative model in any given system

So you can't just specify any system potentially and find a conditional synchronization map.

However, the above derivations can be taken as existence of proof that such manifolds and accompanying variational free energy formulation can emerge from sufficiently sparse coupling.

So this is one system, classic system of complexity analysis, and it worked here.

Maybe there's other systems where it will or won't.

A particular partition is necessary to talk about states that are internal to some particle or person, and which can be distinguished from external states.

One way of understanding the ensuing coupling between internal and external states is in terms of generalized synchrony.

That's that synchronization manifold.

This synchronization can be expressed as a variational principle of least action using the notation notion of variational free energy.

So this is from another DaCosta paper, the synthesis on discrete state spaces.

And it is talking about how that variational free energy minimization of perception and planning as inference about observations can be seen as a generalization.

Here's active inference

If you have no prior, then you have surprise, pure surprise, optimal surprise, intrinsic motivation, info gain, info max principle, because it's just about what's surprising given no priors.

When there's no ambiguity, so when there is a model that abstracts away from, for example, measurement error,

you have risk sensitive policies and kl divergence based control and the occam's principle and there's other cases like bayesian decision theory expected utility theory as well as maximum entropy and jane so it's kind of um there's a lot of pieces that are coming into play when we talk about active inference probably some that will still are yet to learn um but there are some pretty interesting patterns arising from this partitioning

Here's another implication.

The polynomial form of the Helmholtz decomposition from Formalism 5 may provide a generic model for observed random dynamical systems.

In other words, it could be the basis of a forward or generative model that explains some empirically observed flow, estimated using the first and second moments to quantify the flow and covariance of random fluctuations over state-space respectively.

This kind of generative model is appealing because of its parameterization in terms of the underlying non-equilibrium steady state density.

In other words, one could, in principle, try to explain empirical data in terms of a Gaussian steady state density, which may include constraints on conditional dependencies.

So let's think back to the beginning with flow and information flow and mental flow and granite moving down a stream

quarry or all these kinds of flow and then could there be something that integrates across them another option for scaling this approach to high dimensional dynamical systems would be to learn the state dependency of the flow operator and the non-equilibrium steady state density using unsupervised learning approaches such as deep neural networks a similar approach has become popular in the deep learning literature in the form of neural stochastic differential equations

So here's two recent stochastic differential equation papers.

And then they bring up this very interesting suggestion.

One could use a separate feed forward neural network to parameterize the different components of the flow operator and the self information.

This would require differentiable transforms to be applied to the output layers of the network to constrain the Hessian and solenoidal flow operator to be positive definite and anti-symmetric respectively.

So suggesting some neural network architectures that might facilitate active inference.

Then this is a pretty nice example.

piece, it is interesting to relate flows across a Markov boundary to the constructal law, which like the free energy principle, seeks a normative account of the structure and dynamics of complex systems.

In the case of the constructal law, this is articulated in terms of maximizing external access to the currents internal to the system.

So here is Adrian Bajan, who's like a awesome professor and researcher who has done many years of work

like Friston in some ways on this construct the law.

So I was quite happy to see that connection.

Here's another final implication.

One practical implication.

Finally, the practical implication.

Great.

It licenses the use of inverse sample covariance matrices of a sufficiently long time series as potentially sufficient description of the steady state density.

So we could take a real time series and fit that Laplacian approximation.

This would furnish a description of the expected flow and Lyapunov exponents to establish whether the system was chaotic or not.

In conclusion, last sentence, having a simple functional form for the flow of random dynamical systems may be useful for both modeling and analyzing time series generated by real world processes that are far from equilibrium that may or may not be chaotic.

So we can think of two chaotic systems, the humans and the ants, and then everything else.

So pretty interesting paper.

The coming two weeks, hopefully we'll have some good group discussions.

We're going to email the authors now that we've done our work on the dot zero and would be awesome to have them on for the two discussions we'll have or for any other time.

um thanks everybody who was watching I hope if you are watching to the end you found this interesting and come get involved with active lab because we could all have some shared resources so that some of these questions that are really being advanced in this paper like

connections to complexity and dynamical systems theory and statistical thermodynamics these are important contributions and this is not a fringe apologetics for active inference it's barely mentioned in the paper it's actually some really fundamental work that

I hope is understood and critiqued where valid.

So what would a good understanding here enable of the kinds of things that are discussed in this paper, which came out in 2021, but think into the future.

what are the unique predictions and implications of this paper what are the next steps for fvp and active inference what are the goals of this research and what are you still curious about so thanks for sticking around for a long live stream at a different time but so it goes so have a good one everyone hopefully see you around the lab or around bye

## wqoeyrW2Yqg

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

This is Active Lab live stream number 32.1321 Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is learning, communicating, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at some of the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

At this short link, you can see some of the past, present, and upcoming live streams.

We are here in the early November 2021-32 discussions on Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets.

And in the second half of November, we'll be talking about the paper Thinking Like a State, and we haven't yet set the papers for 34 and 35.

So if you have any ideas, or if you're an author, you want to come on to discuss for these dates, then get in touch with us.

Today in Active Stream 32.1, the goal is to learn and discuss this extremely interesting paper, Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets by Fristin, Heinz, Oltshofer, DaCosta, and Parr from 2021.

and there's a lot to cover in this paper there's a lot of formalisms and figures and keywords and broader questions so i'm sure we'll have a lot to think about and discuss if you're watching live then please feel free to write a question in the chat because otherwise stephen and i are just chilling here

So let's get into it with just intros and warmups.

And if others join, we'll have them introduce themselves when they do join.

But for now, let's just say hello and maybe bring up just something that excited us about coming to this discussion or something that we wanted to resolve today.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

And something that I liked or remembered about the paper was that there was

seemingly some changes or updates to the formalism of core terms.

And so how to understand that in the broader trajectory of the literature, which one of these changes are like updates?

Where is it a software update?

Where is it a breaking change?

And then what are the implications of those changes for some of the broader conclusions that people do or want to draw from active inference and the FEP

like the nature of thingness or biological systems or levels of nested organization.

So, Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Good morning from Toronto.

I'm Stephen.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD, which has kind of moved into a methods-based PhD.

I work a lot with...

group processes and working with creative spatial approaches to help do sense-making.

So I'm really interested in active inference within that as a kind of unifying way to help to close a lot of the loops and the fragmented questions that come up when trying to do sense-making with different types of people in different types of spaces.

So as with Daniel, I'm really interested about this paper as

After the initial view of it, because you see stochastic chaos and unconsciously trying to not go too far down sort of an abstract academic aspects of things, but I realized that actually these underlying processes have got quite a lot of applications in this ability to understand why and how things are unifying.

And I think that's really exciting.

because there's a lot of sort of semi-Markovian looks at larger cognitive processes.

There's certain practices and inactivist processes.

But what we tend to see when it gets down into the nitty gritty is it's how are things bubbling up through the kind of stochastic chaos of the world and life?

Or should I just say stochastic chaos?

separated, chaotic processes.

So the idea of having stochastic chaos and what that means, and this paper does that, is quite useful to start to look at what it means to have to be able to reconcile those approaches.

So it actually does start to help think about more applied approaches.

So that's something I'm interested and excited about this paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Steven.

In the 32.0, this is kind of the lead in was this topic of flow.

And that is in a way what might start to bridge this distinction that you raised and will definitely return to between kind of abstractions and applications.

Flow is a term that has applications across domains from the flow of water, flow of people, flow of information and money to psychological flow.

It's kind of a nomadic term.

It's a transdisciplinary term.

And then that's an abstraction.

We're abstracting to the patterns of flow that help us connect the dots across these different systems.

But also we want to apply it.

We don't just want to say, well, water's flow and information is flow and that's the end of the story.

So how abstractions and applications kind of work like the left and the right foot together to

build our knowledge and our application almost like our epistemic and our pragmatic value I think that'll be a thread that's important to um pull out what do you think about that yeah that's a really helpful connection and I think this also speaks to that um usefulness of this


SPEAKER_03:
work beyond modeling directly is when this idea of flow is talked about in these ways, it's kind of a bit vague, right?

And it still has this idea of things flowing in a certain direction.

And are you in the flow?

And so I think when we start to also have the potential for stochastic

processes and in a way the sense that everything's flow and you know how does what does low and high requirements mean you know what does low and high competencies preferences mean and they kind of these are quite bucket terms right and essentially they they are what they are because they are workable

truth be told.

But we can start to look for something which can hold those in a more unified way.

Because I think that the way that we might feel in the flow when we're in a zone where we can both do things and we're immersed in it may well be maybe what we're in all the time anyway, but it's just a different form of.

So that also changes the kind of ramifications out there.


SPEAKER_01:
Great point.

And we can actually connect that to this sort of view from the outside and view from the inside, which we talk about a lot in Act-Inf.

So it's almost like there's the skier going down the hill and the view from the outside, the behavioral view is like, given the angle of the hill,

they're optimally flowing that river is physically optimally flowing down that hill as you'd expect from the friction and the potential energy and just the physics of the setup and then there's this internal experience of flow so it's kind of like um

Maybe we are in flow all the time, even when we are getting, for example, distracted or bored or frustrated.

In what ways is that still flow?

Because if we think about flow, well, flow's good.

It's a state where we're productive and happy and things like that, and then we're out of flow.

That's what you'd hear in the psychological literature.

But let's just say that the river, we're flowing and flooding.

We don't say, well, we're done using flow models because now it doesn't do what I thought it was gonna do.

Flow is the whole space.

So how do we think about this whole psychological space as being particular regimes of flow and flows the big topic that connects stress

fear of failing, overwhelm, concern, excitation, et cetera, those are all flow states.

Maybe it's not the flow state that we expect, maybe not the one that we prefer, but a river can have flow states that we don't expect or prefer either.

And so it's like when we do abstract to the physical systems, we get a whole quantitative toolkit

And we also get the ability to maybe look beyond phrasings that see flow as just something to be obtained and rather flow as the nature of perhaps interior experience.

And then we can talk about designing or perturbing regimes of flow.

Yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's a good point, because from the out, there's the outside system, like, say, seeing someone skiing down a hill and you could say there's different

ways of doing that.

And then there's from the inside, you've got essentially a dynamic, nonlinear dynamical organism that's kind of trying to sort of thrive and survive.

It's different.

There's no getting away from that.

And the nature of that difference is, that's another question beyond.

But the interesting thing is on that graph as well, is often that graph only, the flow is only shown on the top right and not on the bottom left, even though it could be seen to flow down.

And so some of it is like a quadrant and it's just the top right which is seen as the flow.

But what's also interesting is,

It kind of depends, again, on these multi-scale dynamics.

So within certain scales and temporal scales, things start to fit our organism's preferred states, some of which is kind of built into our morphology.

So if something becomes so easy, for instance,

It's a lot easier if I'm trying to protect a building just to stand in front of the front door as a security guard and nothing happens all day.

And I may end up in some sort of flow, but there's a point at which there's a desire for some stimulation, there's a desire for some change, and there's also maybe changes that happen at the kind of... This sort of ties in with Adam Saffron's work about windows of experience, both in real time and over time, is...

When is it kind of in the same sort of time scales that we consciously function in?

And when is something beyond that?

So that could be where stress and boredom or stress and burnout can be both because of the nature of the activity,

is too rapid, it's too disjointed for our morphology.

Or it may be that we perceive it that way because we have some depression or anxiety that's also not enabling us to engage in those ways.

What's your thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Let's take that point to one of the formalisms of the paper.

So you just mentioned how there's like multiple timescales and there might be slower timescales as well as faster ones, which might even be faster than our rate of perception or modeling.

which are one and the same if perception is indeed a generative model.

And this is very early in the paper in section two, from dynamics to densities.

So they write, the aim of this section is to get from the specification of a random dynamical system in terms of its equations of motion.

So the, for example, differential equations that define the time evolution of a dynamical system

to the probability density over its states in the long-term future from any initial conditions so going from dynamical systems which takes us um into the temporal realm to the density realm and so there we think about ocean water of different physical densities there's

a motion to the densities because denser things go down.

And so that idea of denser things going down or flow from high to low density regions, just like in the atmosphere, just like in the ocean,

that is going to be connected to the behavior of random dynamical systems and to information geometry so that's a little bit of the next piece but the two time scales are here you

Here's a classic flow model.

There's a flow and then there's the fast fluctuations.

So it's like there's the river moving ahead at one kilometer per hour, but each molecule in that river is not always going at exactly that speed rates.

There's a fast fluctuation, which might average out to zero.

So in the bulk aggregate or in the time aggregate, the flow dominates the behavior of the river.

but the fast fluctuations are also occurring and they can often be equivalent to a well-behaved i.e.

Gaussian error term.

So this is where we see the separation of timescales into sort of the flow of the river and then the vibration of the molecules.

And those have two different partitionings of the system.

flow is well behaved because it is just like a single number for the whole river in this simple example and the fast fluctuations are well behaved because they're smaller if they were larger than the flow they would become the flow itself so they're smaller than the flow and they might be uncorrelated or have a zero mean which allows us to do gaussian statistics on them and then this idea of separation to slow and fast time scales

is connected to density dynamics through the Fokker-Planck equation.

Yeah, Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just a little question on that.

So this time dynamic, so flow is both a time scale of interest, I suppose you could say, and potentially one which has a net kind of change in some sort of

directional kind of gradient descent i suppose and then the fast fluctuations it doesn't say random but it's probably more stochastic um but could also have flows going on so is this um is this is this um you know how how much difference in in the in the rate that they need to be to be classes


SPEAKER_01:
Good question.

So the X with a dot is kind of like the derivative of X. It's the rate of change in X. It's the flow in X is going to be decomposed to these two terms.

Now we might be interested in a very special solution to this equation.

So again, we have X dot is kind of the change in X, which is being broken down to these two dynamical variables.

And then that's being equivalent to the Fokker plank, which is more of a density framing.

So that's the key introductory step in the paper is just to build this really strong equivalence, AKA they're the same picture between the dynamical specification and the density specification.

So if we could solve when the dynamics were at a steady point, that would be equivalent to when the density would be at a steady point.

There might be some methods to help solve it in one phrasing or the other phrasing.

It turns out that there's a...

way to solve with a little bit more feasibility when P of X equals zero.

So that's when the density flow given this is zero.

And so that's what they're discussing here.

is basically asking, when does that equal zero?

And that is a stationary point.

So it's kind of like, doesn't mean it's just simply flat in the reservoir, but there's a pump bringing water up to the reservoir at 10 gallons per minute, and then the reservoir is dumping at 10 gallons per minute.

Then that is going to be a point where there's a stationarity in the overall flow

densities of those two bodies of water, just like if it were two bodies of heat.

And so we're solving for a special place, which is where the total flow rate is zero.


SPEAKER_03:
Can I just ask a question on that without going too deep?

But so in a way, the, the, the flow is the, the ability of having this relationship to the flow is it gives, it gives you a sense, I suppose you could say it's like when the graph, the gradient zero, you know, that the top of a graph between two types of descent and it's, it's, it's got like that, that flat gradient, it gives you a chance to choose moments, which could have a particular,

set of properties without having to calculate everything about it.

Now when that happens, what happens then?

Is it then that you then measure the density and just keep measuring lots of density points when you find the flow points to be at

at a state of equilibrium or is there something else?


SPEAKER_01:
So very good question.

Taking samples and using that to say something about the landscape is something we are going to get to.

Welcome, Dean.

So we will talk about how samples can be empirically taken to say things and do inference on the flow density.

But you made a good point, which is that we want to figure out something about a special point.

Let's just say that we knew that we were solving for a quadratic equation, which is going to come into play later.

So it is going to look like a bowl.

Now, it'd be awesome to know every single point on the whole bowl, but it turns out we might only be interested or mostly interested in one point, the bottom of the bowl.

And for a quadratic function, the bottom of the bowl is the only time that the derivative is zero.

So we can have this big nasty quadratic equation and then

take the derivative of it, the first derivative, and then just ask, when does the first derivative, the slope of the curve equal zero?

And we know that for a quadratic equation, there's only one point where that happens.

And either it's like a bowl or it's like an upside down bowl, but because we constrained the discussion to a specific family of equations, which is gonna be important for variational inference,

we can then solve some very reduced equations like the derivative, which is of a lower order of computational complexity, and then just get the one point that we actually wanted, which is like the location of the bottom of the bowl.

And then from the bottom of the bowl and some of the coefficient estimates that we have, we actually do get the whole bowl.

So this is kind of like we're taking some big family

of equations and then we're going to be looking for special points like especially where the flow is at equilibrium or stationarity and then fitting a family of equations with a form that we know we can compute with to approximate

a flow that has a different underlying dynamic.

And that is going to come into play where they show very early, you can take a Lorenz attractor, which has some equations that govern its motion.

So again, those can be moved from the equations of motion to the density dynamics.

And then you can reconstruct an approximation of its dynamics

And your approximation to the dynamics doesn't have to be even of the same form as the generative process itself.

So it's like you could fit a linear model between height and weight with some error, but that doesn't mean that there is a linear model relating height and weight.

It just means it's an approximation heuristic with a form that's very easy to solve.

Stephen, and then welcome Dean, feel free to add anything you'd like.


SPEAKER_03:
So in some ways, this is a bit like that particle wave challenge, whereby you have to use a particle to find where something is in time and space.

You have to use a very simplified understanding of the wave to say, OK, at this point, I can't have all that other information but to have my location information, even if it's an informational location.

So it's like the flow...

finding a point in the flow gives you a way to identify the location, maybe in the information space.

And then the Fokker plank,

gives you a way to then embellish that with another type of, you know, put information back in a way, back into the cake mix, put a bit more, you know, a bit more salt and a few more chocolate buttons in there.

And so you can see what's going on.

Okay, that's quite useful to think about that.

Would I be right in the sense of like what those two equations are doing?

giving you, okay, some chance to choose a moment in information space or physical space.

So at least you've got something to, and then the other one is giving you a way to then put some information in which you can then start to do some variational processing on.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll give a short thought and then Dean and Blue, feel free to say hello and just any overall thoughts and take it wherever you want to go.

Most

dynamical systems have been framed classically using these equations of motion.

So you get like a matrix that describes the differential equations that describe the unfolding of the Lorenz attractor.

So it's framed as a series of dynamical equations.

So this early equivalence allows us to bring some of the tools of

fluid mechanics and density dynamics and flow to bear on these dynamical systems.

So there are some ingredients or some kitchen tools that make approximations to flow very useful

for equations of motion that might be intractable if you try to solve it on just that domain.

Like figuring out a chaotic system's underlying generative process, it's basically not possible.

But potentially by approximating it with a very specific type of approximation, families of functions that we know have certain behaviors, which we're gonna talk more about,

using approximation families that are well behaved and using some of the things that have been developed from flow decomposition, like the Helmholtz decomposition, that doesn't exist for dynamical systems.

So by making that equivalence between dynamical systems and flowing systems, we can then use flow tools to study dynamical systems

as well as making it clear that we're describing the flow of our approximation.

But it turns out that that does pretty well, at least in some of these examples that they're going to present in the paper.

So, Dean, and then Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I wasn't going to come on today, but the conversation was stimulating enough.

I figured I had to jump in here and maybe add my two cents at some point.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

And Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I'm a research assistant in New Mexico.

And I was into this paper because it, I don't know, kind of piqued my interest in information geometry.

And Daniel, I saw like in the dot zero that you had mentioned that course that's online.

I'm like going to look into that for sure.

And, you know, I am curious about like a lot of the leaps that were maybe made in this paper between like

particles from particles to cells and back to particles again.

And those kinds of transitions get a little fuzzy for me.

So I'm curious to see kind of where this flows to.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

I think that was the information geometry course of John Bayes.

So that's like,

Again, I haven't taken that, but I know that that's recommended and very cool.

So we talked a little bit about flow, about that's kind of one of the dreams that we could have a unified flow model for heat and people, information, behavior, strategy, etc.

um and one of the earliest moves that they do in the paper is just to really lock down this connection between dynamical systems systems through time and systems with density so it's worth just repeating that because that's the second section of the paper and that's going to be a lot of the build up another

term that comes into play is the lyopinib exponent and chaotic systems so if anyone has a thought of course just raise your hand but one way that chaotic is quantified and formalized this doesn't mean it's the only sense of the word chaotic because sometimes people do use it non-technically

But the technical definition of chaotic is referring to the extent of the sensitivity of the system to small changes, for example, in initial conditions or in perturbations.

And so there's what's known as a Lyapunov exponent, which is something that can be calculated from the model of a dynamical system.

And there are some dynamical systems where

adjacent points stay adjacent.

So it's like two pieces of wood that are just put in a river that's moving straight forward.

There's other systems where adjacent points converge or where adjacent points diverge.

And it depends where you are in the system.

Like if you're at the bottom of the bowl, then

either way you go, it's like a stable equilibrium.

You're going to get pushed back in.

But if the bowl were upside down, then either point to the side of the top of the bowl would push you and diverge.

So that's the Lyapunov exponent.

And

there's a lot of technical detail in exploring chaotic systems from this perspective um so that's one matrix term that comes into play is using the lyopinib exponents especially the leading lyopinib exponents to characterize some of the attributes of a system stephen


SPEAKER_03:
I think it's good to mention that idea of a system, two things coming together, and when they can meet, the system as well, they can converge or they diverge, but they could also, when they bump into each other, there's also the dynamics of the system

So as well as the system's dynamics merging, the dynamics of the change, it will stop changing once they meet, right?

So there's also that extra level of dynamical change, which you get with these nonlinear dynamical systems, which are actually working with the dynamics of the change.

So it can sort of reset itself.

It's not like once they're in a physical system, they've come together, that's kind of it.

When you're dealing with variations on change,

it becomes much more generative.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Yes.

So sometimes these exquisite sensitivities to tiny, tiny differences in initial conditions, they get swamped by random fluctuations.

So,

that's what's interesting about their approach here is again they're partitioning out the flow from the fast fluctuations and then they're describing how when random fluctuations are added in then the strange attractor is going to be replaced by a pullback attractor

And then the flow is the expected motion.

So that's the movement of the river of the flow term.

If this flow shows exponential divergence of trajectories, i.e.

positively operative exponents, we can impute stochastic chaos.

They then use this approach to investigate one of the classic equations

chaotic systems which has also been one of the earliest chaotic systems of lorenz who

Maybe there was some other livestream where we did a little bit more on the Lorenz, but it was a meteorology question.

Lorenz and colleagues were studying the weather and how it changes and about some of the sensitivity of the dynamical models to tiny changes.

Like it seems like if it's, you know, 21.1 C, it seems like that should be very similar in its behavior in the long run to it being just 0.1 degree higher.

and then as you got further away it's like well then it'd be way more different in the future if it's more different today but then it could actually turn out that a tiny difference ends up sending your equations haywire whereas a very different initial condition might actually like feed back and come back to a similar attractor through time

So that's the kind of systems that they were investigating in like the 1950s.

And there's been a lot of computer and technical work since then.

But this is still a total classic and a beautiful strange attractor for them to be working on as the first example in their paper.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
So from what you're saying, the strange attractor is the kind of complexity science idea of these mathematical models where things get caught in, as you just described, and initial conditions can change the nature of what that becomes within a certain range.

And obviously outside that range, it doesn't form.

So it's still kind of off equilibrium.

This pullback attractor is a...

is a almost a set of states which can be moved towards through looking at the flows within

other types of chaotic attractors.

So it's making a difference.

In some ways, the pullback attractor would need or involve some sort of inference or some sort of driver to make it happen.

It's not inherent to the nature of the mathematics of that particular thing once you let it roll.

Would I be right in that?


SPEAKER_01:
so the pull back attractor it's kind of like let's just imagine the attractor is like a post in the ground and there's a bungee cord so if we were looking at that quadratic bowl it'd be like there's an attractor at the bottom of the bowl and then if all you saw was the lateral movement of the particle so we don't know anything about the height necessarily or the shape of the graph we just observe that when we push the ball to the left

it gets pulled back as if it's being on a bungee cord, pulled left, maybe it even overshoots and it kind of dampens.

So that's like a pullback attractor to a point attractor.

What's being shown here is an attractor that is in higher dimensions.

So if you had a two-dimensional pullback attractor, it'd be like the line Y equals X. And if you get perturbed off the line, you come back down into the valley.

So that's like where you start to see vector fields and the flow of water into a river.

And now we're in a three-dimensional attractor, at least three spatial dimensions.

And so it's kind of like there's a race car going around this butterfly track.

And then it has the bungee cord.

So you're getting pulled to this car that's moving.

And then if you sample your location at different times, you're being drawn to a pullback attractor, which is the compromise between the flow as defined by the equations of motions of Lorenz attractor and the fast stochastic fluctuations.

Dean and then Steven.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just quickly, I think this is why sometimes using the metaphor of building a bridge is difficult because not all times is as convenient as the lowest energy state in a bowl.

Sometimes what we have to look at is the fact that one end, call it point A,

we're trying to figure out what point B is, and it isn't always the lowest energy state.

I think here's an example.

So if you've been to Hudson Yards in New York, it's a fascinating translation of a space over time.

And if you were to ask the people who actually constructed those high trestles at the point that they were built, if you had asked them X number of years later whether or not that was going to be the lowest possible energy state or a tractor state, I don't think they could have predicted that.

And so that's why I think it's difficult at times when we, for the sake of convenience, to expedite our sense of what's going to happen next, we use a connector metaphor.

But in fact, that's not exactly what stochastic communication

possibility is about.

So what we tend to do is collapse down too quickly, down to the particulars of what purpose a product can serve.

And if we're going to build a bridge from a product to a process, which is what I think looking at stochastic separation is about, we should maybe drop the idea of

a static connector and maybe look at the back and forth and the actual dynamics of those dynamic situations, which were now the tool of active inference affords.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, interesting.

It just made me think about like throwing a Frisbee and it catches on a roof.

That's its lowest local energy state.

But if you just thought about gravity, maybe you'd say, well, it's going to fall to the ground.

So one particular trajectory may not realize the ultimate lowest energy state yet.

In a way, it's in its own energy state.

So Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so thinking again about applications, I think what Dean mentions is a good point, is there's an actual tendency to want to have that kind of bridge between two stable things.

The thing with two stable things is they're stable, as we just mentioned, so therefore if you're trying to get information about variations within them, particularly chaotic variations, you're not going to get much, right?

So you kind of need...

there's, there's a need to be off out of equilibrium to, to give the conditions where things can move in potentially a strange attractor or potentially other types of solenoidal flows or something.

There needs to be some way for flows to happen.

And then within that, which I think that might explain why that last graph.

So if I'm, if I'm right in thinking that those four graphs that you showed there,

kind of showing that you've got this strange tract that you can sort of look at the state space using points of where something has become momentarily zero in the flow calculation gives you a zero so you can then take a point and then the bottom right is basically saying you can recapitulate that as a global potential so you can sort of

by taking the changes that happen in the second order, you can sort of recapitulate some kind of understanding of the structure of the information.

Is that right?


SPEAKER_01:
There's a lot there.

So I cannot reduce it to a binary, but yes, it is showing different aspects of how strange attractors, which are found in these sort of exotic deterministic chaos systems, like a perfectly clean double pendulum.

And then how, when we take the approximation, we find a pullback attractor empirically in

approximation so now we're describing a nicer still stochastic but much nicer and more approachable pullback attractor like it's being pulled back to some butterfly shape now we don't get these like rings of jupiter situation from our sampling because we're taking particular samples and we're fitting then

a flow what flow generated those samples so we never see rings of jupiter strange attractor we're dealing with approximations of random attractors and then we have at least two tools slash helpful techniques to apply that are going to help us come to terms with that

approximation.

So one of them is we're dealing with flow, so we can talk about the Helmholtz decomposition.

So this was discussed a lot in Act Inf 26, and as mentioned in the .0, Stochastic Chaos in Markov Blankets was submitted like a few weeks after 26 was submitted, Bayesian Mechanics.

So

The Helmholtz decomposition describes this partitioning into the irrotational, kind of the gradient, putting the ruler on the hill.

What is the angle of the ruler?

If you're on the top of the hill, it's flat.

If you're on the hill, it's going to be at an angle.

So separating that ruler on the hill to the hiking map, the isocontour.

So let's make the ruler flat.

wherever it is, whatever the slope is, and then let's just take that ruler and kind of move it side to side as we go around this hill.

Now, if you're on the very top of the hill, then the ruler is flat and there's no isocontour.

But if you're anywhere else on that whole landscape other than a local maxima,

there's going to be some angle to the ruler and some way to get around the hill.

So that's the Helmholtz decomposition.

So that's one piece that we get to bring to the puzzle.

And then one piece that would be interesting to ask the authors or someone with more technical experience is,

We've seen the Helmholtz decomposition before into the solenoidal and the gradient components, but then there's this housekeeping term, capital Lambda, and that's described in an appendix and it gets quite technical, but it has to do with the density landscape changing.

as a function of flow so it's not just like we're going to have one mountain topography and then we're going to have rain falling on that one mountain there's going to be some changes as we flow around so that it's more like you know you have a jet of hot water into a cold water

you can't just take the mountain of temperature and then just ask, well, what happens if we pour hot water on top of that mountain?

Because the mountain is actually changing.

The landscape is changing as a function of the flow.

And some of that gets incorporated into this housekeeping term.

So one tool that we have is from the flow toolkit is the Helmholtz decomposition into these different components that help us reconstruct

a flow that is a much better approximation.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
You mentioned there that we've seen solenoidal and gradient before with Helmholtz decomposition.

When you say we've seen it before, you're saying we've seen it more recently with the solenoidal work.

Or has the solenoidal been in there all along?


SPEAKER_01:
Like this was drawn...

Oh yeah.

Like we've discussed it in paper number 26 and other papers.

Like this is not a novel partitioning by the authors and it's very linked to other discussions that we've had about Helmholtz decomposition in the context of distributional approximation.


UNKNOWN:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_03:
Got you.

But previously, was there... It was more of a focus on gradient descent.


SPEAKER_01:
The focus was in your regime of attention, potentially.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

It was... Okay, right.

Going way back to early days.

Okay.

Okay, so in that paper that was looking at solenoidal flow, it was giving more weight to that, wasn't it?

Would you say it was giving more weight, or was it using that in a different explanatory way?

Because there has been this shift around solenoidal flow to give another way beyond ergodicity to explain how these dynamics can work.


SPEAKER_01:
They're kind of co-instantiated because they're partitionings from each other of the same underlying model.

So which one is emphasized more is totally a question of situation and flourish, but it also may be the case that over the previous three years, there's more of an emphasis on the importance of the isocontours in complex problem solving, as opposed to just run and gun gradient descent.

So I agree with that.

So that's one tool we have.

Okay, so we do the Helmholtz decomposition because again, we're making this deep equivalence between dynamical systems and flow systems.

So one tool we have from the flow world is the Helmholtz decomposition for vector fields.

Now, they write in section 3.1, our objective is to identify the functional form

So it could be used in the sense like, what function does it play?

Or a functional is like a function of a function.

A functional form of the self-information or potential function that describes the non-equilibrium steady state density.

Okay, so we go back to in three.

The fancy I, the fancy J, they write...

The first dissipative part performs a Riemannian gradient descent on a manifold on the negative logarithm of the steady state density, which can be interpreted as the self-information of any given state or as some potential function.

So this is how surprised should I be to be in this state?

So now let's go back to our bowl.

You shouldn't be surprised if you're at the bottom.

You should be surprised if you're at the top, there's high potential.

Now, if it were gravity that were pulling us down, that would be potential energy, gravitational potential energy.

You have higher gravitational potential energy that can get dissipated

free energy can be dissipated if you have greater potential energy so we want something that is just like you could have the bowl and the ball and know where's the ball expected to be and where is it going to roll down from where's their potential that's high and where's the potential low and then

Here in figure one, they're going to plot self-information on the bottom left.

That's the wax, self-information.

And then that is fluctuating through time.

As the system is cranked, it's kind of like if the self-information were staying at a constant value, it'd be like, if you're in that race car going around the track,

then you're always where you expect to be because again the bowl it's like a point attractor and then the lorenz approximation is going to be to a dynamical approximation so we want to find the function of the non-equilibrium steady state that's going to be describing how surprised you should be the potential function for that system

So these are big questions like how is the self-information measured or calculated?

And then what does it mean for the self-information to be high or low?

And how does the self-information for different states that we might care about, like homeostasis, how does the self-information in those cases differ?

Like, is the self-information higher or lower when homeostatically you're in a good attractor?

So Dean, then Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
So I don't know this, but I would guess that on some basic level, the measure is on its most absolute terms, greater or less than to begin with, because I think that relative difference is something that anybody doesn't even have to be aware of consciously calculating.

They can just, you can kind of tell, but I'm not really sure, but I would think

that as we go up in terms of the determination and the accuracy of the measure, we could find ourselves getting more precise, but on its most basic level, I would think it would, from a functional standpoint, that's where we would have to begin.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, and being less surprised about the state that one is in,

entails having a richer and a more accurate generative self-model.

So if you have a model that's just totally off base, you're going to be recurrently surprised.

If you have a very nuanced self-model, your location and your circadian rhythm, then different observations will be less surprising.


SPEAKER_02:
I was just feeding back what you were saying because you did a really good explanation.

But in your explanation, the key thing was I should be more surprised or I should be less surprised.

You yourself in doing the explanation, come back to that basic difference.

And so again, as we get more precise, I think we can have more sophisticated ways of being able to show how we arrived there.

But at the beginning, even a two-year-old can somehow tell the difference between more and less.

That's why they dig in their heels, right?

So it seems like on that basic level, before we get into some of the more sophisticated stuff,

we all can, where it says addresses these questions for one simple case, I think on its simplest terms, that's where we can probably start.

We can look there first.

If that's not available, I don't know that the other math matters.

I know it does, but to the person who can't see that first, I'm not sure where they go.


SPEAKER_01:
This past weekend, we were hanging out with some larva, with some children, and we were really struck by how there would be some times where it seemed like you just would tell them something totally different, like switch topic in the middle of a sentence, and they just went along with it.

And then other times where they needed something really specific, like they wanted that piece of food and they want it in this part of the plate and they want to touch it this way.

And so it's like, they have a generative model and there's certain parts

that they're surprised by or not.

And so we're just like, we want that piece of food and I'm not too surprised at the route it takes to my plate.

But if their generative model entails a specific way that that is going to get to their plate, they're going to be surprised by anything other than that.

And if they don't have a generative model of topics in the world, then switching topics and talking about this event and then that event, it's just like, it's as if any other set of topics were addressed.

So,

Great point about our intuitive connection to surprising information, how that's related to our generative modeling.

So Blue and then Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
So just to go to your child model, like having, you know, had lots of kids around for a lot of time, you know, food is something particularly that they like fixate on, right?

I mean, my younger stepdaughter is like one of the easiest kids ever.

Like she's so chill and so laid back.

But like I remember when she was about two years old, she would like freak out.

Like one time I cut an apple for her, like sliced it up, you know, just to make it like easy to eat.

And she like got so mad because she wanted the whole apple, the whole thing.

And she thought I was only giving her part of it.

But I think maybe food is, I mean, my point is I'm rambling about the story, but maybe food is one of these things that is like so baked in.

to our generative model because otherwise the children have an attention span of a gnat like you know you're in the car and they start to argue and you just say oh look at that pretty yellow car right there and then they're done they're over it like so so generally like the you can surprise a child and completely shift them but when it comes to food it's like this weird and many kids like that just you know aspen with the apple but then there's also like this food can't touch that food

and like they have a bigger piece of cake than me and all this stuff so so this food like this fundamental like baked in thing that that's like central to survival and therefore it's like very deeply ingrained in our generative model maybe nice agree steven yeah so the idea of children i'll keep that analogy in there um


SPEAKER_03:
if so we've got this these flows happening and we we have um state spaces that get readings off so the very first state space reading i mean unless you've got a prior somehow to go on you don't really know what that means and you get another one another one and so you get a series of state space insights so to speak and then you'll start to get a sense of whether something's more or less than

I mean, the simplest term, the average, right?

But we can then use gradient descent and that to sort of get an understanding of that.

And with children, that can be interesting is,

So, yeah, sometimes I just want to go with everything.

And I notice also, like, I get that with my daughter, Layla.

Sometimes it's like, you know, she'll say, like, I want something very specific.

Or that school there, so-and-so went to that school.

Like, now she knows that.

Well, I know because that's what happened when I was little, meaning when she was a small baby.

And it's all kind of made up stories.

stories in some extent but it's kind of like she's converging on she's got enough state space information to say okay and and probably you've got that with food right it's like there's there's enough state space information to say this and and they can be proud as and i know that and you didn't know that she said to me you know i knew that you didn't know that i knew that uh this is quite cute but you you've got that okay so she's got enough state space awareness

they're going to converge down and then there's other times like when you want them to just stay on the football pitch and not run off the swings uh they just go crazy so there's something about you know sampling the space and saying you've got enough information and synchronization onto joint action manifolds is going to be one of the prices of the paper so blue as a response and then dean


SPEAKER_00:
So, you know, super interesting about like asking your daughter, Steven, like, you know, or the thing she says that she remembers from when she was a baby, something that's really fun to do with kids.

And it's also leads to like the synchronization where I feel like maybe we're going, but yeah.

ask a kid when they can first talk, like when they can barely talk, maybe like, you know, two years old ish, um, ask a kid where they were before they were born.

Um, the answers are awesome.

Or like, do you remember being in your mommy's tummy?

Like, and like, you know, I've, I've heard ranges and ranges of, of answers from kids and it's really super interesting.

So where is this?

Like, is this some inherited prior?

Is this like past life regression or is it just like

They're falling into synchronization.

They're making something up because children have these like great imaginations at that age.

But where does this come from?

Like, are they just responding back to what they think you want to hear?

This is like an absurd question to ask a kid, right?

Like, I mean, you can't really expect a reasonable answer, but ask because it's fun to find out what they think that they were doing before they got here.

It's fun.


SPEAKER_01:
And Dean, first.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think it's interesting because if you're going to go back to that geometry aspect of, you know, can two-year-olds think in the abstract state?

Yes, they can, number one.

And the other part I think we're sort of, we're all sort of synchronizing around is that if it's less or more, that can be represented by the X and the Y on a graph.

We've already shown that.

But if you want to think whether it's in or out,

You have to add that Z vector.

And that is the part that most learning doesn't necessarily explicate.

It's there.

Two-year-olds do it.

They know whether they're in or out.

They know whether they're getting the whole apple or a slice.

So again, I ask,

Are we attempting as people who are trying to help the two-year-old to build a bridge from point A to point B?

Or should we be actually understanding this as building something that is a product that is material to something that is possible?

That's what the stochastic field is until we collapse it to that point B, right?

And the only way that that happens is if we include in and out, if we include the Z dimension to this.

So, again, if we can't get in our own minds, if we can't get that correct, then we're actually going to get in the way of developing pedagogy.

I'm sorry to say that, but it's actually true.

So we can think of these little people as these wonderful little right brains.

The right brain hasn't been brought down to these equations at the bottom of this page.

And yet they're still able to function.

Their functional form is self-information based on product to process, to be determined.

So, again, I'm not saying this because I've got it all figured out, but because I don't want to have this active inference tool, which is a fantastic potentiator, to be collapsed to, now, here's the potential outcomes that we can engineer A through Z.

That doesn't allow for a Hudson Yards, and yet there's a Hudson Yards.

So if we're going to help people, let's not, as you say, Daniel, let's not over reduce prematurely here in the hopes of actually helping people.

When in fact, what that does is it says, as you fall out of the sky raindrop, you shall depart this flow in Surrey, British Columbia, or the Gulf of California, or

at the mouth of the St.

Lawrence River.

We can't do that, or we shouldn't, but we do.

And I can't understand why the greatest thinkers do that.

Well, I can, because we like to talk.

But bottom line is, we've got to rethink this.

That's what active inference supports.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agreed.

And we can engineer the landscape of flow.

You can add a dam so that the water droplets do go one place or another.

But very interesting metaphor.

So Stephen on this, and then we're going to go to the next tool that gets introduced.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think, well, I think, I feel, I know.

So there's a question of, it's an interesting question as well.

When you say you've got a two-year-old,

is where do they get their knowing from?

So we have abstraction in terms of thinking abstraction.

So we have, well, and the sort of ontological abstractions that we can create around our knowledge structures.

But they have access to two years of state space, experiential sensations, of which they can then make a story from.

whichever way they so please, as they can.

So there's an interesting question that what it means to know that's abstract, i.e., or what's outside of

the sort of lived experience level.

And there's that other way.

And one thing I always find interesting is I see a child is around the age of two, three, you really see a change in the fingers that the whole morphology of the body shifts.

And I think one of the reasons that maybe that memories aren't accessible from before the age of three is literally they were encoded in a different body that's too far removed

to revisit the priors or the likelihoods from the state spaces that had been laid down.

So it may be partly a natural way that we sort of forget, but we don't necessarily forget thoughts that we had cognitively.

We just forget the embodied stuff because we're going to lay down some new stuff, unless you have a trauma, in which case that can lock in certain states.


SPEAKER_01:
Blue, any comments on that?


SPEAKER_00:
Of course.

So, you know, it's interesting that the encoding in a different body, I mean, we're doing that every seven years, right?

Like we have full cells turned over, but, you know, there's this process of synaptic pruning that happens.

So as like we're babies, you know, we grow bazillions of neurons and then synaptic pruning happens like around the age of two or three.

where a lot of those neurons die back.

And then the ones that stay exist and continue to build stronger and build better.

But everyone is so completely different in terms of like their ability to remember things from when they were a baby and not always related to trauma.

Like I have no conscious memory stream until like I was 10, which is super late.

And like, there's no, I mean, maybe I might do some like hypnosis and reveal some kind of trauma, like at some point in my life, but

I mean, for me to not have any, like, I remember like some flashes of some stuff.

I remember the photograph.

You showed me the picture.

Oh yeah.

I remember that.

Do I remember it?

No, I probably remember the picture of it.

Right.

Like, so there's this whole other level of thing, but, but the idea of being encoded in a different body is super interesting because of course my body's different now also from when I was 10.

Right.

But I mean, also like, you know, when you're 90, your body's different from when you were 50.

So what stays, what goes, how is it chosen?

Is it this embodied aspect of it, or is it just like, you know, we lock into the things that we think are important for our model, and if it's not relevant for our model, maybe we just let it go.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean?

I just want to say this real quick, because I know you want to move forward, Daniel, but everything that we describe here, in order to get to a concept of between, whether it's between

us today and us seven years plus a day before, that between, or any other between that we want to describe, at some fundamental level, we have to be able to discriminate between more and less and what's in and what's out.

If we can do those things, we in any situation can describe between.

Now, once we can describe between, we can see a difference between what a product is, the bottom of this slide, and a process, something that that equation can do.

If we can get that clear, then stochastic chaos

is a between thing that we can then manipulate to a certain outcome, or we can leave open to possibility.

If we can get that, just that, we will have conquered more than most people have conquered in their lifetime because they use the word between, but I don't think they necessarily understand what makes that up.

And I think that's what we,

That's what I would like to be able to share with others and co-learn with others as opposed to, excuse me, building another set of specific outcomes that we can measure and say, this was you one month ago, you A, and this is you now seven years plus a day.

And now we're going to decide whether or not you're closer to some

thing that I've arbitrarily selected as the thing that makes you have learned something.

If we can get there, could you imagine how amazing that would be?

That's just that one thing.

Sorry, I get really passionate about this, but holy crap, I'm actually talking to people who can actually hear that and go, oh, that's interesting.

Instead of just dismissing it out of hand and going, we don't need to learn that because we already know what between means.


SPEAKER_01:
Between is geometric.

So for sure, information geometry will come into play.

And then the idea of taking vast situations and through time with uncertainty and then calculating more or less cough, cough, expected free energy, that could be an extremely helpful approach.

So Blue, anything on this or we'll continue.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so what's the next tool?

Are we going right into the Markov blanket?

No.

Because, man, when we talk about between.

Not yet.

I just want to get to the Markov blanket.

When we talk about between, I think that having that idea of the Markov blanket.

Anyway, I'll add it at that time.

So go on.

Carry on.


SPEAKER_01:
Absolutely, the Markov blanket is even understood by the non-technical as a betweenness.

But is it the betweenness that is your epithelium mechanically?

Or what kind of betweenness are we actually talking about?

We need the tools.

Let's go to the next tool.

So...

However, this is the quote.

In general, we cannot discount the correction term that arises when flow operators are a function of states.

So if it were just Mount Everest, we could just do the solenoid and the gradient decomposition and then figure out how to combine isocontours with gradient climbing and we would get to the top.

However, swept under the rug by the housekeeping term is this change in the underlying structure.

mountain landscape.

Indeed, it is this state dependency that underwrites stochastic chaos.

So a way to think about that is like the double pendulum.

The chaoticness of that system arises from the exact angle that the double pendulums are in.

You can't just say there's a Mount Everest and it's the bottom.

It's like, okay, not very helpful for me predicting these wacky waving shapes it's doing.

This presents us with a more difficult problem.

The problem can be finessed by using polynomial expansions of the flow operator and the potential as follows for n states.

So it could be one, two, three, four n dimensions

up to polynomial order m. So a linear approximation has a polynomial order of one, a quadratic approximation has a polynomial order of two, and so on.

So it's like fitting higher and higher order terms.

So the big idea is that we're going to use polynomial expansions to approximate complex underlying flow functionals.

Polynomial expansions do many things, but most importantly, they restrict or scaffold our model selection approach to a very specific form and function and size and tractable computation.

So individuals might be familiar with a Taylor series, which is where you take a given point and you say, well, what is this function at that point?

Like the sign of zero is zero.

And then you say, what's the first derivative?

That's this red line.

And then you say, what's the second derivative?

Okay, it's starting to curve a little down.

Okay, what's the third derivative?

And so on.

And you can use the Taylor series to approximate that function further and further out from your entry point that you're calculating the first, second, third, fourth, fifth derivative on, et cetera.

And then this is a static approximation.

So this is something that might be learned in high school or college level maths.

A topic that's very related but not always discussed is the Volterra series.

And so the Volterra series is a model for nonlinear behavior similar to the Taylor series.

It differs from the Taylor series in its ability to capture memory effects.

The Taylor series can be used for approximating the response of a nonlinear system to a given input if the output of the system strictly depends on the input at the given time.

and this is developed quite extensively the volterra in spm textbook by friston et al so again many of the seeds and roots of what we're talking about today check the spm textbook and documentation because that's where a huge amount of this competency in these authors arose from and how they represented it almost 15 years ago so

What happens when we do this polynomial expansion of the functional form?

Well, first off, we moved the problem that we were solving from static mountains only to trampolines that are moving as we're walking.

That's what brings state-dependent changes into the mix and action as well.

And it moves us from, again, a static landscape that we can just calculate where the rulers are flat on and then just figure out the best way to get there.

Well, you can't just lay a flat ruler if there's state-dependent changes because where the ruler is flat at T0 is not where the ruler is flat literally the next moment.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think this is excellent, Daniel, because what this now says is now we can explain why there are impressions, why there's some residue left over, why the in and out aspect of this, not just the bump, but the in and out going through that bump also has to be accommodated or at least acknowledged as part of everything that we're looking at here, the whole thing.

So, yes, that's a great explanation.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
And the learning landscape isn't just the mountains.

The interaction landscape is more like, well, it's like the coupled systems we'll get to soon, but it's even one person learning landscape is like being in trampoline world sometimes.

So that brings us into this space with many important topics that are discussed in an earlier and different way by the SPM textbook.

Now how good is or could be this polynomial expansion?

They write, inspection of the Lorenz system suggests that a second order polynomial approximation is sufficient given the flow is second order in the states.

So we're fitting an approximation that has two terms.

So it's like a quadratic,

So that's why we talked so much about the bowl, because the approximation that we're fitting is bowl-like, which allows optimization techniques that are simple, like convex optimization.

Those are easy.

Roll the ball to the bottom of the hill by minimizing the potential function.

Which potential function?

The free energy potential function, the free energy functional.

Whereas if it was a rugged optimization landscape,

you get the whole headache of how do you know when to stop?

And what if there's just a whole neighborhood you didn't even go to?

So it seems like potentially a second order approximation is sufficient.

Then they use this word ansatz, which is nice.

It's an assumption about the form of an unknown function made in order to facilitate solution of an equation or other problem.

So now we're gonna go with this idea that if we can have a second order approximation to Lorentz, we're gonna be doing good enough.

Let's work with that and see if that turns out to be the case.

So it turns out if this thing that's so hard to model, the self-information, the surprise, the potential function is modeled by a second order polynomial, then the non-equilibrium steady state is approximately Gaussian.

This is known as the Laplace approximation in statistics, which is also in SPM very helpfully.

Here we generalize the notion of Laplace approximation to cover not just the quadratic form of the log density, but also the solenoidal flow that underwrites non-equilibrium dynamics.

So the Laplace approximation in classical statistics is like, we're going to take the density distribution of what we're trying to estimate, and we're going to find the peak, the maximum point, and then we're going to fit a Gaussian over that peak.

And so if there's like a big shoulder and then a tiny shoulder, you're just not going to get that tiny shoulder, right?

But that's a very rich distribution if it really has that structure in the real world.

What you're going to get for that distribution is a Gaussian centered around the big peak.

So for some distributions, you're going to be way off.

There are things that are hard to estimate.

and there's things that don't work well with the Laplace approximation.

It's not a solution, it's an approximation.

However, if we're interested in the mean and in the variance around potentially the bulk of a distribution, then solving the parameters for the Laplace approximation is as easy as fitting a quadratic, which is to say the ball sliding to the bottom of the bowl.

And once you go beyond second order approximation,

you have a third order quadratic, there's a whole nother world because then the ball could get caught in that first little elbow, or it could fall off the other side.

So higher order approximations, they take more computational resources.

And while they might have increased accuracy, they can often be less tractable to actually solve.

So this is at least,

in my reading, a pretty fundamental contribution to the statistics of complex systems, because they've taken the notion of Laplace approximation, not just towards estimating the mean and the variance of some distribution out there, but to the solenoidal component of flow post-Helmholtz decomposition related to non-equilibrium dynamics.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
So up to this point, we actually don't need Markov blankets yet.


SPEAKER_01:
We haven't used the word.

So it has not come into play yet at all.


SPEAKER_03:
Exactly, exactly.

So you've told the story of what needs to be in place for there to be the kind of...

state spaces and then the nature of these state spaces being so changeable and non-linear and then there's this on top of that then there's a way to attractively work within that which is the la passe approximation in statistics which gives you

Does it always give one Gaussian on any landscape, or is there multiple?

Is it just one per landscape?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, per dimension, per state, the Laplace returns one and only one mean invariance.

It's like fitting a Gaussian distribution to the log density.

So it does only give one, which is why I gave the example of the two hump.

It's going to pick one.

and go there.

And so, yeah, let's look at figure two.

And so how interesting though, that the paper is Markov blankets and stochastic chaos, but we're not even at the Markov blanket, but the way that it gets led into

is very improved and different than what we've seen before.

Instead of assume a partition, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot, we're starting way back.

So now here on the left is the flow of the Lorenz system

using the Helmholtz decomposition.

So here are the three components of the flow as they've described it.

The blue is the gradient, the orange is the solenoidal flow, and then the gold is the correction housekeeping term.

Right, this uses the same format, but for a Laplacian system based upon the Lorenz in the upper panel.

So we're gonna be fitting,

a Laplace-like approximation to each of the states, each of the dimensions of this Lorentz strange attractor.

the key difference is that the dissipative part of the flow operator and the Hessian are positive definite.

So just really quick matrix vocabulary.

The Jacobian matrix is the matrix of the first partial derivatives.

So in the X, Y, and Z dimensions, or however many there are, what is the angle of the ruler?

That's the first partial derivative.

hessian is the second order partial derivatives so it's describing the local curvature so if someone said my ruler's flat and it's curving down you're on the top of a hill if your ruler's flat and it's curving up you're at the bottom of a hill and so on so that's how the zeroth the value of the function the first derivative and the second curvature are used like in calculus so

The Hessian is positive definite, which means the gradient flows converge to the maximum of the non-equilibrium steady state density.

This is reflected by the blue arrows that point to the center of the state space.

So in the Lorenz world, you're getting race card around.

The flow is taking you all over the place.

Yet, by making the Laplacian approximation, all of a sudden the flow, the attractive part that's dominating the movement within that space, it's actually convergent.

So that's not to say the Lorenz system converges to a stable point.

It's to say our approximation parameters converge towards potentially a more tractable and simple attractor in the abstract approximation space

and we'll see how well of an approximation that indeed is.

But that's the key difference is here, the blue arrows are taking you on a wild ride as the gradient takes you around the Lorenz flow.

Here, we're doing a flow composition on our approximation, which we constructed to be of a certain type, and it turns out to have properties in its attractor that are very different than the Lorenz.

Dean, and then Steven.

Unmute Dean, and then yes.


SPEAKER_02:
Here's a question for everybody here.

If we're talking about a process, could we be looking at those over time, seeing those arrows in both the Lorenz and the Laplace decomposition thickening or expanding or like having water added to them?

Has anybody contemplated whether in fact that is what is happening over time?

So the fit is actually from a within.

The space is getting filled up by these arrows growing in terms of their circumference.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting question.

The length of the arrow usually describes the amplitude, like the speed of the flow in that moment.

I do not know if I've seen a visualization where the tree rings, the arrows represent thicker or thinner vectors, but great question.

And if anybody with more experience in vector math has a thought, that could be very interesting to know.

Okay.

Stephen, and then Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
And just to clarify that I've got this right, but each of those points where you've got the blue arrow and the solenoidal flows, so each one would be solved, so to speak, for that point as a Gaussian approximation.

And then this is like an assemblage of multiple points.

results of a Gaussian approximation and it's sort of mapping them out, so to speak.

And so, you know, this idea of multiple

pieces of information and nestedness is it sort of comes into play with this.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

There's some landscape and we go out there with our ruler, our Jacobian and our curvature ruler, our Hessian.

And then we're going to make just transects on the hill.

And we're going to just sample a bunch of points and add a bunch of points, you know, one comma one, one comma two, we're going to use the ruler and the curvature.

And we're going to look at, at that point where the field is, uh,

And then if you've sampled at an inadequate resolution, you're not gonna see a coherent vector field.

So you need to sample at a resolution that allows the vector field to be kind of obvious.

So, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
So I just wanna point out for people who might not know that you need to have a positive definite Hessian

to calculate a covariance matrix.

Like in statistical analyses that I've done, this is like one critical point.

And if you don't have an invertible Hessian, then you have to recalculate your model because all of your factors are too entangled to find out how they are covariate together or separately.

So I just wanted to, for anybody who doesn't have the background in matrix math, just point that out.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean?

So, Blue, help me.

Does that mean, literally, that you can't thin one of those arrows?

You can't let certain things be purged from your state space?

Because that's... I really don't know.

I'm not questioning.

I'm asking a question from a physical standpoint, and then being able to translate that to the physical...

reality?


SPEAKER_00:
So I don't translate to physical reality.

Well, my brain just like doesn't work that way, but, but what has to happen is what that really means is you can't establish conditional independence without having some idea of the covariance.

And so if you can't calculate the covariance, you can't discover this conditional independence, which is where we're building up to.

in specifying the Markov blanket.

So that's why I wanted to just point that out because you have to have that ability to find that covariance.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's go to where the covariance comes into play and then Steven.

So we're going to address how well does this approximation work?

Because I mean, we're fitting a few quadratics to like the OG complex system.

Is that really going to work?

What's being shown in figure three is on the very top.

So this is the left one is second versus third, first versus third and first versus second.

So these are like three projections on a cube.

So we're looking on a flat screen or piece of paper about a three-dimensional state space.

And the red dots are the sampled trajectory

in that cube.

So it's like there's a firefly moving around in the cube and we're looking at it this way.

And so we're projecting it onto that screen.

And then in the background, we see this very nice unimodal Gaussian attractor.

So the lighter part is like the attractor part.

And then the darker part is higher potential function, more surprising, less likely.

So that is the Lorenz trajectory

being played out in our Laplace-like approximation cube.

And so it can be shown that the flow of the Laplace approximation, it has some of that kind of butterfly race car dynamics.

It's probably doing a lot better than just sticking a linear equation through it, but it's not perfectly recapitulating the underlying Lorenz system.

So how good is the approximation?

One thing that this approximation is going to live or die by is whether it can characterize the Lorenz system as chaotic or not.

Because if it turns out that the way we're going to deal with chaos, systems with a positively operative exponent, is fit a non-chaotic model, oh, I made an oscillator pendulum to describe homeostasis.

Okay, so you made a simple model, great.

But what's really interesting is if our approximation could also reflect chaos yet handle it tractably.

So what they do in formalism 12 is they show that the estimated Lyapunov dimension for the approximation is 2.48.

And they use some numerical approximation techniques here, like by sampling a grid,

of that transect sampling idea but for the lyopinib exponent at those points rather than say just the gradient and that favors um or that compares very favorably 2.48 2.43 importantly they're both like similar and way over one with the actual analytical lyopinib dimension so

the approximation is actually highlighting the chaotic nature and almost quantitatively the extent of the chaos because there's more and less chaotic systems.

And so for our purposes, the Laplace approximation is easier to handle than the Lorenz system because the functional forms of the flow and potential are immediately at hand.

That's the whole point.

We used an approximation family of equations that's going to be like having a ball rolling down to the bottom of a bowl rather than being swept up in turbulent flow.

Figure four is where we get to the covariance that Blue mentioned.

Okay, so we're gonna have three states.

Those are the X, Y, and Z states or dimensions of the Lorenz system.

And now,

we can look at the log of, so the log is just sort of a transformation to help highlight some of the differences between zero and one, especially.

We can see the log of the Jacobian, which is that first partial derivative, the log of the Hessian, which is the second partial derivative, and then the log of the covariance in the middle, which is like what Blue was referencing.

So here, the first and the second

states dimensions have very high correlations.

neither of them are correlated with the third.

So the on diagonals are states being correlated with themself.

The first and the second dimensions have high correlation.

Well, what does that look like when we use that cube shining light?

So on the bottom left here, we can see like the first and the second have like an oblong relationship.

That scatter plot has a significant regression through it.

There's a correlation coefficient, there's mutual information there.

there's non-sphericity.

Whereas the other ones that are uncorrelated relationships have what looks to be more of a spherical correlation.

Like if you sample variable A and B and it's just a circle, there's no mutual information.

And so interestingly, the covariance matrix looks a lot like the Hessian matrix.

So that is providing evidence that if what we care about is the covariance amongst the states, we're getting a very similar structure when we use the second order polynomial approximation to those states.

And it turns out that it does pretty well if you want to, for example, estimate the first state given the second.

So what if we could only measure two dimensions?

Well, we wouldn't want to pick one and two because they're basically correlated in their measurements.

We would want to pick two and three and then do a really good job at predicting one given two, which is to say that the informational dimension of this system is between two and three.

It's two and a half, basically.

So those are some of the connections between covariance amongst different dimensions and polynomial expansions to dynamical systems based upon flow approximation.

And then just to summarize here, then we can have any questions.

And then in the last 20 minutes, we'll look towards the Markov blanket.

We still haven't even gotten to the Markov blanket yet.

So just, this is the foothills of Mount Markov.

And they write, it's important not to conflate.

It's important not to conflate the simplicity of a non-equilibrium steady state density.

That's this one.

with the complexity of the underlying density dynamics.

The map is not the territory.

You just cannot say it enough.

Simple approximations are not claims about system simplicity.

In other words, when prepared or observed in initial state, the probability density can evolve in a complex and itinerant fashion on various sub-manifolds of the pullback attractor.

And they're going to use information length to talk about that.

But the important thing to know is just that our approximation has attributes that resonate with the original underlying systems dynamics, as well as attributes that we specifically know are different, or they might be different or not.

But no matter what, they're not claims about the underlying system.

So that's not a pipe.

Steven?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think this also speaks to

this idea of triangulation or multimodality is, like you say, this isn't directly speaking to what's out there, or what the system, or what you could say, whatever the things are that are being inferred.

So there needs to be, or the more

approximations that can be triangulated as i say which is kind of what happens in qualitative research qualitative research is all about the triangulation of research not about the exact measures and accuracy within research then you can get a better grip potentially on what might be out there if that makes sense so like you say with that pipe you kind of you know if i could if i could go in and

You know, I've only got one aspect of that reality, so I can only resolve it to a certain degree, and it is what it is.

And then I'd have to see, I don't know how big that is as a painting, you know, until I see it in a gallery, et cetera, et cetera, right?

So, yeah, I think that this, the need to find the way to get an approximate way in

means that you need to have many approximate ways in to start to make a higher level confidence in what you're thinking.

Thanks, Stephen.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, Danny, can you go back to slide 48 for a second?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.


SPEAKER_02:
So this is the fascinating thing about contrast and proportion.

Because you've got nine squares up in the upper right there with the Jacobian and the

And the covariance and the Hessian, trying to translate that.

And I understand this is the big, this is the sort of the grail of translation.

To translate that and the contrast and the proportion that you see there to fresh eyes, to new eyes.

They might look at that middle one with a completely different sense of what that pattern is describing for us than the two outside patterns.

slices of bread.

To us, because we're a little bit more familiar with it, the contrast and the proportion, you can actually see where the Hessian matters from a statistical standpoint.

But drop that into a context now, where you've got mountains and rivers and lakes and forests and streams,

And how do we take that information there, which is really quite clear to people who are familiar with it, and translate it to the context, the situation in which we find ourselves, and are now trying, processing to a converged sense of context.

What does this envelope tell us, right?

We're inside of this cube now.

How do we get outside of it, use this tool,

to reenter the context and have an agreed upon sense of what co-variation means.

This is the grail if we can set up our learning experience as a situated one where we take this tool in, but don't confuse the tool, as you say, don't confuse the math with the field.

That's again, it's fantastic if you can get a whole bunch of people seeing what's the big picture here?

What is the tool?

What's the contrast in proportion with a tool?

And then what is the context?

What's all of this fractalized stuff out there in different colors and different shapes and different sizes?

How do we put those two things together into some sort of coherent narrative?


SPEAKER_01:
point so in the last 10 to 13 minutes we're going to finally verge to the m word markov blanket um and then next week it would be awesome to speak with any of the authors or anyone else who would like to share their perspective or will continue because like

we're basically halfway through and we haven't gotten to the core piece of the markov blanket so we're gonna just look where we're going in the last little bit of dot one and then in dot two we're gonna like you know land on that markov trampoline and then see where we go okay in section four

they're going to repeat the analyses of the previous section, approximating two Lorenz systems coupled to each other through their respective first states.

This induces a richer conditional independent structure from which one can identify internal and external states that are independent when conditioned upon blanket states.

So this is

the more classical Markov blanket definition, which is blanket states are those that conditioned upon them make internal and external states conditionally independent.

So that's a definition that we've seen before.

And the internal, external, and blanket states, they all are co-instantiated.

It doesn't make sense to talk about one without the other.

And we've mentioned that before.

So in...

Figure seven, it's a lot like figure three.

where we were looking at those three projections of the cube of one Lorentz system.

Well, now we're looking at two and it's pretty clear from looking at their trajectories, as well as just from their movement in the state space, like these are pretty synchronized.

So some coupling has been instantiated, no different than if you had like two engines and then you connect them with a heat transfer device, they're gonna have coupled temperature fluctuations, except now it's like more statistical.

Figure eight is a lot like figure four.

So in figure four, we had this three by three matrix describing the first partial derivatives, second partial derivatives, or the covariances of states one, two, and three.

And the on diagonals were states with themselves and the off diagonals were states with other states.

Now we're going to have

three plus three states.

Two sets of three, two coupled Lorentz.

One, two, and three is the first Lorentz.

And then four, five, six are the three states of the second Lorentz.

you see that in the Jacobian, there's high correlation within each Lorenz system.

And then there's that one in four where there's a strong value.

That's the coupling.

Like that is the cell that represents the coupling between the first upper quadrant and then the lower right quadrant.

And that induces some extremely interesting covariance structures.

That is what we want to investigate.

It turns out that by looking at the Hessian of this system, some partitions fall out.

Those partitions can be numerically analyzed to show that basically there's partial correlations that approximate the Hessian of the Lorenz systems that are coupled.

So we can use the Hessian, which we already established the second order polynomial expansion is like basically adequate.

We can use the Hessian of our approximation, not of the system, not the system has a Hessian.

Our model of the Hessian approximation

very well aligns with the partial correlation.

And so that's demonstrated by showing that two states that shouldn't have correlation, third and sixth and fourth and fifth.

So like here, three and six are not correlated.

We can show that even if they start very correlated, like they just happen to start at a similar value, the dynamics of the system actually move them towards having a zero or even a slightly negative partial correlation.

So.

our Hessian approximation is giving us deep insight into the partial correlations.

And then I think a great place to sort of,

is with this connection of the graphical Bayesian network that we've looked at before with that same partitioning into four states, internal, external, and blanket states.

Now, Friston and others then partitioned the Markov slash Perl blanket states

which are of one kind, into these two kinds of blanket states, incoming sensory states, and outgoing action states.

That's what links us with perception, cognition, action, and control theory, and planning as inference.

So this is an image we've seen before.

And here are those six states.

So 1, 2, and 3, that's Lorenz system 1.

Then 4, 5, 6 is Lorenz system 2.

And one and four is the only cross coupling that we're putting into the model.

That's this cell right here.

So we're cross coupling one and four.

You have two neurons, they have two neurons.

And then there's a little tin can between the two of you.

And that's inducing a global structure to all six nodes.

So you don't need to have every neuron wired to every neuron.

There's sparsity in this connection structure.

And technical details aside, that is going to relate to the partitioning, which we're going to be deriving a partitioning on the Hessian, which is a second order polynomial expansion of our model.

So I think that is a great place to go for today.

And then just to close, and then we can have last thoughts or what we want to talk about next week.

Just to reiterate, there's no claim either the original Lorenz system or coupled Lorenz system possesses a Markov blanket.

So the territory doesn't have a Markov blanket.

Our coupling doesn't even have a Markov blanket.

The claim here is that there exists a Laplace approximation to these kinds of systems that in a virtue of the zero elements of the Hessian feature Markov blankets.

So not has a Markov blanket, is, wants to be, did have.

Those are speculative interpretations that maybe future larva will discover to be the case or not.

But what this paper actually claims is very far from that.

Blue and then Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so here we're going to stop just as we're getting good, just as it's getting really good.

Okay.

It's the cliffhanger for next week.

I just wanted to leave off with where this figure is in the paper.

Like right under that figure, it says the names active and sensory or blanket states inherit from the literature where these states are often associated with biotic systems that act on and sense their external milieu.

So I'm like, why are they imputing sensory states onto particles?

Like this is where the great leap in the paper kind of happens for me.

And I'm like, okay, now my particle is sensing, which is like to me, okay, like I'm actually okay with that.

Like you guys know, you've seen me, like I'm pretty good with panpsychism at all or at overall.

And it doesn't really make a big deal to

big difference for me.

I'm still very interested, but it's something that a lot of people I think are going to get maybe tripped up by.

So I would like to hash that out.


SPEAKER_01:
And to say, well, there's absolutely no claim that real systems have a Markov blanket, you know, like the skin.

It's like, are we going to be talking about real systems and how it maps onto physical components of the real world and the mechanisms of sensory transduction or

Or is this about the Hessian approximation to the Laplace?

So sometimes very close to each other in the text, so that can make it a little bit ambiguous.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, very, very cool.

Yeah, Blue makes a good point.

I suppose what I'm sensing here, and correct me if I'm wrong, is that this is showing a way to show that patterns can be existing

within the covariance of attractor states or tractors just in themselves it could just be a blob of stuff right in amongst blobs of things and stuff and particles and then it also shows that there can be the ability for those dynamics to partition out so it's

kind of gives a bit of two ways it gives the partition out piece and then it also gives a way to have a blob this is a very technical term a blob of very useful stochastic chaotic states which don't need to be themselves blanketed but could be what becomes just sort of sensory states for instance but could be a reservoir

within a bigger reservoir.

Would that be a correct sort of assumption?


SPEAKER_01:
If we truly had no difference between our approximation and our incoming observations, like we had a perfect model,

then maybe there'd be a valid claim that the map was the territory.

And for systems that we define in software, it actually can be that way.

But for any real system, this approximation, there's always going to be a delta between the incoming observations and our approximation.

And so the claim here is that it's the Hessian, the second level polynomial expansion,


SPEAKER_02:
of our approximation that has some very nice mathematical properties not that the system has that or any specific properties dean yeah i would just speak to the idea that the skin is a great example because you can look at it only as a product as a limit or you can look at skin as a process i mean we know that all the processing that's going on there so

Again, do we collapse it down to one type of function as a product, as a limit, or do we see it actually as a process as well, as something that's dynamical, something that's constantly changing, and then that opens up the idea of what between means.

Now, I don't know if it takes it down to the particle level.

It seems like it does at those Planck scales,

I'm not really worried about that so much as I'm interested in the idea of what betweenness is because I don't know that skin automatically is a partition.

Sometimes it's a process as well.

So if we keep that open, that'd be something interesting to take up next week.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Yeah.

I think if anyone else has any comments, like what a fun,

paper and dot one.

We hit a lot of the warmup stretching and preliminary topics and contextualization that brought us like right to the vista of Mount Markov with further clouds behind even that.

But we're where we know that we can step into the dot two with a backpack that's prepared.

And then these are really interesting and clearly

either unresolved and or uncommunicated and or unapplied questions in literature in the state of the art, which is what is the relationship between these formalisms and specific nouns and verbs

in the world, the kinds of things that we're semantically engaging with.

And if it turns out that the semantics of a Markov blanket are not like the semantics of any other thing, or they're importantly different from the semantics of what we currently feel familiar with, great.

Or it would be interesting if they do map or overlap or encompass or nest within some other semantics that already exist.

But that's the question.

So we can just look at our final closing questions.

And if anyone has a thought, otherwise 32.2 next week on November 16th.

And we hope to hear from you.

If you would like to join the discussion live, just get in touch with us or contact us at active inference at gmail.com or just show up and ask questions or make comments in the live chat.

But interesting stuff.

We were, uh,

Little trepidatious with such a complex paper, but I think bringing simplicity and simple rules underlying complex behavior and how can our approximations be tractable even when the world is just infinitely surprising, those are some of the fundamental questions that this paper and Active Inference address.

So Blue, Stephen, and Dean, great work, and we will see everybody next week.

Bye.

## ElKVfCJrIHM

SPEAKER_01:
hello everyone welcome to actinflab to actinflab live stream number 32.2 it's november 16 2021

Welcome to the Act-Inf Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at some of the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good and fun video etiquette for live streams.

At this short link, you can see some of the upcoming streams.

This is our second participatory group discussion on the Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets paper.

And then in the second two weeks of November, we're going to be discussing Thinking Like a State by our friend and co-participant, Avil.

And we haven't yet set the papers for December.

So if you know an author who you'd like to invite, or if you yourself would like to join for several weeks of discussion of one of your works, then just let us know.

today in act imp stream number 32.2 we're aiming to learn and discuss and ask what if and what is and hold all these different questions at once we're in the second participatory discussion around the paper stochastic chaos and markov blankets by friston heinz ulzhofer da costa and parr and

And last week we had an awesome discussion in the .1 and we got right up to the cliffhanger where the M word actually was deployed.

And I think today we're going to sprint up to that cliff and then jump off.

So it'll be a fun discussion for those who are watching live.

totally write questions and comments in the live chat and steven and dean and i and anyone else who joins will be just more than happy to hear what you have to share and to um

roll with it as you write things.

So let's begin just by giving a introduction or a warmup.

So we can say hello, and then also just maybe what was exciting about the paper overall, or since we all participated in the dot one, what are you looking forward to in the dot two, or maybe how have you changed how you thought about it over the previous week?

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and

I'll save what I'm excited for until a little bit later and I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, good morning.

My name is Dean.

I'm in Calgary.

In the one week's time since we left off, I think this paper more than many of the other papers we've had conversations around breathes life into something that is typically perceived as

not very alive, it's just sort of a point to and an explanation of, but I think this is one of those papers where when people pick it up and start having conversations with one another about the kind of work that's being done here, it makes it really, really interesting.

It doesn't give us necessarily the answers that the authors could project would be given, and I really like that.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Dean.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
And I'll pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, good morning as well from Toronto.

I'm really interested in this paper, I think, because it does give a unifying perspective.

It does help with that unifying perspective, even though at first when you see things like stochastic chaos, it can be like, oh, we're going down another rabbit hole, et cetera, et cetera.

But actually...

rather than always justifying or talking about applied active influence through applications and quotient applications, there is some benefit to this kind of coming to the foundation.

So I'm excited by that.

And also actually following a conversation we were having earlier and the fact that we have this complexity weekend is some of the ways that complexity can be talked about outside of a more woo-woo kind of,

conversational sense at these foundational levels, which again seems to get into unnecessary detail.

Ultimately, I think it starts to allow some of these crossovers between applications of complexity and this to happen, which for me personally, I don't think I was necessarily able to articulate a year ago.

So I think some of this work does just help fill in some of those gaps.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

I agree.

The system that's picked up and turned around and remodeled throughout the course of the paper in a very narrative-driven way is the Lorenz attractor, which is the classic complex systems model.

So it just kind of plays into contemporary work on complexity and

so many other areas but and then also dean i really like what you said like the authors i hope will be able to join for a future presentation so we're in contact they probably won't join today but what the authors are putting out there and then how that's received and um communicated around and explored that's what's fun and um i know that we'll have many cool things to explore today

So let's jump to the big questions.

Then we'll look at the roadmap and try to remember where we got to yesterday.

And maybe a different big question is,

striking either of you or anyone in the live chat today.

And then we'll try to remember how far on our road trip we got last Tuesday.

And then let's see which sections we're going to get to.

And we have a bunch of other things kind of written down.

So the big questions that we had previously asked were, what is a good model of thingness in a chaotic, dynamic, and dissipative world?

How might this model or approach to thingness speak to system sentience?

And then there in little tiny font, it's sentience not in the phenomenological, like experiential, but greeting Serval, good to see you.

But sentience in the sense of thinking and feeling systems.

without worrying about the first person experience side, at least in this paper.

And then the key technical question of this paper, which broaches onto a million and a half other areas is what is a Markov blanket?

Just what are these blankets?

And how is one modeled, identified, defined statistically?

What are the pros and cons of different approaches?

And so that's some of the technical details that we'll get to.

So Stephen, thanks for raising your hand.

And then welcome, Serval.

After that, feel free to say hello and introduce yourself if you'd like.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I'm curious.

I notice here that we start with thingness, which I do agree is this big question of thingness is something that Carl Friston brings up quite a lot, but I think he's often...

he's the he in that part i feel he's often a bit of a lone voice in terms of really pushing the thing this side of things and i and i think it's really interesting that second question then of okay how does that speak to system sentience and you see now we move into systems right and okay thing this sort of to me is it gives rise to systems and gives rise to sentience however

I think it's thing.

This is still there, right?

Thing.

This is still the game in some ways of being maintained.

So that first question, because when we then get into the third question, thing, this can get lost and it's all about system sentience.

And I think there's something really interesting there because, um, there is a question of, I mean, it's, it's even as we say in those brackets, what it really means to have system sentience or even just system is, um,

probably rather ill-defined.

And I suppose to some extent is how much is it even needed?

How much can thingness be maintained as an equal partner in the game and not sort of passed over once we scale?

So I think that's a good piece of a provocation.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

And to what extent can things and systems be identified in a bottom-up way from measurements of dynamical systems?

Serval, would you like to add anything?

Or say hello?

Or bonjour?


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Serval.

I'm a complexity scientist.

I founded the Cambridge Research Laboratory, which is interested in building inactive models of social political changes, and I'm here to

see the discussion around the formalism of the paper, which I did not revise, and I therefore cannot make informed comments on.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Sir Val.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
I just want to add one thing to what Steve was talking about there.

I think what the big questions and what this paper addresses pretty directly is, can we accept a minimum of two, that there's an abstraction

and that there's a material aspect to thingness.

And marrying those two things is kind of what we're hoping to be able to do.

But it comes in two very discrete forms.

So what of that?

we call it thingness because it kind of spans both realms.

And that's what I think I take away from the idea that it can be chaotic and not.


SPEAKER_01:
Absolutely.

There's the map in the territory and the,

one thing that we're gonna return to is like the first map that we apply to the territory.

So already we're separating the territory and the map, but even the first map can be chaotic.

And then can we put a second map, the Laplacian approximation, as it turns out in the paper, can that second map

be one that gives us some properties that make it more tractable to handle like you know potholders taking something hot out of the oven give a better grip on the first map which gives a better grip in terms of actionable insight into the territory can that second level

both be more tractable, especially using computers, but also retain those chaotic properties, which we're going to see when they estimate the Lyapunov exponent of the Laplacian approximation.

So, Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
That's the recursion prior to the repetitiveness.

That's what I think this really gets into, recursion modeling.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.


SPEAKER_05:
So, Stephen?

Yeah, I'm going to put this as maybe a little bit of a question as well, but it's rhetorical if it doesn't want to be answered.

But I think that the thingness and the mark of blanket, because we get into that stage here, there is this, I think there tends to be a sense that, okay, we have a thing and because it's,

trying to sort of maintain itself in a dissipative world, then that's effectively a system, because it's got a Markov blanket and we're in that world.

But with this, it's like, well, look, you've got Lorenz attractor.

Then Lorenz attractor goes into thingness, right?

Now, and then thingness potentially goes into, probably with a few phases, system, sentient system.

So the question is, which side of thingness

is Markov blanket.

Does Markov blanket emerge from going from Lorenzo Tractor into thingness and then continue, or is it like Lorenzo Tractor into thingness, into Markovian blanketed thingness?

Curious what your thoughts are on that, and maybe this paper must shed some light on that.


SPEAKER_01:
Great question.

Let's look at the roadmap and just see how that comes into play.

So we talked in 32.1 about a few different ideas and we have some slides ready with just tabula rasa if we'd like to add notes or we can always modify slides and deal with questions as people are raising them.

Let's go to the roadmap though.

Okay.

So the roadmap of the paper is as follows.

In section one, there's an introduction.

In section two, there is from dynamics to densities.

So this is one of the really fundamental kind of linking events early in the paper

where dynamical systems dynamics are linked to flow systems like densities so this equivalence between dynamical systems and density driven systems is going to be finessed extensively in the paper so that's an introductory step that's very important to note

The Helmholtz decomposition is a tool from vector calculus that applies very well to densities and flows where it's usually applied, but because of what links were made in section 2, it becomes possible to take that Helmholtz decomposition approach to dynamical systems.

that is specifically visited and revisited and then moved beyond in the lorenz system that's one of those classical chaotic systems and a favorite toy of complexity analysis

The Lorenz system is moved beyond and then approximated with the Laplacian and then even moved beyond there.

So that's pretty much where we got to last week.

We tried to do a really solid grounding in first the equivalence between dynamical systems and density driven systems or two kind of representations of underlying systems that could be seen as equivalent.

And then we talked about the Lorenz system and about how it's chaotic and how chaotic means like sensitivity to small changes as quantified by the Lyapunov exponent.

And then we talked about how the Laplacian approximation, which is kind of like fitting a quadratic, which is kind of like letting the ball roll to the bottom of the bowl.

And this idea of like, well, if we can phrase the problem like a bowl,

then all we have to do is roll to the bottom there's only one bottom and we know which slope we're on so that's also called convex optimization because no matter where you are if you know that the problem is shaped like a quadratic curve like a bowl you can just instantaneously estimate the slope of the bowl and then just run downhill whereas if you're on a rugged landscape just you know you're lost in a mountain region we'll go downhill

you're going to get trapped into a valley potentially, and you might not make it out to the ocean.

But if you could reimagine that rugged landscape in a way that was more bowl-like, it would allow for tractable estimation of which way to move.

In section four, we get to the Markov blanket concept and the free energy principle.

And I think that's gonna be the really fascinating discussion is like, okay, so let's get what that Markov blanket, what is that partitioning?

What are we really talking about?

And then are we talking about the territory?

Are we talking about the Lorenz map or are we talking about the Laplacian map?

Where is this blanket partitioning coming into the picture?

And then how does that help us reduce our uncertainty about systems?

And what does it say or not about that underlying system?

And that's where we're going to be talking about particular partitions.

Of course, a favorite and recurrent pun, which is that particular means specific.

but also it means like a particle, like a autonomous particle drifting around in space.

And then section five really comes to a...

culmination with a discussion of the free energy principle alone.

And so I think it'll be interesting to discuss like what is subsumed into the free energy principle and why do we need one section Markov blankets and free energy principle, and then another section on just the free energy principle.

So that's kind of the roadmap, Stephen, and then deep.


SPEAKER_05:
yeah just a quick question see if this clarifies something which i think is what you're saying dynamics is um the dynamics more particular flow like so it's and densities while you could have a density of particles it's actually more like a probability density on wave functions would i be right in thinking is there's a kind of a wave particle

or actually a particle then wave way into this.

And that's partly how they're playing this out.


SPEAKER_01:
Someone with more experience with the formalism would be totally open to their contributions on that question.

My first take would be, you could make a dynamical systems model, like equations of motion for a particle floating around.

And so it's like, you're focusing on the first, second and third derivatives of movements

in XYZ space or tetrahedral space for some particles.

So a dynamical system model could be describing the movement of a particle.

But the flow that gives rise to the movement of that particle, it's kind of like figure and ground.

Like the dynamical equation features the movement of that particle.

Like I want to know the pendulum's location.

And so that's going to be a dynamical model of the pendulum.

Whereas the flow-based models,

like you pointed out, are much more about, well, what is the underlying space of the flow of that pendulum?

So it's like, if it's to the left of the bottom, it's like it flows this way.

And if it's to the right, it's like it flows that way.

And so that is about asking what is the underlying flow dynamics that do give rise to movement of potentially particles.

And those are why this meme is on the slide and why they are made in equivalence early in the paper, because it is like talking about the difference between the movements of a point through a space versus understanding the flow dynamics of that space that, yes, does give rise to the movement of particles.


SPEAKER_05:
And could I just ask one?

So almost it goes from just purely the momentum of a particle to this flow.

And the flow is kind of a bridge then between density dynamics, which is maybe more of a probability density of where it could be, which can map both to an object where an object might be, but also where a wave function might be in broad sense.

So then you're sort of going from literal particles in a classical sense to the flow.

And then the flow then bridges into density dynamics, which can be more probability orientated.

Is that fair to say?


SPEAKER_01:
yes particle is going to take a particular meaning a little bit later when we talk about the partitioning of states but i believe that's correct and also the density like you suggested ties much more closely to statistical density distributions like in statistics we're often interested in density distributions

of a special type like the area under the distribution summing to one the integral over a distribution being one allows us to treat it like a probability distribution and so that's the whole debate in quantum is it actually a wave or does that distribution of positional uncertainty merely describe our statistical inference on the location of something that's at a specific point so

Whichever side we want to come at this from, section two says it's going to be okay to use both.

And we're going to sometimes lean more on our left leg, and sometimes we're going to lean more on our right leg because there's tools that exist for one but not the other.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I don't know if this begins to answer Stephen's rhetorical question, but I think where most people get introduced to a Markov blanket, they get introduced to the idea that it's either a way of partitioning and dividing, or it's a way of being able to envelop or blanket.

And I think what the paper points out is that it's both all the time.

So you can, for example, find a box of cookies,

and see all the cookies settling at the bottom, or the person who's described as being creative uses that box of cookies as a leverage point to get more cookies off the top shelf.

Now it's a platform.

And now it's a mound.

And so we can see it both ways at once if we think of it as both ways at once.

It's not an or question.

It's that minimum of two piece again that is really fascinating about this that really kind of blows people up.

It's really both at once.

Then you decide which it's going to be.

And that's what I think is really fascinating for people who are just sort of start getting into this because they've been so habituated to saying, oh, it's a cookie jar.

Oh, it's a platform.

No, it's both.

And that's what we want to do.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.

And Marco in the chat wrote, like a boat in a stormy sea, it moves at the mercy of the seas and winds flowing forces with only its rudder, sails, and other limited mechanisms to steward the world's influence on its journey.

So Bucky meme one, unity is plural at minimum two.

Bucky meme two on his gravestone, call me trim tab, kind of like the rudder.

And that is exactly getting at the point of this paper, which is,

If we just were talking about a dust molecule floating in the air, then we could say, well, we could use the dynamical systems model of the position of the dust particle, or we could do inference on the flow of the room, and that gives us a different and complimentary totally co-extant picture, but that's a dust molecule.

What about active systems that have affordances that are able to do inference on action selection, choose different policies?

How do those active systems

do inference, that's the winged snowflake, that's the moth to the flame.

And those are the really exciting systems.

And that also speaks to the difference between what's called mere active inference, like the particle where we can still have this partitioning and still see it as a dynamics or a flow versus the adaptive active inference, which is then we're thinking about those systems where the particle, the particular states

are able to affect different policies and select between them in a way that acts as if it's resisting dissipation.

And those are the kind of exciting systems that we want to get to by the end of the paper.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_05:
And pulling on that idea of cookie jar, is the cookie jar is maybe almost a particle, a thing,

that is like leveraged, and there's a thingness which it becomes.

So say it has a thing about it, but there's a thingness of being an affordance.

So this is an interesting, just sort of came to me, but the thingness in itself is slightly emergent, because only by the process of trying to use it to get the higher cookie does another kind of thing emerge, which becomes a step.

So there's something interesting there about the Ness as an emergent, you know, is it ever a step?

Really?

But it's always, it's never not a thing at the same time.

So there's a, I think there's something quite interesting there in that emergent stroke, flow stroke, you know, literal sense.


SPEAKER_01:
And also, I don't know to what extent this is intentional, but thingness, we talk a lot about N-E-S-S, the non-equilibrium steady state or non-equilibrium stationary states.

And so it's like the things-ness, that's the thing.

The thing we're talking about is the things-ness.

So we're not talking and saying that the system is at stationarity.

We're saying that the things-ness exists

by virtue of how we're modeling it, has stationary characteristics.

And that is the thing as we model it, which is that always existing difference between the map and the territory.

We're not saying that the territory is even a thing.

We're saying the way we're relating and interacting with the map, which we totally made, no one's going to deny that, that maps everything.

is tractable.

I can hold the map in my hands.

That gives me better grip on my road trip.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_05:
That's a really... Yeah, I think also the thingness can tie into the idea that something ontologically...

comes into being through relation, through some sort of network dynamic in which it acts.

And actually, that speaks to this Lorenz attractor.

So the Lorenz becomes part of a network of an ontology of thing, which is really a thing in relation to what some other thing is.

Because obviously, the scale of the cookie box is quite a lot different to the scale of the atoms in the cookie box or the

Whatever scale we want to.

And then there's some sort of affordance level.

And maybe we can get out of the whole sentient system thing.

And it's like it's just an affordance for the thingness to maintain thingness.

It doesn't need to know about systems as such unless some creature happens to evolve a brain which starts to sit down working out system diagrams.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
two-legged ones potentially um otherwise it's like it's just things all the way up right let's now that we're 30 fun minutes in let's um sprint up to that markov cliff and then see where we go so figure one of the paper

is kind of making this first fundamental connection between the Lorenz system as defined by dynamical equations.

So the traditional Lorenz is defined more like the blue version with an equations of motion.

Well, it has a positive lyopinib exponent, which is to say that very closely located points diverge rather than stay in like a laminar flow parallel line world or converging.

So they diverge.

And that's what makes Lorenz system chaotic, ergo difficult to predict given measurement error and tiny perturbations due to even thermal noise, which is like kind of how pseudo random number generators work.

And then there's going to be an approximation based upon this stochastic solution.

And so the trajectory in the right panel here, it's the deterministic solution to the Laplacian form of the Lorenz

based upon the Helmholtz decomposition.

And so this is sort of like the version on the right that's usually seen in the state space model is almost like we're sampling stochastically from points along that racetrack.

So that was figure one.


SPEAKER_05:
We- Could you just explain that, just go over that one more time, just to clarify that bit.

I think I understand what you're saying, but it's kind of an important point you make there.

When you say deterministic solution,

That, I didn't, there is that, just to clarify what that means.


SPEAKER_01:
So the deterministic solution would have no noise so that the

The position at the following time is entirely determined by the non-stochastic state that it's in at the preceding moment.

Whereas when we talk about a stochastic form, it's like, that's like your car's driving

and there's thermal vibrations on the road.

Now, the Lyapunov exponent on that car at non-zero temperature is small so that the flow term dominates the vibratory term.

But there could be some other system where the difference between, well, if it's in an absolute zero world and just on the road, then it's going to go straight.

But once you introduce any wiggling,

When the system is chaotic, it has that positive Lyapunov exponent, then the tiniest wiggle causes the system to diverge.


SPEAKER_05:
That's really helpful.

So basically, normally we just, like with the deterministic thing, it's just whatever the initial conditions, if it varies slightly, but then once it runs, it will settle into something.

But if you've got the initial condition and you've got the perturbations due to noise...

as it's actually running, which adds, I suppose you could say, a little bit of an extra change in initial conditions to each state that the Lorenz attractor is moving through.

So, okay, that's helpful.

Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, and I'm going to just show this image.

This is, I don't know if it's the very, very first, but this is the image that Lorenz

used to talk about chaos in 1961. so i mean what's the difference between 76.8 and 76.85 it's imperceptible if your thermometer only had like three significant figures you wouldn't even be able to talk about the difference but i mean how different can it be and it turns out that they those two systems start imperceptibly different but

nearby points in chaotic systems do diverge.

And so it's like, okay, but they're still tracking each other, right?

It's like, well, no, wrong, later on.

And so, of course, a more chaotic system with a more positive lyopinib exponent diverges faster.

But any system with a positive leading lyopinib exponent is going to have divergence.

And so if you have a purely deterministic system,

or one without this kind of the operative induced chaos, then you can predict far out.

However, prediction matter experts, as Dean I'm sure will revisit us too, meet their match with chaotic systems.

And that's actually one thing I hope that we get to by the end, which is that by putting action in every loop and inference on action, we can still, whichever of these timelines we end up on,

we're going to be doing okay.

Because we're always readjusting our inference to whichever of these mountains we're on.

It's not like one of these is better or worse or more or less challenging.

Like they have the exact same upper and lower bound.

The only mistake would be to make a prediction and be super confident about it and be on the wrong predictive timeline.

but as long as we're always updating our predictions then either of these days are going to be okay but if we put on the jacket because we thought that it was going to be cold here and that's when it was hottest then we're injured but if we just think okay well we know we have the jacket afford in so we're just going to keep an eye on that as we watch the temperature and continue to update our predictions maybe then it'll be okay

So that was the initial Lorenz attractor.

Section three goes into the Helmholtz decomposition, which we've talked about in several other streams.

And we've seen it introduced as the breaking down of a vector field, the total current in this kind of electromagnetic representation into the irrotational, which is kind of like the straight line.

There's no rotation in those straight lines and the purely rotational solenoidal current flow, currency.

We've talked about solenoidal ingredient partitioning.

And then what this paper does, and I think the technical details are in the Appendix B of 16.

So that was the Bayesian Mechanics paper.

And then also there's this housekeeping big lambda.

that's in one of the appendices to this paper so that would be like something for someone else to help us understand a little bit of because it does matter and it's actually a key contribution because if

the landscape is changing moment to moment.

You can't just do the Helmholtz decomposition once and sail on that sea without updating your estimate of the partitioning here, of the decomposition here.

That decomposition, so again, dynamical systems, that's like the position of the car.

And then we're going to, because of section two,

having an equivalence between that dynamics and the flow modeling.

And one of the terms that shows up on both of these is the fancy J, fancy I. It's the self-information.

The first part performs a Riemannian gradient descent on the negative log of the steady state density, which can be interpreted as self-information.

So how surprised should one be to be at a given location relative to expectation?

So we talked about how like the potential energy of the ball higher up on the bowl is higher, and then the potential function drops, and that's the physical analogy to this more informational statistical distribution approach to the self-information.

And then in 3.1,

that self-information is going to be pursued and expanded upon for a relatively more simple case.

So we're going to identify, due to the Helmholtz decomposition, that there's this key variable which can be interpreted as like a potential function corresponding to the self-surprisal, and that self-surprisal term may have functional forms.

so we can have a function that describes how surprised we should be.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, if you could go to that last slide, the previous one there,

I like this.

It's quite useful.

So the Fokker Planck, if it's at an equilibrium, which we're not at because we're doing non-equilibrium steady state, but if it were, then it would be zero, basically.

It's at equilibrium, so it's not changing.

So there's no divergence because it's zero.

And then he's taking this Helmholtz composition, which in a way is like a vector, isn't it?

With a vector, you can split something's movement into x and y. So the gradient is coming out, and the solenoid is at right angles to the gradient.

So it's kind of like that trick that he does with accuracy and complexity.

He can say that there's a solenoid and gradient which go together.

for when it's still in a kind of a particular angular momentum sense.

And then there's that ability to, with the housekeeping, to then move it into the flow, which I'm not entirely sure.

I think that's the bit where we might need some, quite what, because flow could probably be more specifically thought about.

So now you've got this ability to sort of structure

through the kind of more particular context, the solenoidal and gradient.

And then there's this transition to a more kind of general variable, which can be just, we don't need to get the particulars now because it's a variational metric that just gets used in an approximation sense.

And then it follows into what you're saying.

Would I be on the right tracks with that?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not sure who he is, even though I have an expectation because it's a multi-person paper.

But just looking at these as like circles and triangles and squares, we can see that upside down triangle, fancy I of X is in both terms.

So there's like a Q multiplied by something and then a gamma multiplied by something.

And we see that omega

is defined as like the Q minus the gamma.

So these two terms, which were decomposed out from each other, get recombined into the final flow.

So that's just like if it were like A times X minus B times X, and then omega were defined as A minus B times X. So we're recomposing

a flow equation that still features this fancy eye.

And yes, we're solving that for a specific point that matters.

We want to solve that for where the ball is at the bottom of the bowl.

So there's a function that's going to tell us more or less in multiple ways, whether we're more or less away from the bottom of the bowl.

And again, it's not about the system being at stationarity.

It's about this decomposition having a Fock or Planck steady state.

Dean?

Oh, yes, you've got it.


SPEAKER_05:
Just one quick thing.

So at the bottom of the bowl, the gradient can effectively be zero, but solenoidal could still have a value because it can still be spinning around at the bottom of the bowl, but the gradient then... Because I noticed the gradient...


SPEAKER_01:
term isn't in the flow but the solenoidal term is oh the gradient is because q minus gamma is in omega so omega is this omega del fancy i is just these two terms combined okay okay yeah dean yeah i was just gonna say what


SPEAKER_03:
Typically when this is brought forward, it's easier to understand the decomposition and the recompiling if we view the blanket as a partition.

Where it gets a little bit more interesting is when the blanket is literally an envelopment.

And there's a physicist by the name of Keith Humphries who talks about emergence and he looks at that piece of it as well, because there's a polar aspect to this.

We can think of that in terms of positive and negative fields, magnetization and stuff like that, and how that is also a decomposition and a recompiling.

So I understand how it was presented in this paper,

That's the partition way of looking at it, right?

It's more or less, but there's also the positive and negative polar piece to this when we look at the Markov blanket as a blanket, as opposed to a separator.

And again, if we're holding up two things at once, this doesn't change that.

It's just making sure that we hold both things up at once, the envelopment and the divider.

I just want to bring that out there because, again, we can see it easier as a partition, like the skin as a partition.

We don't typically see the skin as a platform for sunscreen.

That's my point.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, this is a good point in terms of

You can imagine, at first I was thinking about gradient.

It's obvious that you've got a gradient that you can pass through maybe where the gradient's zero, but also solenoidal flow, I suppose, if things are moving around this way and it starts to turn and it starts to go the other way, at some point the solenoidal flow is also passing through a zero.

So they can both pass through a zero point.

It just wasn't as intuitive when I first thought about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And even if you have something that's spinning around, like something that's spinning in a circle, like a hammer thrower, it's actually continual acceleration.

That doesn't mean it's speeding up.

It means that the vector is continually changing.

So now our map is of that acceleration and it is unchanging in how it changes.

So that is to say that the system can have

in a different way of thinking about it.

Yes, a solenoidal component.

We're not saying that balls at the bottom of bowls are dead and unmoving.

We're saying in our map, there's only one point because we set it up to be like a bowl map where the derivative is zero.

That's the solution where the rate of change is zero.

So that's not to say that the system isn't moving.

That's to say that the flow steady state has been achieved.

In figure four, well, in figure three, we see the three states.

So this is like the cover of the GEB book, like kind of three different projections from a three-dimensional system.

The second versus the third, the first versus the third, and the first versus the second.

And we're seeing how there's,

movements of sampled trajectories, and they're kind of coming back to something that's bowl-like for any set of two dimensions.

So it's kind of like a three-dimensional bowl now, because any two of these dimensions, it's more like a regular bowl, the kind that soup goes in, but then the soup bowl is like

a down projection of a system that has an attractor in a higher dimension, potentially a much higher dimension, but the Lorenz, they're only modeling three because the particle only moves in three dimensions.

When we continue to investigate the bowl-like properties of our Laplacian approximation to that Lorenz system,

we see that there's a few different shapes of bowls depending on which angle we're gonna shine the flashlight from.

Some of them are like spherical.

So a spherical bowl doesn't have any specific correlation between the two dimensions.

It's like a cloud of points.

The regression is just like flat through it.

However, there are some

where the bowl is non-random.

So it's almost like if we were tracking the movement of a ball, it's getting jostled around in these bowls.

Well, like the one of the first and third, if that was the light we were shining, it would just look like it was a scatterplot.

There's a totally... The regression's flat.

There's not much information being provided.

It's...

within the bowl so it already has some nice dynamics but it's kind of within that attractor zone it's a scatter there's no pattern but clearly for the first and the second we see that there is a coupling now imagine if we didn't see the bowl because of course we don't it's not there that's part of our map we're just seeing the movement of that ball as we sample it through time and it would be only on this manifold

kind of being like spending more time going from the top left to the bottom right in these images.

So we're gonna take that idea and then connect it to the Jacobian and the Hessian, which is again, throwback to our matrix math slide and an awesome opportunity for anyone who wants to bring more of a technical interpretation to the stream.

The Jacobian is like the first,

the unnamed matrix is just like the matrix of position.

So that's like the first moment of the distribution.

And then higher moments are like the partial derivatives.

So Jacobian is like the first order partial derivative.

So that's like the slope of the ruler at that point.

And then the Hessian is the second partial derivative.

That's like the curvature.

So if it's a bowl, there's only one point where it's flat.

And then it could be flat and the bowl could be like up or the bowl could be upside down.

And so that's why it's important to also have this second curvature term to understand whether we're at a bowl like this or a bowl like that.

So that's kind of like calculus.

And those...

bowls, those bowl attractor shapes, which we're inferring using the Laplacian quadratic assumption.

So it's not saying that the Lorenz has these, possesses these, is these, it's saying that's the approximation that we're going to make.

It turns out that although there's somewhat of an unclear correlation pattern in the first derivatives, so like the movement to the left, it's not like it's correlated with movement up.

However, the second

partial derivative, the Hessian matrix, starts to look a lot like the covariance matrix.

So the actual positional covariance of these states with each other, so like the on diagonal is kind of obvious, like of course your position on the x-axis is correlated well with your position on the x-axis.

But there are correlations between state one and two, and the

That is recapitulated in the structure of the second order polynomial approximation to these attractors that are Laplacian approximations.

So again, up until that point in 3.5 and in figure six, Markov has not been introduced.

nothing has been said that word hasn't come into play it didn't come into the system's definition and so that's just really important because it's just showing like there's a lot of groundwork to get to where we make the markovian partitioning and so there's power and challenge in that stephen


SPEAKER_05:
Would I be correct in saying that effectively it's a case of approximating the states of the Lorenz attractor and that's what's currently there so this is different ways of showing that within some manifold state space and by approaching it in different ways it

reveals a different type of approximation.

The only thing I would ask, I'm a little bit confused why it does squish.

Maybe I'm missing something.

I can see why there'd be kind of a round one.

I'm just trying to work out how it squishes.

Is it something to do because of the solenoidal piece or the gradient piece, or is there something else?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So if we were talking about just a particle undergoing Brownian diffusion in three dimensions...

So it doesn't have any kind of correlations or any sort of structure.

It's just a random walk in three dimensions.

Well, then it would have a spherical error profile for all of these images.

But we are capturing structure that exists because Lorenz attractor has a specific specification.

So the states are whichever are being modeled.

If you cared about pressure and volume, that's your state space, that two-dimensional state space of the map.

It's not saying those are the only states of that system.

It's just, those are the ones that you're modeling.

In the Lorenz system, we have three states.

It's positioned in three dimensions.

But those three dimensions, again, also apply to a Brownian diffusing particle, which has a different Jacobian covariance and Hessian.

We're talking about those being calculated for the Lorenz system with the parameters that they selected.

And so we are pulling out covariances and connecting it to this second order polynomial approximation in the Hessian

for a system where the movement is not just a Brownian diffusion.

And so that's why there's structure in the covariance, and that's why the structure is interestingly recapitulated in the Hessian.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and all I would supplement that with is things, things, here we go, things that are in something that's moving, the thing that's moving, that's in something that's moving, that's on something that's moving has a tendency to have the negative charge things all congregate in one place down in the lower right corner and all the positive things all congregate in another place.

in the upper left corner.

That's the nature of movement.

And so that polar part of it is in play as well, if we consider it as part of these statistical transitions.

And that's, again, it's fascinating if you look at it a minimum of two things, so not just

not just as a partition, but also as an envelope, those things suddenly pop out at you and you see the pattern in a different way.


SPEAKER_01:
So I want to think about a physical system that's not chaotic, but will help us understand what this covariance matrix is.

So let's think about a children's carousel.

So it moves, the horsey is moving around in a circle.

And so that's like our unit circle, like the four quadrants.

And then also the horsey is going up and down.

okay so when you're you know so again it's like you know if you were at 12 o'clock on the carousel it's like you have a one for the y and a zero for x okay so i hope that makes sense now as it goes around it's like 0.5 and 0.5 again just using simple numbers here like the x and the y are correlated and then they're also correlated here so

one could say that there's like a correlation between the x and the y like they have a covariance together but now the z-axis is moving up and down independently so a system like that you'd see a covariance between the x and the y positions of the horsey and not that they're a different system but that they are

uncorrelated.

They don't provide mutual information on the Z axis, which is oscillating.

Now, if this paper had done, we model a deterministic carousel and it's kind of like putting the rabbit in the hat because the covariance matrix, it looking like this would be no surprise because it would have been defined that way.

So that's the key insight.

And one of the key contributions is like, they didn't put this in the hat.

This is

the OG complex system.

Yet the approximation, the Laplacian approximation pulls out a covariance structure that's extremely tractable.

And it turns out that it still has a very strongly positive and very similar Lyapunov exponent.

So it's like, now it's like a chaotic carousel,

And yet our approximation, our map of that chaotic carousel still holds the chaotic nature of the system while also giving these bowl-like attractors for any given two and even all dimensions or states considered simultaneously.

we're not conflating the simplicity of a non-equilibrium steady state with the complexity of the underlying density dynamics so just because the map is simple doesn't mean that the territory is and so that to me is a knockout blow against realism and for instrumentalism because this paper's saying nothing about the underlying system

Act-inf doesn't say anything about the underlying system.

We're talking about approximations and our maps of territories.

In other words, the probability density can evolve in a complicated fashion in attractors.


SPEAKER_05:
Go ahead, Steven.

And from what you're saying, it's like if I was to take that Lorenzo tractor, which is like a saddle.

People often talk about a saddle.

And you took the most...

agreeable way of viewing it.

So you view it in a box space this way and look for how it's moving that way and then flip the box like this and see how it's moving that way and flip the box like this and see how it's working that way.

Those approximations would be those three different distributions.

However, if you'd have moved it by like one degree,

that would be like messy, right?

So it's like, if you look, it's almost like this is how the Lorenz attractor taking the most optimal view of X, Y, Z can be mapped out as it transgresses through the saddle, if that makes sense, to bring it into a physical space.

But again, it's more complex than that because this is taking it where there's

the Fokker plank is zero to try and get the most optimum sort of, that's why those things are, follow a nice stable transition.

Whereas if you'd taken a sort of an odd angle, it might all be completely a mess.

Would that be a fair way of saying it?


SPEAKER_01:
If you were to take a perspective, a projection down,

that was a mixture of other axes than, I'm not sure what is gained by that, but I see what you're saying.

There's some particle moving in three dimensions and you can have a projection into any side of that cube, or you could take some sort of off kilter view that would be still some type of linear summation of all three.

So it hasn't really reduced the challenge of estimating, but yes, I mean, that's one way to see it.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
So I'm in complete agreement.

It has to be instrumental so that you can compare to the real, so the minimum of two.

You have to have multiple maths, not one, in order to be able to see this.

And that basically then reinforces the idea that the Markov blanket has to both, at the same time, be a partition and be an envelope.

It's both at the same time, a minimum of two again.

So again, all we keep reinforcing is this idea that if we over reduce, if we get to a place of under two, we may be deceiving ourselves.


SPEAKER_01:
And I think we'll come back to that soon.

So now, one hour in, we're able to get to the Markov blankets.

okay so previously we were talking about the case of a single markov blanket and so if we thought about like a bayesian graph so now we're thinking about three nodes each corresponding to the x y and z axis nodes a and b you know the first two axes would have like an edge between them because they have some type of statistical relationship

And then it would be disconnected from the third node because it doesn't have a statistical relationship with them.

Okay, so now to actually start to get towards more like the communicating systems or system in the niche that we're interested in, that's the target that we're trying to aim towards in section four.

The authors repeat the analysis of the previous section, but approximate two Lorenz systems that are coupled to each other through their respective first states.

Okay, so we're going to look at this matrix.

Okay, so notice that there are two, this, make that transparent.

So here's one Lorenz system

Here's the other Lorenz system, the red one and the blue one.

And then there in these other cells, these are the coupling terms.

So these are couples.

This is saying that the first state of each are coupled.

So it's a bidirectional coupling and that it's saying like state one, the fourth state on the matrix, like matrix row and column four is the first state of the blue system.

The first state of the blue one, the top left of the blue and the top left of the red are coupled through the off-diagonal green boxed terms.

If this was all zeros, nine zeros here and nine zeros here, we would have two independently evolving Lorenz systems.

So we kind of took the Lorenz system

the three by three matrix that specified the dynamics of that system.

And then we just made another, now a six by six matrix with two Lorenz systems that would be evolving statistically independently unless we introduce this targeted coupling.

And they say this form of coupling was chosen to be as simple and symmetric as possible.

Okay, so this is like the next step, but it's a difference that makes a difference because this is going to change the total dynamics of it.

If you had just the red and just the blue, you could like split that matrix and you'd be getting the exact same modelability because the systems wouldn't be interacting.

But now we've introduced these terms, even if we only had one, where you can no longer divide this matrix into sub matrices that perfectly describe the time evolution of the system.

So seven, figure seven,

is like figure three.

So it's similar, we're taking like sort of pinpoint locations on the Laplacian approximation of the Lorenz system.

And now seven is doing the same, but it's looking at these two synchronized systems.

Or maybe it's better to say that

there's two coupled systems.

Yes.

And due to the structure of their coupling, it results in an entangled movement pattern such that their trajectories have very, their trajectories are informative of each other.

And that's also reflected by this flow diagram where clearly they're,

movements exist on a manifold

that's in a restricted space of the possible.

So two people, Brownian diffusing in two separate rooms, you'd get that circle scatterplot.

Two people who are tied to each other, you would see a perfect correlation.

And so we're seeing something, even though each system has complex and even chaotic endogenous dynamics, we're seeing that the introduction of this coupling term


SPEAKER_05:
allows the systems to actually empirically have entangled behavior steven we've now got lorenz systems as opposed to an attractor and i'm curious when does it go from an attractor to a system is it because is that does the coupling effectively start to create more systemic

nature or, you know, I'm just curious about that.


SPEAKER_01:
Um, systems, the Lorenz system is just these three.

This is the specification of a Lorenz system and it has, it's a chaotic attractor.

And so now we're talking about two of them.

So there's two coupled Lorenz systems, but it doesn't make sense to talk about two coupled attractors because that's not what's coupled.

The systems are coupled as per the matrix specification.

And then it doesn't even make sense to couple the attractors.

The whole point is there is an attractor now by virtue of the coupling of the Lorenz systems.


SPEAKER_05:
Is it almost like once you start to have something and you're going to relate them,

As soon as things relate, there's a system because there's a relational quality to it.

Whereas previous that it could be a mathematical formalism.


SPEAKER_01:
It was still described as Lorenz system.

So I wouldn't get too hung up on that word, but yes, systems have multiple interacting parts.

Okay.

Figure eight, just like seven revisited the format of three, eight is going to revisit four

And now we're going to get to where we start to see the partitioning.

Figure eight's going to revisit four.

So remember the first partial derivative, the second partial derivative, and the Jacobian and the Hessian respectively, and then the covariance.

So we're going to do that same thing that we did on a three by three, but now we're going to do it on a six by six.

The log Jacobian looks a lot like this.

The non-zero cells in the specification of the system

which is the system itself for systems that we get to specify.

It looks a lot like this.

But again, for territories we don't get to specify, the map looking like this does not say something specific about the territory, but it's not super surprising that we actually see like similar this top right has like no correlation, like one and three are not correlated.

and we see that little chip missing here and here.

So we see a lot of the same dynamics at play within each of the coupled Lorenz systems, but also we've introduced a coupling.

Now that coupling induces a new and different covariance structure.

Look at these gray squares in the off diagonals.

Now one and two of system A are coupled to one and two of system B. Less so, a little bit grayer than the one that are within each system, but still very marked bidirectional synchronies being induced.

interesting piece comes into play when we look at this second order approximation and that's where we see that several cells can be identified so here we have like the magenta uh mute please steven thank you the magenta and the red are those first states of system a and b those are the ones that have the coupling on the fourth okay

then you have the other two states of system a in teal and the other two states of system b in dark blue so it's almost like we have four kinds of states four kinds of states out of these six of course you could say well each each state is unique great totally true they're different states that's why we have those different dimensions in our model but

there's going to be some interesting things that fall out as a function of us separating out the two systems and then separating out parts of the system that interface internally and externally, and then parts of the system that do not directly, by virtue of how we know we specified the system, do not couple out.

Again, the fascinating thing is that like state two of system A and state two of system B have a covariance.

That's like maybe a mirror neuron.

Again, using a more like realistic mapping, it's like there's some internal part that is only interacting with other internal parts by virtue of how the system is defined.

And yet these two parts in each system, which are not directly interacting by virtue of how we set up the system, have covariance.

So that is what leads us to this numerical analysis, which kind of

provides a little bit stronger and different empirical evidence.

So it's not just an analytical formulation, it's a numerical simulation where we can see that when we actually let that system play out, that even when states start very correlated, like we just start the third and the sixth states in a very similar position, so they start out with a high partial correlation coefficient,

when we run out that simulation through time, it ends up trending towards zero partial correlation.

So we're recapitulating the correlation patterns of the system, even when it starts in a more correlated place.

And so that suggests that some very essential

aspects of the system are being isolated and tractably handled by this kind of partitioning of coupled systems so it's pretty interesting now we've seen this top dive oh dean yes and then we'll just just real quickly daniel what it also says is that hyperbolic is also existing in this pattern although it's not necessarily being um


SPEAKER_03:
materialized in these diagrams, it's also there.

I mean, what that's what this explains is that there can be continuity, there can be alignment, and there can be hyperbolic function within all at the same time.

Again, that's I just want to, again, I just want to point to the non obvious, but it's still there.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

So we've seen this top of Stephen.

Yes.


SPEAKER_05:
I was also going to add that by showing the nature of the coupling, like varying the nature of the coupling that you showed, it can reach a different sort of state, non-equilibrium steady state in some ways.

Would that be true?

There's a different pattern emerges as, so it could speak, maybe I'm overextending this, but changing the nature of how things couple is,

could in a way change the sort of states which things can fall into.

So you could almost have multiple states being inferred based on how the coupling is set up.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh yes.

I mean, we would throw out any model that treated two people tied to each other as simply moving the same way as two people in different rooms.

It is the coupling of systems that influence their behavior.

And again, we're not talking about the causal structure of the world territory.

We're talking about the models that we got to specify and how changing the coupling pattern changes their behavior.

Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
And Stephen, when you're taking the abstraction here off the page, so you could set up your programming, for example, that says, okay, I'm willing to sponsor somebody because I want to mentor them in bricklaying.

You can start with that, or you can start with, there's two people that are interested in bricklaying, but the first thing we have to address is whether there's a potential for positive entanglement.

In real terms, that's how you can flip the abstraction into the likelihood of those entanglements turning out, extending, because the people will actually be relatable to one another.

So that, I just, again, I'll bring that up because that's how we turn the abstraction into the, so what does that look like?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, Stephen, something quick on this, otherwise we'll get to 10.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, yeah, just very quickly.

Yeah, so that speaks to, because we often think about the model on the inside, the generative model and the external states and, you know, the model trying to understand what the external states are doing.

But this speaks to the ability to change the way the blanket is coupling.

So, you know, how much work is going on in terms of,

enabling there to be information, variational free energy information being used in the generative models, how much is being done by actually changing coupling dynamics in the blanket

Is that, it's even feasible that, you know, because that in itself will start to yield more and more ways for the generative model to start to extract and make inferences based on what's going on externally.

So that also helps, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
So as a heuristic thought pump, yes, great.

But actually the blanket is downstream of the coupling pattern.

So it's like changing the coupling of a blanket is a little bit of a cart before the horse because there is the coupling of the system.

And that is what induces partitionings, which we can then map to Markovian assumptions.

So it's like, you know, when you put on headphones and you're listening to this, yes, a different blanket is in play because the partitioning is different, because the coupling is different between other states in the world.

Dean on this?

And then let's go to 10.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'll be real quick.

So Charles Saunders Peirce's abduction doesn't guarantee that when you walk in later and see beans in one hand and a bag of beans in the other, that you'll get to a... Okay, I just lost Dean, so I'm going to continue.


SPEAKER_01:
So in figure 10, but he was talking about abduction in C.S.

Peirce.

kind of that flipping that.


SPEAKER_03:
I understand, you're right.

It is the cart ahead of the horse.

And sometimes that helps.

Not saying it's, and I know you're agreeing with me, but all I'm saying is we shouldn't just assume that it only goes one way.

Horse first, cart second.


SPEAKER_01:
yes and in fact partitioning different imagining differences ways it could be different absolutely this is how we are going to apply and ask what is if for active inference like what is is like what is the blanket states given a coupling pattern well there's an answer

Sensory states are the ones with incoming statistical dependencies, and active states are the ones with outgoing statistical dependencies.

Those are the blanket states.

What if the coupling were different?

Then what would the blanket be?

So yeah, it's not that that first blanket that you identified is being changed.

What's being changed is the coupling, which induces a different kind of covariance amongst the states, but it can be almost thought of

in a cart before the horse way.

So just to recap this nomenclature, which we've seen before,

So we have external states, sensory states, active states, and internal states.

B is the set of blanket states.

So this is one of the innovations of Friston et al.

beyond Pearl 1988, beyond Markov et al.

earlier, earlier, earlier, is that blanket states, which in the non-FEP act-inf world are the set of states upon which

Conditionally, internal and external states are independent.

Those blanket states, again, we're going to partition them into incoming and outgoing statistical dependencies, sense and action.

Now we have autonomous states alpha, which is the set of

active states and internal states.

Autonomous states are the ones that for systems that we design, we get to control.

We get to control our internal states.

We get to control our actions.

We don't get to control directly the sensory input.

You can close your eyes so that it's darker, or you can move your head so it looks differently.

And maybe you'll even be right about what sensory information comes in then.

but you can't just say, I want different sensory information coming in.

So those are the autonomous states.

And then there's the particular states.

The particular states are the whole particle.

That's the blanket states, which are a sense and action, and the internal states.

So the particular states are like the whole particle floating around in the room or the whole cell or whatever, again, to give physical interpretations.

And then the autonomous ones are like the things that the cell can control.

or the thing that the system designer can control.

So we have autonomous states, which composed of internal and action states, blanket states, action and sense, particular, all three on the right side.

And these are all being defined as a partitioning, a cleaving apart from external states as modeled, not of the territory of the map only.

Steven?


SPEAKER_05:
And as we mentioned here, this paper gives a way for this to emerge from the very most basic principles.

And then we have, like you described, the blanket states, the autonomous states.

But of course, in...

any sort of system, organism, non-equilibrium steady state, they're always nested.

So it's not like there will be a whole nested levels of Markovian blankets.

So when we emerge at higher levels,

we might be emerging.

It's not like, unless we made our blanket, there'd be no blanket.

There's going to be blankets all the way up and down.

So as a blanket starts to be formed or brought into play, then the,

the nature of how those blankets come into play starts to draw in the idea of coupling.

So maybe there's some of those things that you just mentioned there about there's not a dependency.

The fact that we're creating something from first principles doesn't mean in the real world without the first principles, we can't make a blanket.

because in other cases it's going to be sort of emergent through more coupling between blankets because i know we're talking about the blanket but it's also good about the blanket in this scale and then the blankets in plural at the multi-scale okay yeah so within


SPEAKER_01:
internal states, again, these are statistical dependencies.

So this one can have other things happening.

It's like a black box within each one.

And so that is for people who expect to see the mechanics of the system, that's a disappointment.

But for people who want to model real systems, including machines, it's a huge advantage because it allows us to go in keeping the map territory distinction totally apparent, which is the real transparency we need from our machine learning models.

You know, there's not going to be a transparent explanation for how 500 variables interact, but we can transparently see potentially how the map and the territory are distinguished.

Now that's where we get to their definition of Markov blankets.

So let others read through and work through the math and critique it and build on it.

But we're talking about boundaries based upon sub matrices of the total state space of the system.

So like, this is just two coupled systems that we're talking about here, where we were studying like system A and system B, each is Lorenz.

We added the coupling to one and four, and that's where we saw a new pattern arising.

Why does a particular partition comprise four sets of states?

Is it because tetrahedra are the minimum polyhedra in our world?

In other words, why does a particular partition consider two Markov boundaries?

The reason is that the particular partition, again, particular states, blanket and internal.

The particular partition is the minimal partition that allows for directed coupling with blanket states.

Sensory states can influence internal states, incoming dependencies, and active states can influence external states, outgoing dependencies, without destroying the conditional independencies of the particular partition, as shown in the upper panel of figure 10.

So very cool how we went from one coupled system or from one system with chaotic dynamics, made an approximation, and then showed that it had certain well-behaved aspects.

And then we took like the next step up, which is to couple systems in a way that we designed.

And that gave a new manifold that the systems were using.

acting entangled as if within and then here's where we get that very fun claim that there's no claim either the original Lorenz system or coupled Lorenz system possesses a Markov blanket we're not describing the territory I don't even think we're even describing the first level of the map

The claim here is that there exists a Laplacian approximation to these kinds of systems that in virtue of the zero elements of the Hessian feature Markov blankets.

So,

This is one reason why, while also acknowledging that there's many perspectives and so much to learn, that we do want to be precise with our language, because it's easy enough to say that the system has a Markov blanket, or there is a Markov blanket in the system, or all these other ways which prepositions and nouns might be combined.

And those might be so misleading, it could be truly incredible.

So it's a word of warning because as we figure out exactly what the technical details are and continue to clarify here, it will matter which natural language words we use to describe it.

And it really does matter.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
So let me add to that, Daniel.

So on an abstracted level, we can frame the problem as in or out.

And then when we translate that into the physical space, we know when something is entangled or when something is different.

But I think what this allows us for on the abstract level is to sample the Markov blanket

as in and out.

It gives us the potential for a second way of looking at how those two things work together.

The Markov blanket has both a divider and an enveloper.

Do you agree?

So on an abstracted level, it's very important to be precise, but if we include this,

we have to accept the fact that on an abstracted level, in and out must be part of our repertoire, not just in or out.

Because one is more precise, what is active inference, while the other allows for what if active inference, the and.

Would you agree?


SPEAKER_01:
I think I agree.

I'm just imagining that it could be possible to design a system where there was one coupling going out, but there was no coupling back in.

So one could devise edge case matrices that have various kinds of properties.

Would those even be good maps of systems that we care about?

Probably not.

So for some of the basic attributes like of communication, like of course, if one person's not wearing their headphones, like, yeah, the systems are coupled.

One person's talking and the other person can hear them, but not return any information.

So it's like, that's interesting.

It's a type of coupling that systems can have.

And it has a different blanket because of that.

But especially for systems where we want to think about states that are influencing the environment and vice versa, whether it's communication or stigmergy or coupling or collective behavior, that whole class of systems, it's extremely important to have, of course, in and out and more and less and different.


SPEAKER_03:
I wouldn't drop or.

Sorry, Stephen, I just got to get this in.

I wouldn't drop or.

I'm actually suggesting that this tells us we must also contemplate and.

So that's like saying, okay, so which is more important, the positive ions or the negative ions?

They're going to congregate.

And we can tell the difference, but we shouldn't apply a value all the time.

There are times when we can just see the difference and accept that for what it is, as opposed to always jumping to the idea that something has to be more or less, that the positive ions are more important than the negative ones.

Maybe they are, but we shouldn't jump to that right away.

Done, I'm done.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, closing thought on this, Stephen, and then we're going to get to free energy principle.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so yeah, just mention a little bit to what Dean said there, like, yeah, if something's a charged particle, how much is the system of the molecule showing the distribution of charge, and how much is it the quality of the thingness of that thing, right?

So I suppose, and that becomes, I don't think there's a definite transition.

And I'm glad you went back to this diagram.

This is the one I just wanted to mention there then, just to...

The arrows there on the right, so where sensory states, it shows that the sensory states are related to the same external states as the action states are affecting.

So it shows it's almost like there's a regime of attention.

So it's not, the sensory states aren't reading something coming in

about something which is completely unrelated to you know it's not like i'm looking i'm acting in front of me but actually my eyes in the back of my head right so my sensory state there's there's an alignment and and then when i look to the the left this this coupling that's going on then between

in the way that it's set up between this, it's saying it's not a Markov blanket when it's saying it's a coupled system.

So it's sort of saying in a way that this more slightly more nascent version, there's kind of, there's still a spookiness about it, I suppose we might say.

There's sort of a, it's not, it doesn't drop out as far as a Markov blanket.

There's that kind of,

resonation going on and i suppose somewhere between left and right you start to become you you meet the the conditions of a markov blanket and i suppose you know that's an interesting point


SPEAKER_01:
I don't want to just make the water murky with too many terminology.

We haven't brought attention in.

It's not related to what we are discussing here.

But I see what you mean that, yes, if actions were influencing state A, you know, your actions were moving something up or down, but you were observing the left-right.

Yes, that's a different kind of system than if you're observing and acting on the up-down movement of something.

That's not a regime of attention, but I know what you mean.

let's get to the fep okay finally remember that edges reflect statistical relationships which is the other side of the coin of saying that the absence of an edge reflects a conditional independence

so one can provide a definition of the conditional density over external states so probability density that's why it was so important to go from dynamics to densities in section two and we're going to think about that external density probability density conditional statistical density as being parameterized by the conditional expectations of internal states given external states here's the formalism

see how the coupled systems have a flow where like, given where you were on one, even if it were a little noisier, as long as it looked like an oval, as long as you were like, you'd know that if you were low on the left, you were going to be low on the up and down.

And if you were further to the right, you'd be higher up on the Y axis.

Okay.

But imagine if the flow was like in a circle, you'd say, okay, we're at X on the zero.

Well,

you really don't know because you could be low, you could be high.

Or imagine if it was just like a scatter cloud, no matter where you were, you wouldn't, like it was everywhere in the box, you wouldn't really know.

But because there's a manifold, then this admits the possibility of a diffeomorphic, which means like sort of like function-like and stretchable map between the sufficient statistics of the respective densities.

not the territory not the first map i don't even know if we're at the second map anymore we're talking about sufficient statistics of densities of approximations okay i think it's a death blow for realism personally but i would love to hear somebody who thinks it's not the existence of this mapping rests upon a continuously differentiable and invertible map which is linear under laplace approximation

There's a few technical pieces there, but it's almost like we set up the system in a way that was defined only by its coupling.

But then we also got to choose our approximation approach

And it turns out that with a system with interesting coupling dynamics, enough to befuddle almost every other kind of model out there, the approximation has a really nice relationship that recapitulates aspects of the system and lets us map, like if we're on low on here, we can go to low on here and low on here to low on here.

Like it's a kind of, it's a function that can go both ways.

And so that is going to be the relationship sigma mapping between the internal and the external states, which was explored more in the Bayesian mechanics paper number 26.

This means the autonomous flow can be expressed as a gradient flow on a free energy functional of the variational density.

Here are those four states, four kinds of states, external, sense, action, internal.

And those are going to be expressed as a tuple.

It has to be, because it has to be all four of those states co-evolving.

And those have a gradient flow, gamma and then the upside down triangle.

plus the solenoidal flow.

So remember way back when, when we saw that we had Q solenoidal, G gamma for gradients, and then lambda for housekeeping.

Okay, so now that is coming back into play

The solenoidal is still a single term.

That's just the potential function, that self-surprisal and one solenoidal term.

Then we have a gradient over these four states and then the lambda housekeeping.

That can be rewritten.

And now pi, again,

let the ontology develop so that we can resolve some of this, but notice how particular states pi are the blanket and the internal, okay?

But how have we usually used pi?

Policy, action selection.

So this is a different pi.

the free energy functional on particular states, particular states, let's call them, equals the self-surprisal on the particular states plus a divergence term.

That is the form that then lends the ability to interpret that free energy functional on particular states

to be rewritten in several ways including energy minus entropy that's a very classical chemical way to talk about free energy to be phrased as the divergence between the q distribution on external states and the p distribution on external states conditioned on particular states

plus the self-surprisal of those particular states, or the one that's closest to the Bayesian information criteria on Bayesian modeling world, but still being shown as equivalent to, is the accuracy minus model complexity and the evidence lower bound.

So that's where we've seen these formalisms come out many, many times, but we're approaching it from a very different way and a lot more bottom up.

And again,

I think, but again, would be open to people correcting in a way that fully embraces the map territory distinction and makes no bones about it.

Whereas if you just pop in from the top with these formalisms, it might seem like they're describing aspects of the system.

But I hope that the way we've approached this over the last like six hours of live streams, literally, and the way that the authors wrote it so carefully makes it clear we're talking about these formalisms on,

probably not even the first map and maybe the second map or summary statistics thereof.

These are relationships that are intrinsic to our approach of map making because we did the Laplacian approximation, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

Steven, and then Deep.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, this is very helpful.

I might just ask we go and walk through the very first sentence again in a second, just because I think it'd be helpful just to reiterate.

But from what you're saying, and I hear this really clearly, is that the particular states and the thingness of maintaining particular states, potentially, or of whatever those particular states persist,

effectively then is the same when at a higher order level over time and space as a policy because let's not bring policy in picture yet we just haven't gotten there but states and internal states okay i won't i won't jump the gun on that but so um i i suppose the the the point is just to say that we we can still be in the realm of thingness

Okay, we can still be in the realm of thingness because we're talking about particular states of things.

So we haven't got, and I won't say beyond that.

And then maybe just to go through the ontology, not just of that first sentence, just to reiterate, just to get it clearer.

Again, autonomous flow, expected internal state.

Could you just recap that just to just unpack that a little bit more, just so that it's a little bit clearer?

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
So the autonomous flow, so autonomous states are actions, which are not, we're not even bringing policy selection in.

So it's the right direction we want to go.

We want to be talking about internal states that are actually doing planning as inference

that affect their action states.

But for now, we're just treating the action states as outgoing statistical dependencies.

And then we're just, we're pausing on how the actions are selected.

We're just, because in the Lorenz system, there's no policy selection, but there are external states that are modified by states.

Those are the active states.

So it's almost like we can talk about action without policy inference.

So the autonomous states, the autonomous flow,

at the expected internal state.

So these are expectations of autonomous states, action, outgoing, and internal states can be expressed as a gradient flow.

So now it's like, we're going to, rather than have a six state system, we're going to rewrite as four states.

remember we pulled out four kinds of nodes and now we're going to express a flow, not in a six dimensional space where each dimension was a measurement that we were making, but express a flow over the four kinds of states.

And then that means that even if there was a bunch of internal nodes that were communicating to each other,

we could still use this fourfold breakdown, hashtag William Blake, hashtag Bucky, hashtag Fristin, no matter how many specifics were inside the internal or how many blanket states there were, like how many nodes in the graph or how many external states, because now it's like a flow over kinds of nodes

And then that, because the nodes are defined by their directionality of relationship, like how they influence each other, right?

Like internal and external, we know don't directly influence each other.

They're conditionally independent based upon blanket states, et cetera.

That allows us to write formalisms that are like evergreen and can be expressed as flow.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I would just say that when I first encountered these kind of formalisms, I always ask, and then what happened?

And that's when I coined the phrase, when in doubt, zoom in, zoom out.

But I didn't want that zooming in and zooming out to be collapsed just to the optical zoom.

I assumed that your legs wouldn't become paralyzed when you picked up a telescope or a microscope, that you would still zoom in and zoom out by moving.

So the inference is in doubt.

So how do you overcome that?

You become more active, but not just with your eyes.

You actually pick yourself up and move yourself around a little bit more.

You don't just have to be on the north end of the carousel.

Sometimes you can pick up a ladder and look down on it as well.

And that'll give you a whole new set of data or more complimentary data, a different collection.

And so that's why I think it's really, really good to be able to see that and understand what it implies.

It basically says, if you're not sure, act some more.


SPEAKER_01:
How could I disagree with Acton for a surf?

Let's just look at this slide then, Stephen.

So this functional, the flow over the four kinds of states that is using this blanket partitioning paradigm can be expressed in several forms.

Expected energy,

E, big E is expectation.

Expected energy minus the entropy of the variational distribution.

Remember the Q variational distribution is like the one that we get to control.

Q of mu, that's the Q of internal states, which is equivalent to the self-information

fancy I, plus the KL divergence between the variational and conditional density.

That's this KL divergence term, which is always greater than zero.

So self-surprisal is always zero or greater.

You can't have negative surprisal.

And then the divergence is always gonna be positive as well.

This can be decomposed into accuracy and complexity.

So that's this third framing.

And in that setting,

Negative free energy becomes the evidence lower bound or ELBO, which will be familiar to many people with machine learning backgrounds.

Okay, amazing.

So those are the three different formalisms and how they fell out.

This is the basis of the free energy principle.

Wait, what's the free energy principle?

Put simply, it means that the expected internal states of a particular partition at non-equilibrium steady state can be cast as encoding conditional or Bayesian beliefs about external states.

That's the free energy principle in this paper, not the first and not the last way it'll be defined and not the only, but that's how they discuss it here.

And basically we moved from early on, it's like tying our shoe with the density to dynamics side.

And now we have this whole universe of formalisms that connect

free energy looking formalisms like chemistry with information theory formalisms.

So thermochemistry with energy and entropy with thermo information, divergence and self-information to information and inference with accuracy minus complexity as a modeling heuristic.

So that's big.

Re-energy is big.

And then they immediately go to talk about physiological perspectives and how that surprisal function that constitutes the potential is log model evidence.

So if you're getting good evidence for your physiological model, you're spending a lot of times in your preferred and expected physiological states.

Stephen?

Stephen?


SPEAKER_05:
amazing this this really ties into the active inference paradigm shift because okay traditionally if we're going to have represented like traditionally representationism for instance like you were saying it does really really um throw that out in a way because if i have 100 cameras normally

and I took 100 different cameras all taking a photo, it's going to make it 100 times more blurry in that sense.

However, in this sense, 100 sources in this noisy dynamical gives me 100 ways to integrate free energy reduction

And even actually the noise of me moving it a hundred ways by a hundred cameras gives me more and more informational thermodynamic ways in.

So that just shifts very much the way we might think about how to know about how to act in the world.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Let's continue on and we'll probably do a few minutes after the hour to get to these last few points.

So

we've been talking about different ways that we can talk about the free energy functional of the particular states 5.1 is where this idea of the internal states as a generative model and self-evidencing or like the minimization of self-surprise

is really leaned into so the alternative and deflationary perspective rests on noting that the free energy gradients are also the gradients of self-information so it's like the free energy itself is a wind that's difficult to latch on to so the free energy bowl the one where you'd be doing strictly as well as you could if you were on the bottom of it

we're not on that bowl.

But the one that we can be keenly aware of is our self-surprisal.

So if the self-surprisal gradient is aligned with the free energy gradients, then reducing our uncertainty about sensory states incoming helps us on the way towards minimizing free energy gradients, reducing that difference.

The organism wants to be minimally surprised about expected and preferred observations.

And those are the perceptions or measurements.

More technically, it wants to be minimally surprised about expected states.

And then preferences are going to play a key role when we talk about active systems that do resist dissipation.

This is where the moth to the flame comes.

And I just, I love this plot arc from 2006.

Ice Queen Fristin with the winged snowflake.

And then, you know, things are heating up for Act Dymph.

Others are being drawn like a chaotic moth to the flame.

They come close, but then it burns.

And then they fly away.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, dear.


SPEAKER_01:
So one could imagine these kinds of systems to be like stochastic chaos.

And that could be, now again, we're thinking about, previously the Lorenz system was like maybe a particle in a chaotic weather system.

So that was like the weather systems that Lorenz was studying.

But now we're gonna be thinking about particular states, like a particular moth, that's able to not just have outgoing statistical dependencies,

but to do policy selection.

So this is where we actually get adaptive active inference.

And again, if there's two kinds of moths, some of them are just particles and then they get burnt when they get burnt and they don't when they don't, some will survive and some won't.

But the ones that do enact effective policy selection

are going to be persistent even a day later so then the lepidoptera have been around for millions of years so is it really any surprise that the moths have adaptive behavioral systems but that when the niche changes like with electric nighttime lighting that that doesn't entail that it's going to instantly be the adaptive system for that new niche

We can think about the motion of a moth attracted towards a flame, but constantly thwarted by turbulent or solenoidal air currents.

Because active states influence sensory states and possibly external states, this would look as if the particle, the moth, was trying to attain its most likely state in the face of random fluctuations and solenoidal dynamics.

So it's like, there's those arrows, the irrotational component are like converging the moth to the flame, but then like overshoot and the windy room are blowing it around.

And so again, there's the moth in the room and we could look at it in the X, Y, and the Z. And if the candle were in the center of the room, it would be like a bowl

that the moth were converging towards for any two dimensions that you looked at and indeed all three dimensions when considered together.

And the movement of that particle, the dynamics of that particle would be related to something about the flow of the air in that room with a pullback attractor.

This perspective emphasizes the active part of self-evidencing, sometimes referred to as active inference.

So we were calculating the potential, the self-surprisal, the outgoing dependencies for particles before we talked about policy selection.

And that is showing mere active inference as it's called.

But then when you think about the real world where only the anti-dissipative systems persist and the successful ones even more so, that's where policy selection comes in to play.

And that's actually where this paper ends.

They basically just bring it to that point

and say all systems are gonna be able to be framed within this way, again, not the territories, all of the approximations that we make will have these attributes.

And then we can imagine that there are some systems where the internal states are not just acting as if they're doing conditional expectations on external states, but then they take those conditional expectations, like about the weather, and then there's another node for policy selection, like the other pie,

policy selection in the models we've seen.

And then that pie can be like put on the jacket or not.

Those are like the two affordances or those are the two states in the affordance variable.

And then in a dissipative world, you're going to see adaptive agents as the ones that are able to recurrently adapt to changing and chaotic circumstance to repeatedly come back to that candle.

And so just to summarize, then we'll just, if there's any implications we want to touch, but we'll summarize.

They constructed a Laplacian system that's quadratic, aka bowl-like, in its potential function and flow operators, state-dependent flow operators, by the way, that includes the housekeeping function.

that evinces, so provides evidence for stochastic chaos because it has that Lyapunov exponent that was very similar to the ones that were calculated from the non-Laplace assumptions or approximations.

The way that the polynomial approximation played out with the first and second order approximations gave a sparsity which can be interpreted as conditional independencies

and a partitioning into four kinds of states.

Coupled systems have a conditional synchronization map.

In this example, it had a linear form.

They were on that manifold that was like Y equals X.

And this is important because in these Laplacian coupled systems, the conditional synchronization map is necessarily diffeomorphic.

Again, would be awesome if somebody wanted to come on and like help us see what the technical implications of the diffeomorphism is.

But...

The simplest level is like, it doesn't bend back on itself.

So it's a good function.

So that means for every sensory state, there's a unique expected internal state and conditional density over external states.

So it'd be like, yeah, when the thermometer says like 20, it could be 20 or 50.

that's not a very helpful thermometer now if you say the thermometer always reads half of the temperature or it's always double or it's a little noisy those are all workable but like the thermometer could just totally be deceiving you and then it just is a it's a wacky world with what the thermometer says not going to be a very adaptive system the resulting formulation can be read as bayesian mechanics

in which internal states on average parameterize belief of a Bayesian sort about external states.

Just like these equations when applied to particles and statistical distributions were a statistical mechanics, we're taking the full Bayesian insight and reading these equivalencies and formalisms as a Bayesian mechanics.

So that's the summary of 5.2.

And then there's a few implications that they get into, but we'll first have any questions.

So Dean, then Steven.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I just think it's fascinating that it doesn't matter whether we're talking moths or people, we're kind of blissfully unaware of the statistical manifold

floating around us prior to us being pulled back to that flame and either becoming the hero moth or the fool moth.

We don't discover that until afterwards, but if we could be aware of the kind of the statistical distribution in play prior to us being pulled, it might help.

I don't think it determines much, but it certainly enlightens as opposed to being lit up.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and the moth example, I think, well, you know, but if it really reaches the flame, it dies.

So maybe that's not even the final perfect example for how attractors work.

That'd be like a bowl with a hole at the bottom.

So again, it's just, it's a heuristic.

It helps us think about the kinds of systems that we're talking about.

But realism interpretation asides, even that example doesn't capture the whole thing because it's a metaphor, because it's like map of map of territory.

So it's totally chill.

Steven?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, the evinces, stochastic chaos, which wasn't a word I'd heard of before, to be honest, is this idea of equality.

So that's really useful, how it gives a sense of how both there can be chaos in the attractor and the noise maintained, at least at some level,

throughout because in most cases, the noise is just averaged away in other scenarios.

So this piece where we're tapping into that quality is really interesting.

And then that then tying into the Bayesian mechanics all the way down is very, very useful, especially when I think the Bayesian mechanics, as I've mentioned before,

is stacked it's like it's not saying this is where everything is different to evidence in it's like like we're going to give better evidence which or better evidence which make us think we're going to show a more accurate Lorenz attractor solution no it's

evinces and we can stack up and add these fuzzy qualities together and we'll still have a fuzzy quality but maybe we'll have one which is a little bit more practical and that's the game in town here is practicality so i like that cool also um it does average out noise


SPEAKER_01:
the internal states on average, the expectation parameterizes beliefs.

And so that's going to be a major challenge is to go from these expectation and mean field approximations without going into ergodicity.

That is literally the whole challenge.

The Laplacian is like a quadratic that's fit on another distribution, which we're not even caring to learn the form of.

And so we could say that the expectation, the single number expectation, the expectation of a child in that class is five feet tall, but maybe it's all four and six feet.

But if we fit Laplacian on that, it's gonna be at five looking like a quadratic.

So the map and the territory are not the same, and it is a significant challenge across domains to connect some of the approximations

that are double-edged swords.

Like let's approximate over a bunch of possible futures, or let's approximate this way.

Like there's no free lunch.

So the internal states on average parameterize beliefs, but does any given internal state parameterize beliefs?

Evolution kind of helps us out by saying like, well, on average, it's gonna get better and better.

That's like the fundamental theorem of natural selection, FTNS.

And then the ones that don't do as well, they die.

So evolution in a way helps us get out of this, but the formalism doesn't have that as we saw it right now.

Yeah, Steven on that.


SPEAKER_05:
That's a really good point.

And so it also does tie into the... So it gives a way to sort of the word average, but to average or approximate these faster perturbations, yet it still maintains perturbations, which could be used at the next nested level or in other ways.

So there's an interesting thing about it's reducing and...

the overwhelming noise

yet it's also not doing what traditional statistical averaging does, which is basically crash everything down to, you know, a fixed point.

It gives this ability for it still to be alive in a way.


SPEAKER_01:
Absolutely.

Like if we just took the expectation, the single average point of the Lorenz attractor itself, it would just be one point in the middle of the saddle.

Okay, but we have something that still has a dynamical nature with a tractable approximation and the dynamics have a positively operative exponent.

So we didn't squash the system down to a point or a racetrack.

We kept some of the dynamical and even chaotic aspects of the system

while still being able to talk about things on average.

But we're not talking about the average position of the particle.

Yeah, Stephen, quickly on that.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think that's a good point.

And also, just one thing that caught my mind is with that butterfly, with the moth going to the flame, is it talks about a perspective that's been taken.

And this is probably useful when people are thinking in the applied active inference.

This is the perspective that we're having.

And it's possibly more used, the word perspective, because we see a picture of a moth.

If there was no picture there, we might say a description.

of the scenario okay so there's this perspective on the moth yet the moth isn't necessarily in this scenario taking a perspective it's doing it's it's doing its mothness


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, it's definitely moths gonna moth.

Although the picture was not in the paper, I added that one.

But the winged snowflake was indeed in the 2006 paper.

So let's just recap a few of the domains of implication and then we'll close because like, what a fun pape and discussion.

So one, implication.

but also sort of note of caution, is that just because we took the OG complex system Lorenz and coupled it, so two chess moves beyond some sort of simple scenario, it doesn't mean that a synchronization map exists, let alone a good one for any given system.

But

One of the implications of this paper was that now we know that for a non-zero subset of dynamical systems, a non-zero subset of chaotic dynamical systems, and a non-zero subset of dynamical chaotic coupled systems, we can get this well-behaved approximation map.

So not to say all, but we know that the answer is now not none.

So that's a key implication.

Another implication was to really start to bring in the variational free energy in terms of generalized synchrony.

That's what opens up to the DaCosta discrete state space synthesis active inference, Bayesian surprise, optimal Bayesian design, intrinsic motivation, InfoMax, risk-sensitive policies, KL control, Occam's principle, decision theory, utility theory, Max-Ent, constructal theory.

this is not all in this paper so a lot more has to be done to get to some of these places especially in such a uh reasoned and bottom-up way um another implication of the paper is that they

took the Helmholtz decomposition in a new way.

And it might provide a generic model for random dynamical systems.

Importantly, because we connected it so closely to Bayesian generative modeling, it could be possible to do less just like, let's do descriptive analytics on flow to like, let's have a map that we can run both ways, where we're updating the parameters of our flow map

with what we're observing, but then we can also generate data sets.

We can generate counterfactuals.

And so that is what allows sparse data sets to play into Active Infant FEP and ties us more closely to modern machine learning like variational autoencoders.

Another implication or next step would be like we were looking at a three-dimensional system, the X, Y, and Z of the Lorenz attractor.

but how could we approach high dimensional dynamical systems?

So attractors in 50 dimensions, that's a little bit different and hard to solve.

So they suggest that a way to approach this, probably hint, hint, cough, cough, wink, wink, et cetera, is to learn the state dependent flow operator and the Ness using deep neural networks.

So it's kind of like you have a neural network now that recognizes bulls.

And so we're still kind of keeping some of the same things that we had a intuitive interpretation of in lower dimensions.

It's just like, you go like, okay, I know about the cube.

And then someone says, well, there's like an 11 dimensional cube.

And you go, okay, I kind of know what, I don't really see exactly what that means, but I kind of see what is being discussed.

How are we going to compute on the 11 dimensional cube though?

Well, neural networks.

And that is actually very close to neural stochastic differential equations.

And I think this is super exciting.

One could, ergo hasn't been done, probably, hint, hint, use a separate feed forward neural network to parameterize different components of the flow operator and self-information.

So in other words, we're taking what we talked about here

And we can think about combining it with the types of stochastic differential equations, neural stochastic differential equations and Bayesian neural networks, all of these advances in machine learning.

And now we're actually coming back to the table with new architectures for deep learning, because this would be a deep learning model.

It would have a deep neural network.

You would benefit from having a GPU,

but it's an architecture that was inspired by the discussions that we had here and then just the final implications and then we'll just have a little closing um the flows across the boundary also notice that a little bit of the blanket starting to potentially be inched away from talking more about a markov boundary

And connecting the FEP to the constructal law and the work of Professor Adrian Bajon, who honestly is a lot like Friston in some ways, and a really gracious person and communicator as well, with a long career of working towards this kind of a unifying structure.

flow theory to get towards the evolution of design in nature and as the image shows like kind of like from floodplains to lung alveoli that similar kind of a unifying model and then a final set of implications

is that we take covariances all the time from time series that's like how we do crypto trading that's how we do weather prediction that's all kinds of systems take covariance matrices on time series and so potentially because the hessian is recapitulating elements of the covariance matrix it could be possible to have an empirical data set

and empirically take the covariance and then learn something about the Hessian, the curvature of the underlying flow states.

So in other words, if you use the Laplacian approximation, even if it's stochastic, chaotic, and dynamic, that empirical covariance could identify conditional independencies where there's a zero.

And so in principle,

you could furnish a description of expected flow and the Lyapunov exponents to establish whether the system was chaotic or not, because we found that the Hessian approximation gave us a Lyapunov estimate that was like the actual Lyapunov exponent in the Lorenz system.

So we could go from empirical covariances, which people do literally every day, C, O, V, open parentheses and R, empirical covariances,

two estimated Hessians, two estimates of things like the Lyapunov exponents.

And that's why people often study chaotic systems in the super toy models, like the double pendulum and Lorenz, because it turns out it's shockingly hard to find chaotic systems in nature outside of those toy examples, because the real noise in the system swamps your signal.

And so in conclusion, having a simple functional form for the flow of random dynamical systems may be useful for modeling and analyzing time series generated by real world processes that are far from equilibrium and may or may not be chaotic.

And so that's the closing question.

Human flow, physical flow, supply chains, information flow, narrative flow, semantic flow, ants bringing seeds in and taking the mid and out, all of these flows

we have data sets for them.

And now we have a new kind of model that we can use to model those flows.

So we'll just chill and talk for a few more minutes, but what a great discussion.

So thanks a lot, Dean and Stephen and everybody else who participated in 32.

So Stephen first.


SPEAKER_05:
Deep breath.

Yeah, there was a couple of things there that seems to have a big impact because

As well as Markovian monism and the idea that active inference brings in this partitioning and the active inference field, which can then also have relationships to deep learning and how predictive processing is thought about, what's being said here that there's also evincing or evince, the idea of the evince and statistic chaos itself

also being a paradigm, paradigmatic part of evidence being arrived at.

So which in some ways is not dependent purely on Markovian monism being the overarching game in town.

So that is quite an interesting additional way for

deep learning to be um to be impacted by is this a field of practice is it a domain i don't know what we call it but that that that does it does it does make everything does it doesn't mean it's all markovian monism in terms of the ability to then infer you've also got this other um ability to get

information and from what you're saying it almost as much by inferring if there is chaotic presence or if there's not maybe not having maybe going and seeing if there's not chaos present may give an idea of there's maybe no correlations present and that's that's jumping the gun but you know maybe there's other ways of being able to interrogate statistical dependencies in time series analysis

that can be sitting alongside the Markovian monism.


SPEAKER_01:
So how that's connected to Markovian monism is definitely a good question, but yes, these are general tools for complex systems analysis.

So I hope people don't read this paper as like frist in apologetics or some sort of fringe development in ACT-INF only.

It's pretty clear from the nouns that we used that this is actually like a fundamental contribution towards analyzing dynamical, stochastic, chaotic systems.

However, just because you find, for example, a low lyopinib exponent of your approximation, it's not a statement about the system.

So we will always be able to just halt right there.

You know, it's not that it's not a chaotic system.

Your approximation doesn't have a chaotic leading lyopinib exponent.

So say what you want to say about your map.

And now if your map isn't chaotic and you're doing a great job,

predicting, explaining, controlling, designing, creating.

Wonderful.

I hope the business is successful and that you can have friendship and health and all those things.

But that's not a claim about the territory.

And so there's going to be so many fun ways to talk and explore that.

Dean, what are your closing thoughts?


SPEAKER_03:
Just real quick.

I think what the covariation piece, which is basically statistics and an abstraction to sort of explain things, points out is that if we can understand the world as being both within, enveloped, and between, partitioned, at the same time, that's a good fundamental place to start.

And I completely agree with your last statement.

We're not...

We're not counting fairies on pins and then just leaving it there.

We're actually hoping at some point to be able to turn this into something useful and functional.

But if you can't start from a place of seeing it as two things at once, within and between, you're going to struggle.

You're going to tend to collapse prematurely and you're not going to get very creative and active inference will

Well, you'll be able to define it and describe it, but I'm not sure how much new information you'll be able to derive with it, unless you can hold up both at once.

It's within in between.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

There's so much more that we all have to learn, the appendices, the formalisms we didn't go into, the citations, other perspectives.

you know, it's just the beginning.

And that's what dot two is about.

Like how far we've come, you know, when we can go back to our roadmap and just be like, wait, dynamical systems and densities.

And then we're, you know,

300 miles past there but where have we gotten and so it's like just really exciting and i'm glad that we're doing it in a participatory way because um there's a lot to it so dean and steven thank you again everybody watching live and replay hope that you get involved and stay involved with act and flap see you later bye

## -Y4OVfbxlMM

SPEAKER_02:
Hello and welcome everyone to Act In Flab livestream number 32.3.

It's December 16th, 2021 and we are really excited to be here with Connor, one of the authors.

Today we'll just jump right into it.

Our goal is to be

learning and discussing this awesome paper, Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets from 2021 with Carl Fristen, Connor Hines, Kai Ulzhofer, Lancelot DaCosta, and Thomas Parr.

And we had a dot zero, dot one, dot two on this paper.

And today we're just excited to have a dot three.

So we'll have a presentation by Connor when we'll all be

providing our regime of attention and writing down any questions and comments we have and writing any questions in the live chat if we would like.

And then we will have a discussion to kind of follow up on the presentation.

So Connor, thank you for joining and please take it away.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Thanks, Daniel.

Thanks for having me.

I'm really happy to be back.

This is my second time on the stream, so it's nice to be here.

Okay, I'm going to share my whole screen.

And now, here's the presentation.


SPEAKER_02:
Looks good, thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Looks good?

Okay, cool.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Could you maybe, where it says hide, meet Jitsi?

You're sharing your screen?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, and then... Hit hide?

Yep.

The whole thing disappeared, but then, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, perfect.

Now we're back, right?


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so as Daniel said, I'll be presenting on this paper that was published this fall in Entropy called Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets.

And it's really great that you guys have already gone through the paper in detail from what I remember from watching some of the past streams.

So we don't have to go through every single equation and every figure, because you guys have already kind of covered it very thoroughly.

But we can dive in with as much technical detail as anyone wants to.

So I'm kind of going to give broad strokes of the paper and also frame it in the context of other literature that's come out on similar topics in the past few months.

A bunch of literature has been published on the same sort of themes.

So that'll kind of help contextualize

what I consider to be the main contributions of the paper.

And there's both methodological and theoretical ones.

So there's a lot to talk about here.

And as Daniel said, I guess afterwards, we'll do this discussion.

But if either of you has questions or anyone in the JITSE has questions during it, feel free.

From my end, I'm fine being interrupted.

But whatever, the format is fine.

OK, so without further ado, I'll get started.

So just a quick introduction to me.

So I'm one of the co-authors on the paper, and I'm a PhD student based in Konstanz, Germany, where I'm supervised by Ian Cousin, who is a leading scientist in the fields of complex systems and collective animal behavior.

So he's the head of the Department of Collective Behavior at the Max Planck Institute for Animal Behavior.

And so yeah.

In Constance, we're basically building a kind of hub for the study of complex systems and collective behavior in particular.

Then I'm also co-advised by the lead author on the paper, who's Carl Friston, who kind of came up with the fundamental premise of a lot of the concepts in the paper, like the free energy principle, Bayesian mechanics, Markov blanket, stuff like that.

So the outline, first I'll talk about the motivations for the paper, some of the contextual literature.

And then I'll summarize what I consider to be the main takeaways.

But there's a lot of different perspectives on this paper.

So these aren't by any means the only way to interpret the paper.

And then in the interest of just kind of getting us all on the same conceptual footing, I'll review stochastic processes, and in particular, a special interpretation of stochastic processes called the Helmholtz decomposition, which is something that you guys have already talked about in the past streams here quite a bit.

And then I will step through the primary moves of the paper in my mind.

And I'll leave out, I'm not going to go through every single figure, like I said, but I'll just step through what I consider to be the primary moves.

So in this past year, a bunch of work has come out on the general theme of Bayesian mechanics.

If you want to look at this paper in the context of other work, I would say that the major works are things like the Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes, which just last week was finally published in Proceedings A of the Royal Society.

So we're very happy about that.

And that established the fundamental mathematical formalism for Bayesian mechanics and the conditions under which you can apply a Bayesian mechanical lens to

dynamical systems, random dynamical systems.

So this is something that's been covered in previous live streams and a few of which Lance and I were attendants at.

There's another great paper that's a preprint right now by Miguel Aguilera and some of his colleagues that studies very similar grounds that's covered in this first paper, basically studying the necessary conditions for Bayesian mechanics and in particular

uncovering what's known as the synchronization manifold and studying that in the context of simple linear Gaussian systems.

And then finally, there's this paper also produced also in the same special issue of entropy as the present paper called memory and Markov blankets.

And that's again, studying how Markov blankets actually evolved through time.

I mentioned these three papers because they all study Bayesian mechanics.

And in particular, they're all focused primarily on linear systems.

So systems that are often in the stochastic literature called linear diffusion processes or Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes.

So that's a really deep common thread to all of them is they leverage the mathematical tractability of these simple linear systems to get really nice analytic proofs about when Bayesian mechanics exists and when it doesn't.

I say the primary focus is on linear systems because in, for instance, basic mechanics or stationary processes, the mathematical derivations actually apply to any processes that have a Gaussian steady state, not only linear ones.

But the primary examples used in that paper were all linear systems.

I mean, there are a few nonlinear ones, but the focus and the tight derivations focused on linear systems.

So given that kind of contextual background, now we can talk about the main takeaways of this paper, Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets.

So the first main thing is basically taking a random dynamical system.

In this case, we're taking a stochastic version of the Lorenz attractor and we're trying to basically apply the lens of Bayesian mechanics to it.

So the same thing that these previous papers have done to look at the paper from the perspective or look at the system from the perspective of how does the system look as if it's forming beliefs about other subsets of variables in its environment.

So that's what something we also call the physics of sentience.

How can physical systems, not necessarily things we typically think of as sentient, actually exhibit the hallmarks of something like biological computation or representation?

The second main takeaway is finding that you can fit the Helmholtz decomposition, which is this special interpretation of stochastic processes that we'll cover in the next few slides.

How can you kind of learn that decomposition automatically from data

or not from data, but from stochastic dynamical systems where the usual tractability doesn't exist.

So that's a big methodological contribution.

It actually lays out kind of the steps or an algorithm for doing this automatically for systems that lack the usual analytic tractability like you get with linear systems.

And finally, I think another kind of big contribution here

that was kind of tucked into one of the later sections of the papers, but it's pretty interesting, is a new result on the relationship between the Markov blanket and causal coupling between systems.

So we basically show that a Markov blanket does not always imply causal relationships and vice versa.

So the Markov blanket is fundamentally a statistical relationship that doesn't always go hand in hand with a causal relationship.

So those are the main three takeaways that I'll discuss today.

But there's a few others that we can also dive into that may have been covered in other live streams.

So to do the first goal, like basically deriving a physics of sentience, we need to actually start with Bayesian mechanics as our goal.

And then from there, we'll get to the study of stochastic processes.

So I'm going to quick first give an overview of Bayesian mechanics.

So the generalized Bayesian mechanics is very, I would say, it can be described very non-mathematically, which is basically you just have a system that's embedded in some kind of ambient environment.

And crucially, that system has an interface with the environment.

It can only exchange information with the environment through some kind of sensory or active interface.

So in the context of the most popular use case for Bayesian mechanics, that would be something like a brain, a nervous system that's insulated from the world via things like muscular organs, effector organs, and then sensory modalities.

So the interface is comprised of

the way we can impact the world around us as well as the way that we kind of absorb or are impressed by information from the world and then you can zoom in right and say that a single cell has the same kind of relationship where intracellular processes are like the equivalent of the brain you know this is genetic things going on with dna or just intracellular metabolic uh cascades

And then the interface would be something like the cell membrane, which kind of mediates information and energy transfer between the cells, intracellular contents, and then some extracellular environment.

And then from my perspective, what I'm interested in studying personally is kind of zooming out and saying, how can you look at an entire system, let's say a school of fish or a flock of birds, as if

whole thing is a kind of internal system that's insulated from some kind of social or physical environment where the interface here might not be as simple as your skin or a cell membrane but something more embodied by other individuals maybe the sensory interface between a group and its surrounding are sensory or active individuals and that's you know this is very catered to my own interests but as you know there's tons of

People are trying to apply the same framework to all kinds of systems, even like socio-technical systems in societies and stuff.

So it's a very generic framework.

That's the fundamental kind of partition of the world that we're interested in with Bayesian mechanics.

And what Bayesian mechanics is saying is that if you take these three sets of states, which I've now termed mu internal,

B, blanket, that's the interface states, and then eta, which is the external world.

If you take that fundamental three-way partition of the world, Bayesian mechanics is just saying that under certain conditions, it looks as if the internal states are encoding the external states.

And the thing that allows that encoding to happen is a special function or a manifold that's called the synchronization map, which just maps information from the internal to the external.

And the conditions for this happening is basically that information that gets to the internal world is basically conditionally independent of the external world when that conditioning is done on the interface.

So the interface kind of statistically insulates the internal from the external.

And with that at play, you can actually have the internal states look as if they're encoding the external states.

So that's the gist of Bayesian mechanics without leaving out as much math as we possibly can.

So then Bayesian mechanics research first asked the question, what are the necessary and sufficient conditions for that map to exist?

So that's something that the earlier paper, Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes, that's what it explicitly explored.

What are the mathematical conditions for us to be justified in saying, yeah, that map actually exists?

And once we've answered this first aim of Bayesian mechanics, then we can try to actually look for hallmarks of Bayesian mechanics in real systems, biotic and abiotic alike.

So those are the kind of two that the first thing is, what is Bayesian mechanics?

What allows it to exist?

And then the second thing is saying, once we know those conditions, we can actually look for that in the real world.

Okay, so to do this proper analysis of a system,

To identify this three-way partition, internal, blanket, external, you need basically a probability distribution over the states of our system.

So that's what's denoted with this p. Probably a distribution that tells you for every setting of mu, b, and eta, internal, blanket, external, what is the probability of that particular configuration?

So that's kind of a tall order.

Getting a full probability distribution for any system is not...

is not trivial yeah for some systems it is trivial but for most of the things we're interested in we usually don't have access to that so um that's why a lot of the work in this field so far has not been really applied to actual empirical data because it's so theoretical at this point and very like in silico um so we're still at that stage where we're still figuring things out theoretically and we haven't moved to like empirical application yet mainly because of these these issues of finding what that probability distribution

So that's Bayesian mechanics.

And now to move from there to stochastic processes, we're motivated by the fact that in the case we need to find this probability distribution and the internal blanket and external states change over time, i.e.

they're dynamic, then we need to move to the realm of stochastic processes.

And the reason that is is because stochastic differential equations are the mathematical construct that allow us to write down

a probability distribution over variables that change over time.

So a way to express that is using a stochastic differential equation.

This is the basic a basic kind of abstract formalism for understanding probability distributions over paths or over sequences of states over time.

That's really what a stochastic process is.

But we like to formally summarize that that probability distribution using this kind of differential equation.

all this differential equation is saying is that the rate of change of some state is a function of the state so it's basically a deterministic function of the state where where i'm going is a function of where i am plus some random noise and the random noise is just basically there to to incorporate the fact that i don't know my position

with certainty over time.

I have some sense that's given by that deterministic flow.

But overall, there's uncertainty in where I'll be next.

So we capture all that uncertainty with this thing, noise.

And that's the basic structure of any stochastic process or stochastic differential equation.

Okay, so now we're going to zoom in onto this flow component, which is the deterministic part of the stochastic process.

So hereafter, when I say flow or drift, we're referring to the deterministic part of this flow of this stochastic differential equation.

We're going to take that and we're going to expand it to give it a new interpretation that will allow us to get back to our original goal, which is writing down a probability distribution so that we can do Bayesian mechanics.

The interpretation that allows us to make those moves is called the Helmholtz decomposition.

And it's basically saying that any flow of a stochastic differential equation, there are a few conditions on the flow that we can get into.

They're kind of technical conditions.

But if this flow meets those basic conditions, which are quite general, then you can decompose it into the sum of two parts.

One is called the reversible part of the flow, and the other one is called the irreversible part of the flow.

And we'll get into now what that actually means.

So the first one is called the reversible part of the flow.

And it can basically be seen as a gradient flow towards the maximum of the probability density of the whole system.

So that probability distribution we talked about at the beginning, it has peaks and valleys.

There's areas of higher density and lower density.

This reversible part of the flow is just telling the system, bring me to the local maxima or to the peaks of that probability density.

This is also referred to as dissipative or time reversible because a system that's driven by this gradient flow has time reversibility or time symmetry in the sense that if you run one version of the process forwards in time, it'll look the same ran backwards.

And the important part here is that it's tightly related to the noise or the random fluctuations that we talked about from earlier.

So the strength of the force that pushes you towards the maxima of your probability density is directly proportional to the amplitude or the variance of the noise.

So that's a very interesting concept that might be a little counterintuitive at first, but basically those random fluctuations that we're adding to the flow in the Langevin equation,

How big those fluctuations are determines how quickly or with what force we get to the probability density's maxima, which you might think that's a little weird.

Why would more noise actually make us get to where we're going faster?

Wouldn't that push us away from our path?

But if you think about averages and think about the density of paths trying to get somewhere in probability density,

the more noise you have, the actual more chances the system has to kind of explore state space and then reach its eventual average like steady state density faster.

So that's one part is this gradient flow, this dissipative flow whose strength is proportional to the amplitude of random fluctuations.

And then secondly, we have this more interesting thing, which is called the conservative or time irreversible component, also called the solenoidal flow.

And this is mediated by this anti-symmetric operator called Q. And this basically doesn't point either in the direction of the minima or the maxima of the probability density of the system.

but rather it points you along the isocontours of equal probability of that density.

So this is the kind of circuitous component of the flow.

And it's very interesting from the perspective of thermodynamics because systems with this time irreversibility, they exhibit positive entry pre-production, for instance, and they basically have conservative dynamics.

So here's an example on the left of a stochastic process that's just driven by gradient flow with some noise on top of it.

And you can see that it's kind of ascending or running parallel to the probability density.

And then on the right, we have a deterministic system that's just driven by solenoidal flow.

And it kind of acts like a celestial body, like a planet that's orbiting some center of gravity.

And I should say that the blue background on each plot is basically showing how high the probability density is of the states at each point in state space.

So this is just a two dimensional system.

So the Helmholtz decomposition is saying that you can take these two components and together they form the full dynamic of any stochastic system.

So the full dynamic has components of trying to get to the maxima of the probability density.

And then it also has components of surfing the isocontours of probability density.

And all of this is subject to random fluctuations that are knocking it off the path.

So you can get rich dynamics with just this very simple decomposition of any system's flow.

So this is another way that we can visualize these things in terms of vector fields.

So on the left, I'm showing the solenoidal flow, like the strength of that component at each point in state space.

So x and y are just the two levels of some two-dimensional random variable.

Here are the components of the dissipative flow.

And you can see that they're parallel to the gradients that pull you towards or away from the center of the probability density.

And then if you add these two things together, then you get the force that's driving the system at every point in state space, which is this combination of this kind of orbiting fluctuation, as well as this thing that's pulling it towards the center.

And just a kind of technical note, the reason that the dissipative flow looks like it's pointing away from the center in the middle plot

but it's pointing to the center in the right plot is because there's a minus sign in front of the dissipative operator on the right plot.

So that's an important thing that often confuses people.

So now we've done this decomposition.

We have this gradient flow.

We have this solenoidal flow.

And the thing that brings us back to Bayesian mechanics is this important point that I left out, which is that the gradient flow and the solenoidal flow, they don't just operate on the state of the system, but they operate on the gradient of the probability density, which is given by this kind of weird I slash J operator, which we can just call the surprisal.

So the surprise is defined as the negative log of the probability density.

It's also known in physics as a scalar potential.

And this just says how basically tells you how far away you are in some sense from the center of the probability density.

It's saying, what is the local curvature right now?

How steep is the probability landscape at the point I am right now?

So this, in turn, these are the things that scale the dissipative and the solenoidal operators.

And this thing, in turn, can be formally related to the steady state distribution of the process, this probability density over mu, b, and eta that we were originally interested in.

So because it's the negative log of that density, you can exponentiate its negative, and you get yourself back to the density.

And that's excluding something that's called a partition function.

But that density is called the non-equilibrium steady state density.

And the existence of that is kind of fundamental to the whole free energy principle Bayesian mechanics thing.

If a system has this Ness density, then the system can achieve Bayesian mechanics.

And another important point is if Q is non-zero,

the system truly is non-equilibrium.

If it is zero, if the Q does not exist and there's only dissipative currents, then the system is known as an equilibrium system, and it just has an equilibrium steady state.

So the Q is basically what mediates all the things that we're interested in biological systems, like the breaking of detailed balance, positive entropy production rate, and time irreversibility.

That's all kind of baked into the system with Q.

So the main point of all these slides on stochastic processes, Helmholtz decomposition, is just the fact that that deterministic flow component of the Langevin equation can be rewritten in terms of gradients of its log stationary density.

So it looks as if any stochastic process is basically being dragged towards its stationary density, subject to random noise and these solenoidal components that kind of drive it along the isocontours.

So we can now kind of take the steps required to rewrite our full-on Gevin equation using this new interpretation.

So first you have this flow operator, which is just a combination of the irreversible and reversible components.

Then you can plug that into our expression for F, which is the flow.

So it's the flow operator times the gradients of the log density, the negative log density, and then minus this extra term that I'll talk about in a few minutes.

And then you can just combine all this together, plug it back into the Langevin equation, and now we have an expression for the Langevin equation, namely the rate of change of the state in terms of a gradient descent on this surprisal.

So basically, all this is saying is that a system looks like it's trying to minimize the surprisal of its states, i.e.

find itself in parts of state space that are the least surprising or have the highest probability.

So as I just mentioned, there's this extra term that we haven't talked about.

It's kind of called this housekeeping or correction term.

And this, I think, has come up in a few of the past live streams, if I remember correctly.

And this is going to be really important for the current paper.

It kind of mediates all the interesting things that we see in things like stochastic chaos.

So this is called what Carl calls in the paper the housekeeping term.

And it only arises in the case that those solenoidal and dissipative matrices depend on the state of the system.

So for these earlier papers we were talking about, like the Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes, and Miguel's paper, as well as the memory and Markov blankets paper, those three papers, for the most part, assume that these matrices were constant in the sense that they don't depend on the states.

That's what makes a system a linear versus a nonlinear system.

If these matrices are constant, then the system is linear.

If they are not constant in the states, i.e.

they depend on the part of state space you're in, then it's a nonlinear system, and this housekeeping term is nonzero.

It actually has some influence on the dynamics.

So this is something that figures into the current paper on the Lorenz attractor.

The Lorenz attractor, which we'll get into later, is a nonlinear system.

So this housekeeping term becomes nonzero.

And if anyone's technically interested, that's just what it looks like.

It's basically a type of matrix field divergence, which is a mouthful.

But it's basically a sum of partial derivatives of the matrix field across different state variables.

So given that, we can now

In the case of a nonlinear system where the Q matrix actually depends on the state, now we're showing the solenoidal operator as a function of state space.

And you can see that now the solenoidal flow actually depends on which part of the xy plane you're in, here denoted x1, x2.

The dissipative operator I've kept constant just to be simple.

And then you have additionally this housekeeping term that is also a function of state space.

And it's kind of actually counteracting in some sense the dissipative operator.

And it's a weird combination of kind of flows that are pulling you towards the center as well as away from the center.

And then the full dynamic is going to be

this combination between a housekeeping term, the solenoidal term, and the dissipative term altogether.

So these are the kind of systems that you're going to more likely encounter in the real world, so to speak, because most real world systems are nonlinear.

They can't be described with nice Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes where the housekeeping term disappears.

Okay, so that was our big detour into Helmholtz decomposition, and it was a lot of math and theory, but it'll actually become

concrete when we apply it to the Lorenz attractor.

So now let's go back to our desired goal of getting that probability distribution.

So we want a probability distribution over mu internal states, blanket states, external states, so that we can do Bayesian mechanics.

And now we're going to say that our system of interest x is just a 3D system, a 3D vector that's comprised of internal, blanket, external at every time.

So we want to have a 3D probability distribution over those variables.

So once we have that probability distribution, we can basically do what's called marginalized the density and find conditional density.

So we can say, give me the conditional density over internal given blanket states.

Give me the conditional density over external given blanket states.

Those two densities are theoretically the things that get mapped to each other through the synchronization map.

So that's something I didn't really mention in the beginning with this theoretical kind of more semantic description of Bayesian mechanics.

But technically, Bayesian mechanics has to do with conditional densities.

It says, tell me, conditioned on some level of the blanket states, what is the most likely value of the internal states?

And if you know that and you have a synchronization map, you can kind of guess the most likely value of the external states conditioned on blanket states.

So the synchronization map is really mapping the two conditional densities to each other.


SPEAKER_00:
quick question so at that point can we do because you've used phrases like zoom in and zoom out and when you're talking about decomposition do we know where on on the scalar that will this tell us where something is focused or versus something that's looking at horizons

Do you know what I'm saying?

Like, can we tell what the field is based on this, that the thing is trying to map?


SPEAKER_01:
And when you say horizons, do you mean like temporal horizons or do you mean more spatial?


SPEAKER_00:
You know what I'm saying?

Like, can we tell whether it's zooming in on a focal point or whether it's looking at a larger picture?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I see.


SPEAKER_00:
Time-wise and map-wise.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so the map technically is very focal in the sense that I haven't shown it in the lower right because I didn't want to get too technical, but the synchronization map technically maps the sufficient statistics of the densities together.

So it maps a particular point on a statistical manifold.

So when I say statistical manifold, I mean a space that is not spanned by the values of the system, but actually by the expected values or the averages of the system.

So it says on average,

the internal states will get mapped to the external states.

So in that sense, it's kind of a point because you're saying I'm mapping from a most likely value or from an average.

to another average on the other side of the blanket.

So in that sense, you're kind of doing a dimensionality reduction, because the map is not defined for any particular little fluctuation of the internal or the external, like some particular instance.

But it's actually really defined on this average level.

So you're only going to be seeing the inference when you take averages across multiple noisy realizations.


SPEAKER_02:
um honor if i could ask one more question to kind of lock in the gains of this great section is it fair to say that the synchronization map is literally the internal states map of the external states territory yeah exactly okay the synchronization map will take any internal state and it will map it into


SPEAKER_01:
a map, like it'll map it into a space.

And that space is a map of the external state's territory.

And it might not be correct.

It could be off.

But it's basically taking any internal state and it's projecting it into a representation.

And that representation's metric space, like when I move around in that represented space, is supposed to mirror how external states are actually moving.

And the key point of the synchronization map is the map and the territory will only be aligned on average.

But for any given particular instance of the internal states, that guess or that place it gets mapped to on the map, on the representation, might be arbitrarily far from the true external state that's going on at that time.

But on average, they'll be exactly on top of each other.


SPEAKER_02:
And there's one comment in the chat from Miguel Aguilera.

So I'm going to read it to you, Connor, and you can address it now, or if it comes at a better time later, then address it then.

So Miguel writes, great introduction of the Helmholtz decomposition.

How general is the housekeeping lambda term?

Can it account for any nonlinear systems with higher order terms, for example, larger than quadratic?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a great question.

Yes, it totally can.

So if we go back to it, where was it?

I'll just address it now, if that's OK with you, Daniel.

Yeah.

Yeah, so if you look at this housekeeping term, it's defined as this divergence of the matrix field.

And it's a sum of the partial derivatives of the flow operator.

So now I'm talking about the last equation on the slide.

The flow operator again is the Q minus the gamma.

So those partial derivatives, if they're higher order than quadratic, they will have nonlinear terms, right?

So if you're taking

the partial derivative of something that has a third or a fourth order, then the partial derivative itself will be nonlinear.

So all that means is that the housekeeping term itself will be nonlinear in the states.

So the housekeeping term is also a function of the states.

And in this case, with higher order, more than quadratic terms, then you'll just get an appropriately nonlinear housekeeping term.

So for instance, if we go back to this slide, in the third

the third column, the housekeeping term, because I made the Q matrix, the solenoidal matrix, a second order in the states, i.e.

there's an interaction between X1 and X2, a multiplicative interaction, the housekeeping term becomes linear in one of the two states.

So it's just a simple linear function of X1 and X2.

If, however, we were to imagine that either Q

or gamma.

Gamma is the dissipative operator.

I made it constant for now.

But if one of those had a higher order term, like a x to the third term, or x1 squared times x2, then the housekeeping term would also have now a nonlinear term.

And now the housekeeping would be nonlinear in the state space.

And there's nothing wrong with that.

It would just mean the housekeeping term would be nonlinear, and the dynamics would be even more complex.

Yeah, that's a great question, Miguel.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
And if I could ask some follow-up housekeeping questions.

So one, can the housekeeping be non-differentiable?

Or what if there's some function that doesn't have a nice derivative?

And the second part is, what does the housekeeping term represent for a given example system?

And how is it different than the regular Helmholtz decomposition?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a good question.

So the first question is about differentiability.

So I mentioned in the beginning that for a system to have these nice things we were talking about, like to basically be applied to the Helmholtz decomposition, to be applied to it, et cetera, one of the conditions is that the flow function, that f of x, is a smooth function of the states.

So it basically means it's differentiable everywhere.

As long as the flow is differentiable, it implies that all the subcomponents are also differentiable.

if my memory of calculus serves me well.

So basically, it means that Q will be differentiable, which means that all its higher order derivatives are also differentiable.

So basically, the very premise of this decomposition assumes that things are differentiable.

So that problem shouldn't arise.

Or if there's non-differentiable flow function, then you're right.

All these things will have discontinuities.

And I don't think the solution or there aren't any guarantees that the decomposition even applies in that case.

Um, the second question, can you, sorry, can you remind me what the second one?

Oh, sorry.

Yeah.

The interpretation of the housekeeping term.

That's a really good question.

I, this is something we talked a lot about with Carl.

Um, when, when we discussed this paper at a TNB meeting, like how do you interpret this?

Cause the solenoidal flow, right.

I can imagine it's.

You're going along the isocontours.

Dissipative makes sense.

You're going up and down the gradients of the density itself.

But the housekeeping term is this weird thing where it has to do with the derivatives of the state-dependent solenoidal and dissipative flow.

I don't know how to interpret it, to be honest with you, in terms of one of these nice kind of orthogonality, because it's not an orthogonalization of the state space.

It's a mixture of both state-dependent solenoidal and dissipative terms.

Um, the one thing he did say that, that Carl said to us that, uh,

will come to later is that the housekeeping term in the case of chaotic dynamics is actually what mediates the wandering seemingly non-steady state-ish behavior of things like the lorenzo tractor so the lorenzo tractor seems to kind of go on these itinerant wanderings so that are arbitrarily far from its steady state density whatever that steady state density is because again we don't know what it is and basically the housekeeping term in this case

can push the system away from the gradients of the log density and also away from the level sets of the iso contours of the density given by the solenoidal flow so an example of that is actually here right where you see in kind of the main xy planes of the if you compare the red plot to the purple plot the red arrows are actually pointing sometimes in the opposite arrows

of the purple arrows.

So one interpretation is that for sufficiently complex systems, sometimes they'll actually be quite strong components of the flow.

that are driving it away from the probability density's maxima.

So this might actually, if you want to try to interpret this in the context of biological systems, systems sometimes seem to wander very far away from what in a greedy sense would be the best state to be in, i.e.

a local mode of the probability density.

And this housekeeping term can sometimes drive the system into long wandering sojourns

that are far away from those local maxima.

And it's the strength of that housekeeping term versus the dissipative term that Carl argues is actually the Helmholtz decomposition take on chaotic behavior.

So chaotic behavior is when things wander arbitrarily far, basically because the housekeeping term dominates and pushes things away from the modes of the density.

That was the closest that I got to a kind of interpretation of the housekeeping term.

But it's a really good question.

I would be curious to hear what other people have to say about that.

OK.

Yes, so right, this is where we work.

So we're talking about the synchronization map.

That's where we want to get to.

We want to get to being able to write down those conditional densities so that we can map them to each other and then imbue our system with some form of sentience, or at least a sentient interpretation.

So how do we get this density?

So this brings us to the first major contribution of the paper, which is a new method for approximating a system where we don't have that density.

So for instance, the system we're about to talk about, the Lorenz attractor, we don't know what the probability density is.

So we're going to use a new method proposed in this paper to approximate that density.

And the method used to approximate the density relies on a combination of polynomial regression

as well as the Helmholtz decomposition.

So that's why I just spent so much time going through the Helmholtz decomposition, because this new method proposed by the paper for fitting the density relies on the Helmholtz decomposition as well as basically some statistical inference techniques or polynomial regression.

So now we're going to actually make things specific and dive into a particular system.

So the Lorenz attractor, a phase space portrait of it is shown in the top left, is a famous deterministic dynamical system that exhibits what's known as chaos.

And again, I'm going to not go too into depth here to save time.

And last time in one of the earlier streams, Daniel gave a very nice explanation of chaotic behavior.

But it basically means when you very slightly alter the initial conditions of the system,

the end up and resulting trajectory can be arbitrarily far in state space.

So if I start the system at setting 0.1 versus 0.101,

the resulting place that those two trajectories end up can be super far away from each other.

So it's quantified most often by analyzing what's known as the eigenvalues of the Jacobian or the Lyapunov exponent, the sign of which will tell you how far systems on how far trajectories on average should diverge.

And that's kind of the hallmark of chaos.

So that's the Lorenz attractor.

It gives these nice kind of itinerant wandering butterfly lobes.

When you look at its trajectories over time, an interesting property is that no same one trajectory is the same for a slightly different initial condition.

That's why we call it chaotic.

What we study in this paper is exactly that deterministic chaotic system, but we just add noise onto its flow function.

So that's what's represented with the equations here.

So we can call it the stochastic Lorenz attractor.

It's not been characterized super rigorously as much as the Lorenz attractor has been.

So it's a kind of interesting experimental stochastic process to investigate here.

So on the bottom right, we see the original stochastic Lorenz flows, which is a nonlinear deterministic dynamical system.

That's that f of x. And what we're doing here is we're just perturbing the system at every time with a little random Gaussian fluctuation.

That's what's represented by omega.

And I've bolded everything here to represent that we're now dealing with a vector space of states.

So we're dealing with x1, x2, x3.

It's not just a single variable, but it's a 3D system.

Okay, so now we can get into the major moves of the actual paper.

So the first approach is to say, okay, we know about this Helmholtz decomposition thing.

Let's try to rewrite the Lorenz attractor as if it's doing a gradient ascent on a log probability density or a gradient descent on a surprisal.

So an important thing to note here is

The surprisal, as well as the flow operator, the Q and the gamma, are state dependent.

And as we know now from our discussion of the housekeeping term, we're going to get that extra lambda term

because the system is state dependent.

And you can just look at the flows for the Lorenz attractor to see that very clearly.

So for instance, f of x is not just first order in the state.

So that would mean it would be a linear system.

But for instance, the flow of x2 depends on a multiplicative interaction between x1 and x3.

And likewise, the flow of x3 depends on a multiplicative interaction between x1 and x2.

That state dependence

will be exactly recapitulated in the fact that Q and gamma will not be a constant function of the states.

And because of that, we'll also get this housekeeping term, this big lambda on the side.

So that's why the Lorenz attractor was chosen as opposed to an OU process, exactly because it has this non-linear state dependence.

So if we want to write down an OU process, and this is a decomposition that people like Miguel know very well by now, you can just write it down as this linear matrix function, which is just Q, which is a matrix, minus gamma, another matrix, multiplied by the gradients of a Gaussian probability density, a log Gaussian.

Okay, so the first approach to tackle decomposing Lorenz attractor as if it's doing a gradient descent is basically fitting that dependency.

So fitting Q and gamma using polynomial expansions.

So assume we didn't know the true Lorenz flows and we just want to basically fit.

Okay, if I want to express the Lorenz flows in terms of a Q and gamma, what would I do?

the first approach is to first of all take our state space which is x1 x2 x3 and expand it in terms of polynomial on basis functions which again is something i think was covered in an earlier live stream it's also known as a taylor expansion where we're saying i'm going to express each state of the system not as x1 x2 x3 but things like x1 squared x1 x2 x1 x2 x3 all these interaction terms and higher order terms and then i'm going to say

find me a function that maps from that higher order basis in terms of polynomial expansions to the coefficients of q and gamma respectively.

And I'm also going to model this surprisal function, which is the negative log of the density as a function of the polynomial states.

So the problem of polynomial regression is just finding the coefficients here, q and h, that need to be multiplied by these polynomial expansions in order to fit the observed flow as best possible.

So this is a very common technique used in data science.

Instead of just doing a linear regression between

let's say housing prices and the size of the house, you add in higher order terms like the squared size of the house or the size of the house times the size of the pool or whatever.

So it's like a very classic thing is to use polynomial expansions to get more expressive functions to explain some observed data.

So we're doing the same thing here except that the data we're trying to explain is the actual flow of the system.

So what the first move of the paper is, is to actually do this fitting process and figure out that you can rewrite

the deterministic Lorenz system as if it's doing a gradient descent on this surprisal function.

But as we'll see later, it's actually not a proper surprisal.

So we can just call it a potential function for now.

And basically the solution is a second order function of the state.

So there's a multiplicative term between x1 and x2 with coefficient h5.

And then there's a linear term in x3.

And then what this means is that if you do this for the deterministic system, so you actually assume the random fluctuations go to zero, then what you can do is rewrite the parameters of the Lorenz attractor, which are given by sigma, beta, and rho.

These are the classic ways that people just parameterize the Lorenz attractor.

And certain settings of rho and beta lead to chaos and different kinds of attractors.

you can rewrite them in terms of the coefficients of the Helmholtz decomposition.

So that's the first major move is that this Helmholtz decomposition can be used to write down the system's flows as if it's doing a gradient descent on a potential function.

There's a problem with this, though, which is that if we look at that potential, it's actually not a proper probability distribution.

So this isn't really Bayesian mechanics, this first move.

All it's saying is that we can force the Helmholtz decomposition to explain the flow function of the Lorentz attractor, but the resulting surprisal function we're left with is actually not a proper probability distribution.

And if you just analyze that equation and try to interpret it like a probability function, it won't actually work.

So that has to do with whether the gradients are positive definite, essentially.

So that motivates the next move, which is where we don't try to approximate the Lorenz attractor exactly, but we try to approximate what Carr refers to as a Laplace approximation to the steady state density.

So here, instead of saying, okay, let's rewrite the Lorenz attractor as Helmholtz decomposed, let's assume that the Lorenz attractor is dragged towards a steady state that's Gaussian.

So the Ness is a multivariate Gaussian.

And if we force that assumption on and then use our polynomial regression, what is the kind of resulting coefficients that we'll get?

Because now we're forcing the system to look as if it's doing a gradient descent on a proper surprisal function or a gradient ascent on a proper probability distribution.

So if you do that constraint and then you fit the Helmholtz decomposition,

So again, we're fitting the coefficients of the flow operator, q and gamma, in terms of the states using polynomial expansions of the states.

And we're constraining the surprisal function to be quadratic, i.e.

the steady state is Gaussian.

then we basically create not a perfect recapitulation of the stochastic Lorenz system, but something that looks like the Lorenz system with this weird constraint that it has to be occupying on average a Gaussian steady state, which is not necessarily true of the real Lorenz system.

That's an interesting move here.

And then what you get is, again, what is referred to as the Laplace approximation to the stochastic Lorenz system, which can be validated in terms of how close it is to the real Lorenz system using things like the Hausdorff dimension, which is a quantification of the fractal dimensionality of the system.

So it's very well known that the Lorenz attractor basically lives on a fractal submanifold of its ambient state space, which is quantified by a fractal Hausdorff dimension or a non-integer Hausdorff dimension.

And that's just a function of, again, of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the flow.

And then he also validates the approximation quality by just looking at how correlated the approximate flow is using this polynomial method with the true flow, which is on the x-axis of that correlation plot.

And then on the right hand, we have some example trajectories of this Laplace approximated Lorenz system.

So this is a very interesting example

kind of plot, because it's showing that even though the, the underlying Gauss, uh, underlying steady state density is a multivariate Gaussian.

You can see that the actual trajectories of the system don't necessarily look like they're just neatly sitting or wandering around that Gaussian say state again, because of the solenoidal flow.

And because of that housekeeping term, which is very large in this case, the trajectories of the system look as if they're making very itinerant wandering trajectories.

But on average, if you were to take a very infinite time observation of the system, the system would still look as if it sits on a Gaussian steady state.

So that's like the first, I would say, major move of the paper is doing this Laplace approximate

Gaussian version of the Lorenz attractor, the stochastic Lorenz attractor, which anecdotally has some features of the Lorenz attractor, like it has these two lobes and all of these quantifications kind of make it correlated, but it's not exactly the Lorenz attractor because we're putting constraints on it.

That was a lot of information.

Are there any comments or questions so far?

Okay, so I'll just keep going.

So importantly,

Now that we've rewritten the nest density as if it's Gaussian, we can use it to read off conditional independent structure, i.e.

the Markov blanket.

And the reason that is, is obvious basically from earlier papers like the Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes and Miguel's paper on...

also on linear diffusion systems where basically you can just look at the Hessian or the inverse of the covariance matrix and you can use that to read off conditional independence, i.e.

to read off the Markov blanket.

And that simple relationship between the inverse covariance and the Markov blanket only obtains because of the Gaussian nature of the steady state density.

So that's why the Laplace approximation works here or is a nice move to make because it means we can then

write down or read off the markov blanket very easily and so the lower right plot is showing that the hessian and the covariance matrix and you can so the the white here means very low values so what we immediately see is that there's basically a markov blanket between the first and the third states um conditioned on the on the second states or actually sorry rather the the first and second states are both conditionally independent of the third states

So there's kind of a Markov blanket between those two and the third state.

This one isn't as nice as the coupled system as we'll see further because it's actually not clear what the blanket states are here.

This more seems just like marginal lack of correlation.

But so even though there's like the third and second states are also kind

conditionally independent, you can still treat the second state as a blanket state.

And you can basically parameterize the density over the first state given the second state.

So here we're writing down a synchronization map between the first and third states.

And this is symmetric.

So first can infer third or third can infer first.

first, but the conditioning, the blanket state is the second state.

So you can kind of see that if I just take the instantaneous value of the third state, it's in some way performing a guess or making an estimate about the most likely value of the first state.

And this relationship goes vice versa.

And the only reason we can write down that function that maps between the first and the third is again, because we have an expression for the covariance matrix

which follows from the Laplace approximation or the Gaussian approximation to this stochastic Lorenz attractor.

So once that's been done, the Laplace approximation, then the next move is kind of, it's not a full analysis, but it's showing that you can extend this to non-Gaussian steady states and kind of make higher order approximations, which might be called density learning.

So in a case when you don't know, you don't have a parametric form for the steady state density,

You can parameterize the surprisal function and the Helmholtz decomposition in such a way that you know that the resulting density is a proper probability distribution, but you don't necessarily know what its neat parametric form is.

So the way he does this is basically by parameterizing the quadratic or the potential as quadratic.

but the covariance or the Hessian of that quadratic potential is state dependent.

So it's almost like you're fitting locally linear synchronization maps to different parts in state space, or you're fitting locally Gaussian approximations.

So the way he does this is essentially I have a efficient parameterization of the covariance matrix of my steady state, but that covariance is actually changing as a function of state space, whereas in Gaussians, the covariance by definition is constant.

So by doing this, you can basically achieve a nicer approximation to the true stochastic Lorentz system, where all the conditional densities are still Gaussian, but the full multivariate density is not necessarily Gaussian.

So that's basically what's shown in the right plot here is this higher order

learned stochastic Lorenz system.

But it's not clear in this case what the synchronization map would be, because the synchronization map is not just going to be a simple function of the Hessian, because now the Hessian is changing over state space.


SPEAKER_02:
Can I ask a question here?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, please.


SPEAKER_02:
So from the chat, Martin Beal has asked, is this right?

There are two approximations here, one of the dynamics and one of the stationary state.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, I would say that the approximations are intrinsically tied together though, because what you're doing here is you're approximating the potential function and then that approximation directly factors into the approximation of the flow, right?

So you're fitting in this case, these kernel matrices, these K matrices as being state dependent.

So the kernel matrix is basically a Cholesky factor of the covariance matrix, or really of the Hessian here, the precision matrix.

And the gradients of that will then factor into the parameterization of the flow.

Because the flow is defined in terms of the Helmholtz decomposition, which is q minus gamma times the gradients of the potential.

So however you fit the stationary density, those coefficients that you fit will also factor in to the parameterization of the flow.

So in this case, in the upper left, I have the parameterization of the density, this quadratic function.

If I take the gradients of that with respect to the states, it'll essentially look like k transpose k times x minus mu, or basically a precision weighted prediction error, where k transpose k is the precision, and then x minus mu is the deviation of x from some mean vector.

So you're doing all that simultaneously.

You're doing both the parameterization of the steady state as well as the parameterization of the flow.

But you're doing it all just by trying to fit the flow with these coefficients.

But for free, some of those coefficients you get out, you can use them to write down a potential function, which can be converted to a stationary density.

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

And just on this slide, what is PD?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, sorry, positive definite.


UNKNOWN:
OK.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's a good point.

So yeah, because these kernel matrices are symmetric, these k transpose times k, they're symmetric.

They're state dependent, but they are always symmetric.

It means that their product will always be positive definite, which means that the stationary density evaluated at different points in state space will always have locally

be locally convex, i.e.

there's going to be some local mode.

But since that PD matrix is changing over state space, you're going to basically have a multimodal density, but locally it'll be unimodal.

That's another way of expressing everything on the left side.

Okay, so here's the more interesting part where we can really start talking about like the interesting Bayesian mechanical inferential interpretations.

where now we have two coupled Lorenz systems.

So again, it's a stochastic Lorenz system.

But since we have two of them that are talking to each other, it's really a six-dimensional system.

So three of one Lorenz attractor, three of the other.

And crucially, we're coupling them together through the first and fourth state.

So the fourth state of the system is really like the first state of the second Lorenz attractor, if that makes sense.

So basically, we're saying that X1, the first state of one Lorenz attractor, is talking to X4, which is the first state of a second Lorenz attractor.

And so just by coupling them with this one state, we're mediating the flow of information between these two Lorenz attractors.

The next move is to go back to the Laplace approximation, where we're enforcing the surprisal function to be quadratic, a quadratic potential.

And now we're applying it to the six-dimensional stochastic Lorenz system.

So now we are fitting this whole coupled system with a 6D multivariate Gaussian.

And because of that Gaussian constraint, we'll be able to read off the synchronization map from the entries of the Hessian, the inverse covariance matrix.

So on the right, what we have are just example trajectories.

from the coupled Lorenz systems.

So this is what Carl would call evidence of a synchronization manifold in a less rigorous sense, although we'll get rigorous with it later.

But in a more anecdotal sense, you can see that the systems are basically synchronized with each other.

Even when they're only connecting through one state, they're kind of surfing along similar submanifolds of their state space.

They're kind of hugging each other.

Again, these other metrics, like the very bottom, is just to show that the approximated flow using this Laplace approximation plus polynomial expansions is qualitatively at least positively correlated with the true flows of the full nonlinear system that has no Gaussian approximation.

And then the Bayesian mechanics interpretation comes in next, where now we, again, read off the Markov blanket

that exists between two of the Lorenz attractors.

So here, the upper right is what I'm focusing on now.

Here, the second two states, state two and state three, are the internal states of one Lorenz attractor, whereas states five and six, that dark blue box, are the internal states of the second Lorenz attractor.

And they both share a pair of blanket states, which are X1 and X4.

So the synchronization map is a map that maps from

x2 and x3 to x5 and x6 where the mapping is done on the conditional densities where the conditioning is done on the sensory state of either the first system or the second system which is respectively the active state of the other so that's a little bit confusing is basically the purple um sensory state of the first system is actually the active state of the second system and vice versa but the the most bottom plot is basically showing that

At any given time, the internal states of one system are making a best guess or a conditional estimate about the external state, which are the internal states of the second Lorenz attractor.

So you basically have two minds, little two-dimensional minds, that are making inferences about each other.

But the inferences are done with respect to these conditional densities, where the conditioning is done on the sensory states.

That's basically what all these plots on the lower right are showing.

So that's the demonstration of this inferential or sentience interpretation.

And then because, as we said, the full system is multivariate Gaussian, it means all the conditional densities are also Gaussian.

And then you can literally write down the synchronization map as a linear function of the states, where that linear function is given by appropriate sub-matrices of the full Hessian, which is the inverse covariance.

And again, because we're fitting the potential function using a polynomial expansion, it means that the Hessian function, which is the double derivative of the probability density with respect to the states, that will also be a function of those polynomial coefficients.

So the end result of all that is basically that given this polynomially approximated Helmholtz decomposition, I can then write down the synchronization map precisely in terms of those coefficients that I fit.

And then you can compute all these nice things like a free energy function, which is basically a sum of accuracy or prediction errors and complexity, which is effectively a prior penalty that penalizes how far the inferred expected state is from its expectation under the full steady state density.

So this is a nice, this is a crucial result because it's saying even if you don't know what the true steady state of a system is, you can use polynomial expansions.

and a Laplace approximation to get something that still has rich nonlinear dynamics, but by enforcing this Gaussian constraint on it, you can then write down the synchronization map using linear functions and the form of that function you know because you fit its coefficients by doing this Helmholtz decomposition.

Okay, so that's basically the main brunt of the


SPEAKER_02:
of the paper, but there's another- Can we go back and ask a few questions?

So I have one question and then there's two in the chat.

So the first question is, in this free energy equation on the bottom, pi is representing the particular states, but also we've seen free energy minimization on pi representing policy,

where free energy minimization is involved in the selection of affordances for policy selection.

So what's the relationship between free energy minimization of particular states, like the autonomous states, and how is that related to free energy minimization as planning as inference?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's a great question.

So yeah, this has nothing to do with the policy one.

It's just about pi, which is basically just saying the expected value of the particular states, which I should have mentioned are

the autonomous and the blanket states, or the autonomous and the sensory states.

So in this case, the particular states would be the two internal, the sensory and the active state.

of one of those Lorenz attractors where it's active state is actually the sensory state of the other Lorenz attractor.

So they share, you know, they have one overlap in terms of their blanket.

So this here is just saying that on average, the system is instantaneously minimizing at all times, this free energy functional, which is just saying is penalizing particular states from how far they are from their conditional expected value.

That's the expectation of PI given ETA.

where the expectation is taken under Q, which is this variational density that's parametrized by the synchronization mapped internal states.

The expected free energy, which is what you're talking about, is how do you write down a functional of trajectories or paths

of future autonomous states that is minimized such that you get the semblance of planning behavior where you're penalizing not something in terms of how far instantaneous it is but over a future horizon how how much is the free energy expected to deviate from the optimal policy or path which is going to be a sequence of autonomous states um that is a more complex question that has to basically do with yeah free energy minimum basically minimization of actions which are

under certain assumptions, sums of surprisals over time.

And that's something that is not treated at all in this paper, but it is explicitly treated in an upcoming paper that I believe is in review right now.

where we explicitly make the connection between the instantaneous free energy minimization like we see here and then this more temporally deep expected free energy minimization.

But basically for the present purposes of this paper, there's no relationship and nothing can really be said here about planning or temporally deep free energy minimization.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, let's keep it on this slide and I'll ask a few more questions in chat.

So from Martin, is the actual steady state distribution of the Lorenz attractor known?


SPEAKER_01:
um no basically yeah okay um i think there have been others um there's been other papers where they're not using the stochastic lorenz system but what they're using is uh the distributions of a bunch of lorenz attractors so this is the difference between i guess stochastic differential equations and random dynamical systems where

I'm randomizing a bunch of initial conditions, and then I'm looking at the resulting densities of the deterministic systems after a bunch of time has passed.

So that's a different kind of density.

It's a density over the deterministic ending states or deterministic trajectories of the system from a bunch of initial conditions.

And I think there has been work done on characterizing those densities.

But again, I doubt that those

densities are parametrically defined.

I bet they're more like approximations, like what we did here.

But this is something that, honestly, I'm not an expert on the Lorenz attractor, so that's something that I should probably just defer, that I don't know much about it.

But I'm pretty sure the stochastic Lorenz attractor doesn't have a neat solution to the Fokker-Planck equation, which is what you would need to do to get the stationary density.


SPEAKER_02:
going to ask a pair of questions from martin and from miguel so it's awesome thanks both and everybody in the chat because it's cool to have this kind of real-time field feedback so the first question is from martin in what way does the markov blanket emerge here

Is it not here at some point and then later it is?

So the first question from Arden is, what do you mean by emergence?

And then the second question by Miguel is, it is impressive that you can find a Markov blanket in a nonlinear system.

Have you quantified how precise are the approximations of the covariance and Hessian values, e.g.

comparing against numerical simulations?

So question one.

In what way does the Markov blanket emerge?

Question two, how precise are the approximation of the covariance and Hessian?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, okay, so that's a good question.

First question about the emergence.

The Markov blankets is defined with respect to the stationary density, the conditional independence relationships expressed in those two upper right panels, log covariance and log Hessian.

So those things do temporally vary

in the sense that if you condition on some initial state, the time-varying densities will have different log covariance and log Hessian matrices.

This idea of conditioning on an initial state and then looking at the time-evolving densities, that's exactly the whole point of this paper by Thomas and a few other of us called Memory and Markov Blankets, where

The Markov blanket can change in the sense that if you look at the evolution of conditional densities, conditioned on some perturbation, those conditional densities do change.

But if we just look at the stationary density, by definition, the stationary density doesn't change its sufficient statistics over time because it isn't defined with respect to time.

You've marginalized out sequences of variables.

So in this sense, the Markov blanket

If you don't condition on a particular state and you're just looking at the unconditional stationary density, then it's just always there.

It doesn't emerge.

And maybe I said emerge, and I didn't mean that in a temporal sense.

So there's no sense in which the Markov blanket emerges.

Markov blanket is just a property of the stationary covariance matrix, or more specifically, its inverse.

And that is a constant value that is just a characteristic of the full six dimensional multivariate Gaussian.

So even if we didn't even think about stochastic processes, if I just wrote down a six dimensional multivariate Gaussian with these particular entries of the covariance matrix, that is the constant Markov blanket that just always exists.


SPEAKER_02:
The second question was about... The precision of the covariance and Hessian in comparison to numerical simulations.


SPEAKER_01:
That's a really good question.

And I'm assuming, was that from one of the comments?


SPEAKER_02:
That was from Miguel, yes.


SPEAKER_01:
From Miguel, yes.

So I'm assuming you mean the overlap between the...

the empirically measured covariance in the Laplace, sorry, in the real stochastic Lorentz system.

And that one measured, or in that one estimated in the, in like, so the one estimated from the real system, and then the analytic Hessian from the, from the Laplace approximated stochastic Lorentz.

So I have,

have the paper up here that i can show this that's a really good question so one of the reviewers actually asked us something very similar and we have an extra figure that demonstrates exactly that okay can you still see my screen yep looks good okay perfect so here we're essentially doing exactly that um comparison where we're looking at

the partial correlation, which in the case of Gaussians is actually the same thing as the Hessian, which is an interesting, or sorry, it's not the same thing as the Hessian.

The partial correlation is the same measure of conditional independence.

It's not the case for non-Gaussian.

It's a case for a few classes of exponential distributions that if you measure the partial correlation, which is a kind of conditional correlation between two variables, it's the same as the corresponding value of the Hessian.

So what we're doing here is exactly that we're basically measuring how well the empirically measured partial correlation between different subsets of states.

So here, the third and the sixth states, which should be, these are the two internal states of two mini Lorenz attractors within the full system.

So this is like internal state of brain, one internal state of brain too.

how their partial correlation actually measures up with the true Hessian value.

And it kind of converges to a value very close to zero, which agrees with the analytically measured Hessian.

So you can basically quantify this more coarsely by just looking at the structure of the Hessian matches the empirically measured partial correlation.

And the partial correlation was basically measured for increasing segments of time.

So the partial correlation measured here was from the first 50 time steps.

And then up to years, the cumulative partial correlation from the first until the 500th time step and so on.

So basically by looking at the partial correlation and increasingly long windows of time, it should converge to the true value of the conditional independence and

it approximates that which we get from the Laplace approximated system.

What I should say, however, is that this partial correlation was not measured from the full Lorenz attractor, the stochastic one, but actually just from our approximation.

So we're just saying that if we make this approximation and then empirically measure the partial correlation from real

from realizations of that approximated system.

The empirical measurements line up with what it should be, given the way that we parameterize the flow using the polynomial expansion.

However, what we haven't done, but I think would be very interesting, and maybe this is what was being asked in the question, is actually to measure this from the real stochastic Lorentz system to see if there actually is a Markov blanket in the

in the real Lorenz system.

The only issue with that is we can't necessarily use partial correlation if we did it in the real stochastic Lorenz system, because as we were just discussing, like Martin asked, do we know what the stationary density of the real Lorenz system is, the stochastic one?

If we don't know that, we would have to use a less parametric method like mutual information

conditional mutual information in order to assess the presence or absence of conditional independence.

So it would be harder to do just because evaluating massive conditional mutual information for increasing amounts of time is computationally difficult.

But I agree that that is something that should be done.

But no, we didn't do it for the real stochastic Lorenz.

We just did it between our approximation and our analytic Hessian.

I hope that answers the question and that was clear.

We can keep talking if there's any lack of clarity on that.


SPEAKER_02:
I think continue with the presentation, and if anyone has more questions at the end of the presentation, we'll return to them.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, cool.

Yeah, but that was a very good point, actually measuring the Markov blanket empirically.

Okay, so I'm almost done with the overview of the paper.

So the last big thing that's kind of tucked into one of the results section is something called the sparse coupling conjecture, which is important because it dissociates conditional independence from causality.

So conditional independence, as we said, in the context of a Gaussian... Actually, no, it's not even for Gaussian systems.

For all systems,

conditional independence is determined by a zero entry in the Hessian.

So if the Hessian between two states is zero, which means the conditional densities don't change as you change, like the conditional density over one variable doesn't change as a function of the other, then

It implies this relationship, which is shown in terms of the Jacobian on the left.

The Jacobian basically measures causal coupling.

We can go into what it means mathematically, but you can just think of the Jacobian as the derivative of the flow function with respect to the states.

And entries in the Jacobian that are non-zero mean that one state is influencing another.

So what this relationship shows is that if at most one state influences the other, but not otherwise, like there's a non-reciprocal coupling between one state and the other, then the two states are conditionally independent, i.e.

there's a Markov blanket.

That's a really weird counterintuitive statement.

It means that if

I'm affecting you, but you're not affecting me, then we will be conditionally independent in the steady state.

And this is what's called the sparse coupling conjecture.

And it's the way we originally wrote it.

It was actually much stronger of a claim.

And then we realized there's actually some conditions on it.

So it's called a conjecture because it doesn't always hold, but there's certain conditions under which it should hold given a high dimensional enough and nonlinear enough system.

So we can kind of prove that more mathematically by saying if you expand the Jacobian by basically taking the derivative of the Helmholtz decomposition, so that's what's shown in the middle thing, and then you assume that certain entries of the Jacobian are zero, then you can basically show that it implies, or sorry, not certain entries of the Jacobian, but certain products of entries in the Jacobian are zero, that it implies that there's an accompanying

zero entry in the Hessian, which is shown on the bottom.

So what's shown on the bottom more specifically is what's known as the normal form of the flow or kind of a circular coupling, where if you have this particular structure of the flow operator where certain block or certain sub matrices of the flow operator are zero, then you're guaranteed to have this kind of sparse coupling, which means that one state can influence the other and not vice versa.

And then you'll get conditional independence in the steady state.

So that's another big,

result that, um, I think during the earlier live stream, when we talked with Lance, we had an example in his paper where that was also the case where basically two systems were, uh, two, one state was affecting the other, but they're actually conditionally independent.

Um, that's, that's a, uh, basically we rigorously showed the conditions under which that exists here.

So just because you see a zero in the Hessian, that means don't assume that the systems can't affect each other.

Two systems are conditionally independent.

doesn't necessarily mean that they don't affect each other through having a non-zero entry in the Jacobian.

But it just means that those connections have to be asymmetric or non-reciprocal.

So this is an example physically of what that would look like.

Say we had some system with external sensory and active states under the normal form of the flow, which is this special block diagonal flow operator.

What this essentially means is that you can get this sparse coupling conjecture

His sparse coupling conjecture holds as long as sensory states do not affect internal states and active states do not affect external states directly, but only through the sensory states.

So that's a particular instantiation of the normal form of the flow where you have these

Basically, particular entries of the Jacobian and the solenoidal flow operator are zero.

And then you'll get this kind of sparse coupling or circular coupling.


SPEAKER_02:
And one question on that, and then Dean, if you'd like to ask any questions, and this is also related to the work of Miguel, the paper that was brought up earlier.

What is the topology of perception, cognition, and action?

Is it just sense influencing internal and internal influencing active and active influencing external, which then feed back to sensory, sort of the simple clock model?

Or here we have a edge between sense and active states, the blanket states.

And so in free energy principle and active inference, are we committed to a certain topology of action?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a really good question.

Yeah.

So given the sparse coupling conjecture and the normal form of the flow, all this is... So basically, no, we're not committed to anything.

There's so many different combinations that will give rise to

a conditional synchronization manifold that can be interpreted as Bayesian mechanics.

All we're saying is that this coupling structure we have here is mainly defined by the lack of certain connections.

So all that we're saying is if external states do not affect active states, and internal states do not directly affect sensory states, so it's the lack of those two connections.

Can you see my mouse, actually?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so if you don't have a connection going from blue to red, and you don't have one going from blue to sensory, but anything else is allowed, like all I'm saying is putting constraints on what cannot exist, then the conditions laid out here will hold.

and the sparse coupling conjecture will exist, which means that an asymmetric relationship implies conditional independence.

So given that, what it means is that actually sensory states will be conditionally independent of internal states, conditioned on active states, because there's only a unidirectional coupling.

So those are some weird

weird like results from this is that sensory and internal will be conditionally independent because one affects the other but the other does not affect the first one and likewise for active and uh and external states but all that being aside external and and internal will still be conditionally independent and therefore there'll still be a synchronization map between them so

The conditions about the topology that I laid out, the absence of these connections, just have to do with satisfying the normal form of the flow as laid out here and satisfying this weird sparse coupling conjecture about unidirectional nonreciprocal coupling.

But other than that, the active inference story and the Bayesian mechanic story, you can swap around all of these influences, and it'll still pertain as long as this guy is conditionally independent of this one.

So if these two are conditionally independent

dependent on the blanket states, then that synchronization map still exists.

But you can have all kinds of weird coupling loops between the two.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

Very interesting.

Dean, do you want to ask anything here?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, there's so many things I could ask, and I'd get a great answer back, and I'd only be able to use a small percentage of the great answer.

One thing I do want to... I will ask this, and I'm not sure if it's...

if it's good or not, but I've been doing a lot of work and trying to see whether or not the active sensory state is a form of kind of decomposition of where a concept might rest between things like content and context.

And I'm just wondering when you do this math and you get a sense of

Knowing what you're working with and the relationship between all of the different components of what you're working with

Do you see in this a lot, instead of things always assuming that things just sort of pop out as an emergence, do you start getting a sense that sometimes things just exist within and between and those constraints and some of the things you talked in terms of linearity and just getting an understanding of what you're working with.

Do you see things like concepts

sort of resting in between these other areas, we call them in this diagram, external and internal states.

But could a concept be that sort of fluid and appearing and disappearing based on some of the things that you've looked at here in this paper?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I definitely think so.

I mean, for me, when I start thinking about concepts, I immediately start thinking about relationships, right?

Like what we've shown here are very low dimensional systems.

where you have a few internal, a few active, a few sensory, a few external.

Once you start having larger, higher dimensional systems, so say we weren't modeling two dumb Lorenz attractors just oscillating around each other.

But say we had some 100 dimensional neural network synchronized with another 100 dimensional external state space, like another neural network.

Once you're getting into that world, I think you get the, you can have the computational representational capacity for things like concepts, because you just have a higher correlational structure.

So imagine that we had a hundred internal states.

The internal states we know in some way are relating to the external states, but they're also relating to each other.

So there might be like subgroups, like

groups of 10 or 20 neurons that are all correlated in their firing to each other, there might be rich recurrent internal dynamics just within the internal states.

And the particular relationship of sub-manifolds, so to speak, of the internal state space, how those conditionally relate to external states.

That's where I think you start getting into the world of concepts where you can have under a certain part of the external state space, this part of the internal manifold gets more or less activated

versus when that part of the external state space lights up, this different part of the internal state space gets lit up.

So I think the key to identifying something like concepts really relies on having higher dimensional systems, which then allow you to have kind of more rich lower dimensional correlation structure that kind of exists in the ambient dimension of like a hundred dimensional state space.

That would be, that's how I at least interpret your description of like the concepts kind of existing in between.

It really rests in

lower dimensional manifolds of ambient high dimensionality.

So yeah, we're pretty much done with the thing.

This is just a summary of the contributions.

I would say, yeah, Helmholtz decomposition, fitting it to a stochastic dynamical system where we don't know the steady state distribution, and then going through the steps with this Laplace approximated one

studying its synchronization manifold, doing this cool coupled Lorenz thing, and then finally this sparse coupling conjecture about circular coupling.

And yeah, you can move to the discussion now or go back, dive into the slides or dive into different parts of the paper that I didn't even talk about here.

Whatever you guys think best.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

Maybe you could unshare and we'll have some time just to

talk and see um if anyone else has any questions in the chat so just one starting question from martin was the question above was whether it is even known that the lorenz attractor has a stationary state did we address that earlier oh sorry yeah we we addressed it like my initial answer that was i'm pretty sure it's not known but i'm not positive like i'm not an expert on the stochastic lorenz tractor but i'm pretty sure it's not known


SPEAKER_01:
Because I just imagine intuitively that writing down a unique solution to the Fokker Planck operator would be very difficult for that, which I imagine is difficult for any system that exhibits stochastic chaos.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

And another question from Martin is whether the sparse coupling conjecture requires a Gaussian as the stationary distribution.


SPEAKER_01:
No, it doesn't.

The requirements on it are not about the Gaussianity of the density.

They're more actually, so for this new paper that's in review now, there's an appendix in that paper that more, that fleshes out the conditions on the sparse coupling conjecture more rigorously.

And the conditions are not about the form of the stationary density.

They're actually more about basically

how local the coupling is in the solenoidal term.

So if the solenoidal terms are state-dependent, like solenoidal term ij depends on the states, then the sparse coupling conjecture only holds if that dependence is only a function of states i and j. But if the coupling between states i and j is actually a state-dependent function of state k, then the sparse coupling conjecture can be more easily violated.

Um, and I have a proof of that, that I can again, share my screen and show you, but it's not really related to your question, which was more about is the gaussianity related to the sparse coupling.

So yeah, it's not.


SPEAKER_02:
what you described there reminds me a lot of neuromodulation and about how like the effective connectivity of two regions could be modulated.

So here's a question from Miguel and then we can go to Dean and then I have a question as well.

So from Miguel, in nonlinear systems, high order correlations might arise.

I think this means the Hessian may not be enough to assess conditional independence.

Do you see a way to explore that with this method?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, my Yeah, that's a great question.

So my intuition is that if you use this method that we talked about in the second part, where it's like higher order density learning, if you

are basically the high order density learning where you're not assuming a Laplace approximation, but you're enforcing a state space local quadratic approximation to the potential function.

That means that you have a Hessian that's changing over state space.

what your point is basically saying is that because of higher order correlations there will probably be parts of state space even if for like three quarters of space space the hessian is zero there's a final quarter where the hessian will not be zero in that part of state space and i think what that allows you to do is basically say that insofar as the hessian does locally approximate the markov blanket between two states it means that there's regions of state space where the markov blanket

condition applies, and then other regions where it doesn't, and the Markov blanket disappears.

The claims in this paper about the conditional independence relationships, especially as they relate to sparse coupling, only apply to Hessians that even if they're state-dependent Hessians, which implies a non-Gaussian stationary distribution, that the entry of the Hessian is zero for every part in state space.

So I don't know if the sparse coupling conjecture, for instance, applies where there's a state-dependent Hessian entry that's zero in some parts of state space and non-zero in other parts.

I think that will throw a wrench in this formulation potentially.

But it would be interesting to say if you can still interpret

the entry of the Hessian as being a on-off signal of there's a Markov blanket between these two things.

What does it mean if that Markov blanket is changing as a function of where you are in state space?

Does it mean that sometimes there's a synchronization map between these two states, depending if they're visiting this region of state space versus that?

Or maybe that actually doesn't make sense.

So I don't know.

I think it can certainly be used to explore those questions.

But offhand, I don't have an easy answer.

I think that's a really good question.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Thank you.

Dean, if you'd like to throw one out.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'm just curious.

So we were just doing a recent paper and it was talking about sort of how did you get here?

How did you come to this place?

And I would like to ask Connor, I don't know the history of how housekeeping...

Was introduced to this formalism.

So I was just wondering if maybe you could walk us through that I don't think you sort of put a put a notice up on the door and called housekeeping.

It just seemed to Insert itself.

So maybe you could tell us how that how you know when it was introduced Not assumed right how you kind of dealt with that Yeah, yeah, it's a really good question.


SPEAKER_01:
So basically well, okay.

Yeah, it's interesting.

I

The whole point, so from my understanding, the evolution of this paper came into the beginnings of this paper was there was a meeting that I presented at Carl's lab meeting in 20, must have been late 2020, where I was trying to do this kind of Bayesian mechanical analysis on a very high-dimensional nonlinear system.

And I was trying to model basically schools of fish.

Can you look at certain groups of a big school of fish and interpret their states as if they're doing inference about something happening on the other side of the school?

And so at the end, we had a bunch of conversations.

I think we had three meetings total where we just went through the mathematics of how that's possible.

And it drove Carl to say, okay, what we're going to do is we're going to write down, we're going to write a paper where we deal with a system like that, where things are very state dependent and nonlinear in state space.

So that forced Carl basically to go back to the drawing board with the Helmholtz decomposition.

And as a result of all the mathematical formulation here, which is like 95%, just Carl, like writing that down and figuring things out, he realized that there's this extra term, this housekeeping term that pops out of the Helmholtz decomposition.

So my assumption is he named it housekeeping term because it was basically this

unintended side effect of trying to do the Helmholtz decomposition on systems that are highly nonlinear.

And so the housekeeping term came out as like, oh, I need to have this thing to make sure everything's neat and in order.

Because if you actually look at the mathematical derivation of where that term comes from, I'm not sure Carl was familiar with it from the literature, or if he just derived it and kind of thought of it himself.

I'm actually really not sure on his own

intellectual journey to getting there, but it is in the stochastic processes literature.

It's not like a totally new thing.

It's been known for like decades now.

But I think from his perspective, he labeled it housekeeping term because it was this new thing that pops out that he has to account for that keeps the full Fokker-Planck solution like in order.

So you basically need to add that on to make sure that certain terms don't become

like remain zero when you're trying to solve the Fokker-Planck solution.

It has to do something called the probability current to make sure the divergence of the probability current to zero need to add in this housekeeping term.

So my interpretation of the word housekeeping is very analogous to the word correction, like it's a correction term or a cancellation term.

But that was a vocabulary that Carl just started using in the paper.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Dot four, 32.4.

It's never too late.

You briefly touched on where I was going to go with this next question, which was about collective behavior.

So just how are you thinking about...

these kinds of formalisms in collective behavioral systems, are we thinking about multi-agent simulations of active inference agents like we had done with ants, or is there another level of analysis where the collective is sort of this shifting entity in and of itself?

Like where does this apply to collective behavior?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's a great question.

So I can just personally speak to that because that's like essentially the, the, the,

thing I'm doing during my PhD.

So one half of my PhD, or I'd say one third of my PhD is doing the first thing, which is very similar to what you've done with active inference, where I'm just taking a bunch of active inference agents and I'm making them school together.

I first tried doing that.

And like, that's a separate story that like, maybe we can have another live stream and talk about that.

Cause that's a cool thing, but that has nothing to do with.

writing down the stationary density of the entire system.

I tried to do that at first, but it's very hard because every active inference agent is a mixture between SDEs and ODEs.

And all the things we talked about today were just SDEs, stochastic systems.

Whereas when you're doing a single active inference agent, like doing predictive coding, its neural dynamics are actually solved as an ODE, which is a straight deterministic gradient descent on variational free energy.

So in a big

collective dynamical system that has some ODEs and some SDEs, writing down the stationary density becomes very difficult.

So because of that, we had all these meetings and this paper was one of the results of those meetings.

So the approach I'm taking now is

I'm not modeling individuals as active inference agents.

I'm just modeling each of them as like, for instance, the 2d position of a particle that has some velocity and some position.

And then there's classic schooling models like the V check model or the Reynolds model or the cousin model, which was identified by my advisor, where you're basically just trying to model

schooling fish or flocking birds as a bunch of little stochastic differential equations that are coupled to each other.

So the approach I'm taking now is applying exactly the formalism described today to higher dimensional systems.

And you encounter special challenges when you do that because trying to fit a polynomial expansion with all of the higher order interaction terms to a 100-dimensional system is just not going to be feasible if you're including every possible interaction.

It's just like you're going to have a combinatorially explosive state space.

So basically, a lot of the work I'm doing now is figuring out ways to fit the Helmholtz decomposition

using non-polynomial expansion methods that are more amenable to higher dimensional data, where you don't have this cursive dimensionality.

And so a lot of that involves what you could probably guess using amortized approximations like deep neural networks to fit the coefficients of the Helmholtz.

So that's something I'm literally working on right now.

So there's not too many results on there, but that's one of the two directions I'm going.

There's the multi-agent active inference, and then there's the

high dimensional Helmholtz decomposition stuff.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

I'd imagine that nested cognitive systems with shifting boundaries and functional relationships, that's challenging for any framework, but at least we're quite rapidly approaching the ability to have the grammar and the motifs to actually talk about those questions and then also see them from multiple perspectives.

either as cognitive agents interacting in a way where we don't even need to have the top level be anything specific or more from a top down perspective, which as you pointed out, it's hard to then introduce the cognitive elements into those particles.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, exactly.

Yeah.

I mean, just if I could just follow up on that, I think the ultimate goal would be to bridge both, right?

Like it would be sick to,

write down a big multi-agent active inference simulation where every single agent is actually doing a gradient descent on free energy to choose their actions, whether they're MDPs or predictive coding agents.

But then you can also write down a stationary density for the whole thing and identify the Markov blanket of the whole system.

Because then you would truly have the multi-scale perspective.

You would have the generative model of the individuals

you'd have the generative model of the whole existing simultaneously and then you could really ask questions like if i change the sensory precision of this single agent how does that affect the actual markov blanket at the collective level and that's just so like technically difficult that's like originally what i planned to do um but i ended up splitting into two separate things because just the mathematics behind it was too hard for me but uh yeah that would be really cool


SPEAKER_02:
I hope this isn't a misleading physical intuition, but it's almost like if we have a ball rolling on a surface, there could be the sort of particles within the ball, which are minimizing a potential function relative to their local position.

And then there's the ball rolling on the landscape.

And then the housekeeping term is almost like the landscape is soft.

And so it's state dependent what the landscape actually looks like.


SPEAKER_00:
landscape is the flow operator are Dean if you have a question and then Martin I have a question from him you have a so on that you on that same theme I'll give you a sort of a metaphorical story so if I'm standing on the bunny hill and I'm trying to control gravity and

And I'm sliding with all my friends.

We're flocking down here on the bunny hill and having a good time.

And we're looking up at the headwall.

And the irony is, of course, if you've been up there mathematically, you know that you can't control gravity on the headwall just because the pitch is different.

Now, to the person on the bunny hill and all of their behavior, they're all kind of swimming around down here on the sort of more gradual surface.

Conceptually,

they would have to let go of their concepts of what they're doing to control gravity down here those those same themes don't apply on that on that head wall how how do we get our minds wrapped around that the letting go of what we think

Our first intuition, we can see the head wall.

We're not even blinded to it.

Our first intuition would be, well, how will I control gravity up there when, in fact, the first thing you have to do is let go of your current concept, right?

So mathematically, how would we show that the benefit isn't in a continuation or a

A combinatorial thinking around that, it would actually be a reconciliation, a letting go of what you know in order to be able to take up something new.

That's the part where I'm not sure if your paper answers that, but at least it leaves enough space open that it isn't always a linear thing.

I'm down here, I'm going to make my way up the side of that hill, and I'm going to be able to apply exactly the same thinking to that new situation.

That's the part that I find quite fascinating.

I really appreciate the idea of collective behavior, but for me, it's how do I let go of one idea in order to be able to take up a new one that allows me to continue to FEP my way down the hill.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's really cool.

Yeah, no, I think that's like a critical, I would say that's a critical insight from all of this is showing that like something that seems optimal at your local level or whatever the concepts are that you use at your local level, really it's a different game when you zoom out or when you look at like a different scale.

So I think that has a lot to do with this idea of what me and Daniel were just talking about of like, how do the individuals, their language, the terms, the state space they think in terms of,

be a totally fundamentally different language than the language that the collective thinks in terms of which is the same thing of like me trying to plan now versus planning in the future planning now is based on making sure like i am sitting up straight and i'm drinking enough water but playing in the future is what am i going to do in 10 days and what's optimal from those perspectives can be like a totally different state space like a different language essentially


SPEAKER_02:
So the nesting of different timescales is important and also it's one reason the housekeeping term is important because for active systems that can undertake epistemic actions, if action is not recalculated every single perception, cognitive and action loop, then it's like you're going to be navigating based upon a mirage or a fantasy.

Let me ask this good question from Martin in the chat.

The construction in this paper of how internal states do inference on external states is still the same as in a free energy principle for a particular physics or not.

Is Miguel's criticism of the derivation of this in a free energy principle for a particular physics taken into account here or not?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a really good question.

So my understanding, okay, so the big thing that changed between free energy principle for a particular physics and

and what was done here, as well as what was done in Lance's paper.

The biggest change, and I think, I'm not sure, Miguel, if Miguel's here, he can correct me, if Miguel also made this, is we went from argmax to expectation.

So in free energy principle for a particular physics, the synchronization manifold was defined as a map between the modes of two conditional densities, i.e.

the maximum probability point to another max probability point.

The big move that allows us to get away with the difference between argomacs and expectation is that we make everything Gaussian so that they're the same.

And crucially, everything's differentiable because Gaussians are smooth.

And the argomacs function is crucially smooth because the expectation is smooth.

So I don't know how you deal with multimodal densities when you're mapping between the modes of

the two conditional densities because the argmax function may not be differentiable anymore.

And one of the main things that, and the differentiability of argmax slash expectation also factors into the differentiability of the synchronization manifold, which needs to be differentiable by construction.

So I think one of the main things that

um miguel was talking about was talking about the differentiability of sigma but he was also talking about the the flow of the internal states and whether the flow of the internal states can also be thought of as doing flows on variational free energy in that paper they really very nicely showed that the average flow is not the same as the flow of the average and therefore it's not guaranteed that any individual realization will look as if it's doing

inference.

So this paper, as well as Lance's paper on Bayesian mechanics, that does not say anything basically about the direction of the flow.

So I don't think there's any disagreement there.

In the new paper that's coming out, we actually do directly have a new

result that talks about the flow of individual trajectories that will more specifically address the flow based argument that Miguel was making in his paper where we're actually looking at the flow of an individual trajectory of the system in terms of gradients of the surprise of functional gradients of the variational free energy.

And we're doing that from different marginals of the steady state density.

So the flow of the active states as a gradient descent on the variational free energy of the particular states, for instance, or the blanket states.

So there's multiple things that can be answered from your question.

One has to do with the differentiability of sigma, which relies on the differentiability of things like arc max versus expectation.

And other things have to do with

relying on the differentiability of sigma to look at the flow of the most likely internal state given blanket states.

And neither of these papers actually have to do with the flow argument and whether the average flows equal the flow of the average.

They just have to do with on average does the most likely internal state given blanket states parameterize the density?

And that is the case.

That's mathematically the case.

And it also gets around the argmax versus expectation issue by making everything Gaussian.

Are there other issues?

Is there something more specific?

Because there are several critiques in Miguel's paper, and maybe I didn't get at the one that you're talking about, Martin.


SPEAKER_02:
I think this is a perfect place for either of you to have a last word.

Connor, though, thanks so much for scheduling this, for breaking into the .3 tier, which was...

unexpected but awesome and we really look forward to your future work and joining us for future discussions so any last comments if you would like to have them um yeah no thanks so much for having me on it's been a it's been a real pleasure there's been a really stimulating conversation and it's and it's also thanks to miguel and martin who were in the


SPEAKER_01:
whoever else was watching it is really appreciate the comments that was really nice and uh and yeah also just general apologies on the part of all the authors that they couldn't be here today and also for the earlier live streams uh on this paper but you did a really great job in discussing the paper um so yeah it's it's really cool to like that we put out the paper and then we get this attention and we get this chance to like talk about this stuff with you so

Thanks.

And thanks, Dean, for your great questions too.

It's really always fun chatting with you on here.

I think you were here at the last one as well that I was at.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah it's awesome and just like wow eight hours is not enough to explore and there could be so many ways to connect what's being said to core terms in the active inference ontology and it's just a great time so thank you connor thank you dean and everybody who is participating live and asynchronously
