## SV0glS6stuA

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, welcome to the course Physics as Information Processing taught by Chris Fields with Andra Aguirre as a course assistant hosted during 2023 by the Active Inference Institute.

This video is an overview of the course website.

It's going to cover some of the key pieces of the website and ways to participate.

The course homepage hosts the key links and a written course overview.

On the course syllabus page,

There's a table with each row being one session.

So here you can see the topic and the preparation for each of the six lectures.

And you can see information about the six discussion sections, which will be following each lecture by about two weeks.

Each lecture and discussion, you can click this blue icon and go directly to the video.

to rewatch it or watch it live, or you can go to the playlist to watch all videos sequentially.

that's one way that you can participate is watching videos live or re-watching them on the questions and answers page there's a form that you can submit you can say what is time and if you submit that question we'll get it on the back end and chris fields will answer the question and then the question and answer will come up to the public front end

And along with the transcripts of all sessions, these questions and answers will be part of the publication that we prepare at the end of the course.

So we heartily encourage all questions and answers.

It's a really easy and important anonymous way for you to contribute.

lastly you can go to register to join discussions so if you want to join those live interactive discussion live streams about two weeks after each lecture you can complete this form and we'll add you to calendar events so

Thanks again for your interest in the course, Physics as Information Processing.

And we hope to see you either watching and re-watching the videos, asking questions and answers, and maybe even registering to join the discussions.

Thanks and see you there.

## hOto96Q8sYQ

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome it's july 29th 2023 and we're here in session three discussion of the course physics is information processing at the active inference institute

We're having a follow-up discussion on Chris Fields' third lecture on quantum reference frames.

And we're looking forward to your participation.

So if you're watching along live and you've been invited to the calendar event, it's not too late to jump in.

If you're watching on YouTube, you can write any questions or comments in the live chat with Dean and Andrew here.

We're going to be looking at some of the key points and taking it in a few different directions, sharing our reference frames, making a shared one.

So Andrew, it'd be awesome to have you zoom in a little bit on the slide and then


SPEAKER_02:
feel free to to take us through some of the key points so that we can um see a little bit how you're seeing it thank you that looks good yep okay so let's let's start by reviewing um the last lecture from a couple weeks ago and then we can open up the discussions if there's any questions that appear in the live chat we can address those all right so

lecture two chris introduced this idea of uh the information processing between system a and b you know where they interact via qubits on a boundary and they have um reference frames that give meaning to this com to this communication you want to think of uh you

information processing as a communication channel, the way Shannon thought about it.

So that was in lecture two.

And lecture three, a couple of weeks ago, tried to make this more explicit by emphasizing the idea that this has to be physically embodied somewhere.

OK.

And I think that because we are so used to information being fungible,

in no small part because of the internet and everything.

It's a little hard to understand at first when the claim is made that you have a QRF that is non-fungible or you have a piece of quantum information that's non-fungible or things like the no-cloning theorem.

We're so used to information being fungible to it being zeros and ones that


SPEAKER_00:
it's a bit of a change in in in mindset at first but that's exactly what lecture three um introduced this was all old stuff right um could you maybe just unpack that a little bit what would it mean for information to be fungible or what's that stance like and then what does it mean for information to be non-fungible and what is that stance like


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I'm about to get there.

So let me scroll down the slides because that's addressed here.

So maybe I should have kept this in the beginning.

But anyways, session two talked about how information theory makes this simple and obvious.

And in session three, we talk about reference frames and mechanistically how all of this works.

So yeah, let's address that question of the difference between


SPEAKER_00:
between hold on one second let me use my mouse to scroll down here okay so that's that's a little faster right okay so um can you restate your question uh daniel yeah what would it mean for information to be fungible or non-fungible people might be familiar with that in the economic setting with non-fungible tokens and all of that but what are we talking about with informational fungibility


SPEAKER_02:
I think it basically comes down to whether you can replicate.

I mean, it's basically the difference between classical and quantum information, as far as I know.

Fungible information is everything that you can basically turn into a message of zeros and ones.

It's, you know, how you transmit it may be different, you know, the channel, the physical hardware and so on.

But at the end of the day,

It's something that you can write on a boundary and something that you can transmit as zeros and ones.

Whereas quantum information, you literally have to send the piece of hardware, the QRF.

At least that's how I understand it.

So a simple answer might be that it's information encoded in a piece of software versus a piece of hardware.

But I don't think that analogy is perfect.


SPEAKER_01:
But what do you?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, Dean, what do you think?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, here's what I'm curious about.

And again, you guys can help me with this.

As opposed to reference frames, I oftentimes

default to frame of reference.

And I know that in one of the live streams, what I tried to bring out was the idea that there was an ice cream cone looking at an ice cream truck.

And the question was always whether or not, which one of those two entities is it?

One is in the foreground and one is in the background.

And in this slide that Ander has up, the question is, is the non-fungibility because only A and B can decide whether

the VA as seen by B, the A is deeper into that image based on our frame of reference and the B is closer or is the B the one that's actually deeper and the A is the one that's in the foreground.

And I was wondering whether the idea of non-copy ability is because of that depth of field aspect that cannot be determined unless it's literally


SPEAKER_02:
handed over the way that chris was describing it i think i think that's basically accurate i think um i'm not sure i can answer the question but i think i have the feeling that chris well chris said this in the lecture that i mean at the end of the day the krf is somewhere in your your nervous system

You bring up a good point, right?

It looks like this slide is a bit of an optical illusion.

Whether you see A or B deeper, I guess it depends on something going on inside your head.

This picture is so symmetrical that if you focus enough on it, you can change your opinion.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, just to even connect that to what we're talking about, the classical fungible information on the holographic screen, on the blanket, and then the quantum cognitive rotation is those two images.

are on the screen identical and then whether it gets a quantum rotation such that the three points of the axes are closer to us than the intersection on that kind of tetrahedron or the other way around whether the ballerina is rotating one way or the other that's not on the boundary so the information about the depth of field

is part of the qrf or part of the enactment of the qrf and it's not written on the boundary and that goes back to the preparation question and not just the measuring yeah like in the preparation if your whole enculturation or the last five minutes

it was entrained or you were holding an object that predisposed you to think that the vertex of the intersection was further away, that's the preparation that sets your prior so that when you get this ambiguous artifact, you rotate it into the most natural position cognitively.

And that's the preparation that sets you up for measurement.

No measurement can happen without a preparation.

What do you think, Andrew?


SPEAKER_02:
Uh, sure.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Everything you said makes sense.

Um, so, uh, perhaps let me, uh, let me recall what I said around the slides.

Uh, there was a, in, in this whole spirit or philosophy of making, emphasizing that information is physical, you know, from QV, this whole thing, um, one of the glaring omissions in, in physics was

the embodiment of the reference frame, which was treated as an abstraction, you know, in classical physics, such as by Galileo, but maybe even Einstein, even if he, my hunch is that he did have more of this instinct of, you know, particularly in all those thought experiments of trying to chase the light ray, you are chasing the light ray, right?

So at the end of the day, but I mean, this is a whole process of making

observer on the reference frame more and more explicit and more and more physical because at the end of the day it has to right if if you start with this assumption that um solipsistic assumption almost that you know all you see and you know is part of the same material uh ether that you are then you know then you are part of the universe that and you're observing something that

is out there uh so you need to make include a theory of what it means for you to be observing that right and at the end of the day the observer has to be physical that's what was emphasized by by chris at the beginning of this lecture so this jump from treating the reference frame as an abstraction to a real physical entity and yeah these are these these people have uh

talk a lot about in these papers that are quoted there, but I should also remark if folks want to see this, it's coming up in high energy theory also in recent work of Saskind and others where they talk about quantum reference frames very explicitly.

So I don't have the citations off the bat, but it's definitely becoming an important thing in the last 20 years.

this attempt to really explicitly treat the reference frame and the observer as a quantum entity, as a physical entity.

OK, so this.

That's what I just said, OK, the jump from treating things reference frames as abstractions to physical objects.

And because we cannot make

perfect copy of quantum information.

We say that these are unique, unclonable, and unfungible.

So in order to recreate an experiment perfectly, this is addressed as the part of fungibility or not, right?

Can Alice, if you have some sort of quantum experiment and Alice and Bob are, you know, it's the usual EPR thought experiment or whatever, Alice and Bob are separated

by light years.

Is it enough if they want to recreate the same exact, the same experiment for Alice to send string of zeros and ones?

Well, if you had an experiment where that's enough, then you can recreate it with fungible information.

If not, then you need to somehow send non-fungible information, which really implies sending a piece of hard work.


SPEAKER_00:
um can i can i add another uh another piece here look on the previous uh slide so this looks really technical and scientific but let's think about alice's laboratory is alice's brain mind and bob's analogously alice is thinking about what to say and then says it

And that information might be written in a chat form.

It might be said verbally.

It might be transmitted through a digital or analog signal.

But at some point, it's going through this classical informational interface.

And then Bob's laboratory is perceiving and unpacking it.

And the question of semantic alignment is such that if Alice gives a shopping list of 10 items, if there's semantic alignment, Bob would be able to go to the store and then find those 10 items.

And it made me think of the dictionary definition of left and right.

So this gets back to our discussion of whether the vertex on these axes is coming towards us or away from us.

So I looked up the dictionary definition of left.

on, towards, or relating to the side of a human body or of a thing that is to the west when the person or that thing is facing north.

So that's, I guess, one attempt to anchor what it means to be left.

The second definition is the left-hand part, side, or direction.

And you could imagine there's an analogous definition for right.

The point is you can't describe verbally leftness and rightness or chirality in general because its referent is an embodied perspective.

And so if Alice said, okay, you're going to go down the street and then turn left at the stop sign, how would Alice communicate to Bob what leftness meant at that stop sign versus rightness?

And that's this question of flipping left.

And the way that the quantum formalism accommodates that is through the wick rotation and the quantum cognitive events where the fungible, transmittable, holographic information gets rotated into the imaginary axis with the formalisms that enable it to be rotated at all, but that means you could rotate it left, quote, or rotate it right.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that's

That's a very good explanation.

I don't know if I have much to add.


SPEAKER_01:
Dean, you wanted to say something?

I don't know the answer to this, but to take what Daniel just said, to take the basic concept of being able to take something that for all intents and purposes can appear one way or another, and then turn that into how Chris closed the last lecture with,

we are seeing ourselves as both being entangled and also being separatable.

How did we go literally from a three-dimensioned vertex to we're both entangled and we're not living in a paradox.

That's just the way it is.

We're also...

removing ourselves or separating ourselves at the same time.

That's what I would like to know, because somewhere between three arbitrary lines and complexity is not a paradox.

Something has to be happening, and I'm not exactly sure how that transition plays out.

Anybody want to enlighten me?

Can you repeat your question, please?

Well, how do we go?

At this point of the reference frame description of saying you can't copy it, all you can do is pass it.

Because we think things could be flipped based on internal reference frames, internal meanings, and

Donald Kenkel- turtle models, the thing we choose for context yada yada yada goes all the way out to the conclusion of end of chris's.

Donald Kenkel- conversation with us in the in number three where he said bottom line is is that it's not a paradox that as things become more and more complex, then.

it wants to get to a place of entanglement, alignment, a sense of agreement, and at the same time, wants to remain separate.

So between those two things,

A whole lot has happened, and I don't think we've skipped over it, but we certainly haven't opened it up and really looked at it closely.

And I'm just curious what's in between those two scales.

I agree.


SPEAKER_02:
I think we're going to cover that towards the end of the talk.

but I agree.

I don't know how you see this related to QRS or the stuff we just talked about, but I think it's the big question in this lecture, right?

That was like, where does this tension between increasing complexity and wanting to predict what the environment is doing?

One requires entanglement and the other one requires separability, at least colloquially speaking.

I think this tension

is um basically what the free energy principle comes down to right daniel what do you think you have the free energy and you have the e minus ts and one is prediction error i mean not exactly e minus ts right that would be through dynamics but you know what i mean one is prediction error and the other one is what was it i can't remember


SPEAKER_00:
i'll definitely look forward to to the the technical unpacking that that you'll get to soon but but i was reminded of the william blake quotation do what you will this life's a fiction and is made up of contradiction so let's modify that um project what you will rotate what you will space times a fiction

Not that it's false, but that it's a projected fictionalization, that it doesn't have the ontological primacy that the topology of communication does, and is made up of contradiction.

Yes, and it's made up of this tension between

fitting and not overfitting between aligning and the principle of unitarity and differentiating and becoming through others we become ourselves and that type of articulation and recognizing that two complementary forces like convex and concave come into existence at once like a zero to two jump is not an issue or or a stumbling block

it's that we wouldn't have it any other way.

Couldn't have it any other way.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Sure.

We'll get there towards the end.

You can almost even call it a duality.

It's not far-fetched.

I mean, it's the sort of thing that I think most people would be happy to take for granted, such, you know, supersymmetry, like you have...

two kinds of particles, but the same amount of them, and dualities that are all over the place.

So I think it's fairly, it's not unreasonable to just accept that there is a tension between increasing complexity, which you want AME to be separable for, and accuracy of prediction.

Now, how this is related to emergent space and this QRS stuff, I don't want to make very part

fetch claims.

We'll talk about emergent space later in the course, but for now, let's say a few more words about QRFs, and then we'll get to the complexity stuff towards the end.

So QRFs are almost building blocks, if you want, for information processing.

Here, it's very useful to recall the definition that I feel.

I think we have

mentioned before of information as being differences that make a difference that's probably the best flow definition of information i've heard and i think i think it does a lot of work i mean it's almost mathematical but anyways we need to unpack it a little more and and see so for a difference to make a difference what do you want out of qrf right and surprisingly i mean not surprisingly but reassuringly

I think would be the word.

You need a QRF to have sensory action and a default state, right?

This is sort of like where your Bayesian prior distribution is encoded.

These three things will give you a building block for any information processing.

And that ties together with all the work in the

energy literature and perception action loops and and whatnot um so before we see mathematically how a qrf is defined uh i think it's more illustrative and i think chris went exactly on the right order when when he presented this a couple weeks ago seeing uh examples from nature

These are actual pieces of hardware that are effectively QRFs.

And it's remarkable how they map to... Well, I'll skip ahead a little bit.

But when you get to the mathematical definition of a QRF as a quantum system that you can specify with this category theory diagram, you have incoming arrows.

into a node that then expands, right?

And this roughly corresponds to measurement and preparation degrees of, not degrees of freedom, degrees of freedom would be the same, right?

When you attach it to the boundary, but measurement and preparation stages, I guess, would be the better word.

But anyways, let me go back to these examples, right?

And Daniel, you're the biologist here, so correct me if I say anything wrong here.

You have...

a cartoon picture of the bacteria i think and this is a very simple sort of thing right it navigates in the direction of food and and that's it right so it is a very simple rudimentary example of a curette you have the sensory uh stage here i guess the degrees of freedom i guess the degrees of freedom

um it's not obvious here what the boundary is that's one thing uh but it is a good enough picture to see the resemblance to here we have the measurement which in this in this case you're trying to measure concentration of food you have your node here c which is your prior distribution for concentration of food

And finally, you have the output, the preparation stage, which is your, you know, the rest of this chemical network that will control and steer this bacteria, right?

So there's here, you want to call it the action degrees of freedom that will steer this bacteria in the direction of food.

And likewise with cell division, this I understand even less.

The network appears more complicated.

uh but i think it's fair to say that at the end of the day all these chemical networks that appear super complicated somehow have to be mapped to this

category theoretical diagram.

That's all there is to it.

You're going to have the sensory input and the action output, and you're going to have the default chemical concentration, which amounts to this node over here.

You remember this from last lecture, right, Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and the cone cocoon we explored also in in live stream 17 on the bayesian semantic information flow but i'll kind of add a point about these biological systems um in relationship to to artificially specified systems and what that helps us understand about perception cognition action

So the cone-co-cone diagram has this bowtie architecture or this kind of like two pyramids touching point to point where there's a preparation and a measurement which can be different dimensionalities or different scopes.

Like it could be multi-input, multi-output or multi-input, single output, vice versa and so on.

But they come through this...

eye of the needle with C prime here.

Now contrast that kind of architecture represented here abstractly with what we see in the bacterial process and in the cell division process.

These have that kind of a bow tie perception, cognition, action architecture or measurement cognitive integration preparation architecture.

In contrast, we see, for example, an artificial neural network where the input and the output layers are usually lower dimensional, maybe an image coming in with several hundred pixels and a single output like a classifier coming out the other end, but a dimensional explosion in those internal cognitive layers.

But in biological systems, it's actually exactly the opposite.

For example, many, many, many receptors on the cell surface, on the holographic boundary, the sensorium of the cell, but then there are these common secondary messengers that many pathways converge upon.

So that reflects the kind of radically different architecture that a QRF embodies as opposed to the approach taken by disembodied intelligence frameworks, which use dimensional explosion internally to try to categorize and classify and find edge cases versus this dimensional winnowing that is reflective of these embodied intelligences.


SPEAKER_02:
And if I may make a tangential comment here also, I think the good thing about these two examples is that they also showcase the fact of how the deep implications of a scale-free biology, if you want to call it this way, we tend to think of these sorts of processes such as here,

only happening at the level of the nervous system in animals, or as you said, neural networks, right?

We tend to associate this with neural networks.

And perhaps evolution has steered us in a way that endowed us with nervous systems to make these things, maybe these are higher up in the layers, but really there is, you know, that's a bit of an arbitrary distinction that we make, you know, the processes going on at the cellular level

even if they don't appear to have anything to do with the nervous system, my understanding is that there are some generic properties that are the same, and everything that has to do with information processing.

It manifests maybe slightly different when it comes to explicit nerves, but at the end of the day, it's the same generic process going on.

Would you say that's right, Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
The ontological claim is that it's the same generic process happening, whereas the more instrumentalist claim is that we can model it with some shared abstractions.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, okay, so we can continue, right?

So, from, you know, I don't have a whole lot to say, Daniel,

said quite a bit about, at the end of the day, QRF is, you can visualize it as this diagram.

And, you know, you can think of it as, if you are more familiar with the picture of a neural network and ways on a neural network and so on, that's the way to think about it.

Now, let's continue with explicit embodiment, if you wish.

So, QRFs in the formalism have to be attached to

A boundary.

Boundary degrees of freedom.

And I should add another remark here.

I think, and personally, to me also, the hard part about this quantum pre-energy principle formalism intuition is what you said at the beginning, is the fact that it's topological, right?

So very often it's not clear what the boundary degrees of freedom are, right?

Because we tend to think of boundaries as, you know,

geometrical, and certainly the classical FEP treats them as geometrical.

But that's not the case here in the quantum pre-energy formalism, where we have emergent space, as will be talked about in later sessions.

But that's just one quick remark to make.

At the end of the day, though, even if it's topological, we're going to have real degrees of freedom that these

QRF is attaching to this cone-cocoon diagram.

And you're going to have measurement operators that yield classical outcomes, plus and minus one.

And then you can think of this QRF, or more abstractly, this cone-cocoon diagram as a neural network, if it was acting on those bander qubits.

And then back propagating some sort of action signal preparation.

OK.

Let's not forget that Landauer's principle and so on requires that we are mindful of energy constraints on computation.

And that gives us the following picture.

Number one, we're going to have to use energy from the environment to fuel our computation, to fuel our observation.

That means that right away you cannot use the entirety of your boundary to gather information.

It necessitates an allocation of resources, right?

Here E is the observed environment and the blue portion is a thermodynamical sector where you extract free energy and dump heat in order to run this computational process.

And then furthermore, you can have a memory sector where you write things on the boundary.

And this takes up energy also, writing information onto the boundary by Landauer's principle will take up information.

And Chris called this the minimal interest in Observer because it has a memory sector.

And why minimal here?

Minimal interest implies that we have more than one layer.

Here, the process of writing things into the

into a memory sector requires us to have a clock so that we can label those memories in time okay so we do have time as part of this formalism just not space yet okay the time has to be internal to the observer


SPEAKER_00:
Just one piece on that that Chris mentioned, and as you echoed, time here is an attribute of some cognitive systems in terms of their internal understanding so that they can sort memories and understand what came earlier or later.

It's not something that's a priori defined externally, which is the case in the kind of space-time first.

Now, how do we fit communication into here?

We flip that, we're talking about the topology of communication as ontologically primal, and now certain kinds of sophisticated agents, it's not like necessarily true of a rock or a metronome or a particle of a gas, but some kinds of cognitive systems are such that they are able to generate an internal clock concept.

And that doesn't have to be the same thing as what's happening on the wall with Kronos.

This can reflect a purely internal time, Kairos, that enables observers or interactors that have different clock structures.

And then Landauer's principle helps us arbitrage or connect the informational demands to the energetic or the metabolic demands.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
So when I first listened to the lecture, I thought when the...

term or phrase trade-off was raised, I traditionally have thought of trade-off as kind of a binary.

If I'm picking this, I'm trading off against all the other things that I didn't pick.

So one or the other, or others, plural.

But when I saw this, and especially when I heard it in the context of things like degrees of freedom,

I began to wonder whether it is because it could sit on either side of that boundary.

It could be a priori or it could be ad hoc or post hoc, a trade-off, which prior to this conversation, I just assumed that a trade-off was one or the other.

But essentially what this implies is it,

it's still a kind of a degree of how much weight you put into it, and then you kind of cross a threshold, and then you've made your pick.

You've completed your trade-off.

Or did I, again, did I misinterpret what I was hearing?

If it's topological as opposed to the more conventional space-time perspective.

Is this, can a trade-off be both ad hoc and post hoc, seemingly at the same time?


SPEAKER_00:
Very interesting question.

Let us just let it float and continue on.

Enter.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, because again, if it's, I'll just say this, if it can be that trade-off,

that would really move us out of the classical realm.

That would essentially say that any time we've made a pick, we really haven't made a pick.

There's still a whole bunch of other things that are going to happen that can change whatever that action is that we thought we carried out or enacted.

If we're talking about an internal


SPEAKER_00:
internality state which is what i think we want i think we want to be able to change our minds let me take that one way dean um the the analytical equations of the action perception loop don't tell us in implementation like if we're going to write it in code whether we should

use action first procedurally to update our observations or whether we enable our observations to to wag the dog and then select action at the end of the loop so is it a perception action loop or is an action perception loop and those enable a kind of um seesaw

where sometimes we want what we learn to change what we do, and other times we want what we do to change what we learn, and having that kind of a fulcrum or a pivot, and then again to connect it to the vertex popping in and out, the analytical formalisms inscribed on the screen of the FEP, like the textbooks,

they're ambiguous whether we lead with action and have inference follow, or whether we lead with inference and have action follow, or lead with action and have inference follow, whichever one of the combinations there are.

And then that trade-off or runoff is broken by specific embodied cognitive agents.

that that trade-off about the um the procedural primacy of perception or action can't be broken generically right it certainly makes for a lot of waste heat if you're not careful it'd be exhausting a lot anyway


SPEAKER_02:
okay so um so i i see i i don't know if we can um talk about intent um much with this formalism but we can take a very descriptive uh approach to it and um go down here a little more uh actually before i don't want to get ahead of myself uh what i mean by that is

Whether we can put intent or not in this hierarchy, I don't know.

I don't know if it matters a whole lot, but at least we can talk about it operationally and descriptively and say, just like when you have a clock, the clock is just there.

If you don't have the clock, you don't have the memory, and that's it.

And likewise here, if we don't have attention,

attention control compartment we just cannot have we cannot play with all these QRFs that are non-commutative at the same time so if there is no attention control system to begin with we don't we cannot talk about a system that has non-commutative QRFs meaning here one one presumably goes to memory sectors the other one goes to environment sectors and so on uh so

So this is certainly a necessity of the fact that we have different sectors of the boundary being allocated to different purposes, such as environmental observation and memory and so on.

Within the environment, it's worth remarking that here, if you think deeply about first principles and what it means to observe an entity,

um well you still come down to these differences that make a difference sort of thing right which involves whenever you're looking at the environment to if you're going to identify a system you need sort of a background that tells you that puts the system in context right so that you can identify the system as something distinct i think this again is something that we have talked about in previous uh discussions where

The easiest picture here is something like the speed gauge in your car, where P is the gauge itself.

It tells you the speed, but it's meaningless without the reference system.

Outside of the thing that stays invariant, the context, the background, that gauge moving means nothing to you.

So we come back to this idea of if we think of information as differences that make a difference in terms of first principles, this environment sector that we saw earlier has to be further broken down into pointer and reference states.

Again, this is covered in depth in Chris's papers.

I'm thinking particularly of free energy for generating quantum systems.

And again, just to reiterate, this attention control staff compartment, which is, by the way, very reminiscent to the hierarchy that was earlier with the clock arising higher up in the hierarchy, deeper into the layer.

Likewise, whenever we have, so whenever you're writing something into a memory, you need to have that clock.

Whenever you are deploying uncommunicative reps, you're going to need

attention control compartment.

And we just described this operationally.

If you didn't have it, then the agent would not be what it is.

It could not deploy those noncommutative QRFs.

So marching on.

We'll just end here with the QRF alignment and the free energy principle.

Just a few more words.

This is possibly

the most interesting picture in this in this uh presentation and just we can recall here uh the possibilities for care of alignment and how free energy comes into play in this in this um formalism so is that we call we call a the trivial interaction we call this a thermal interaction

and and then you have a bunch of possibilities right and depending on each possibility you're going to see things as uh notes or as in the paper says non-local hidden variables the last situation is what we call alignment when we have qrfs of the same size perfectly aligned okay so i can't quite recall i think this

this would be the situation where you have noiseless classical computation, right?

You just have A and B just interacting, you know.

And also, this is the situation where, correct me if I'm wrong, Daniel, this is entanglements, right?

Asymptotically, once all the curves are aligned, you have entanglement.

And now we can tie back maybe two gains earlier.

So these two slides conclude the discussion, basically, and then we can open it up.

So given these possibilities for how QRFs can be aligned, QRFs deployed by AMD can be aligned, and how in each situation you're going to get noise or whatever, then what does...

free energy principle say in this quantum setting well minimizing variational free energy leads you to entanglements okay so if theorem here if you are in the picture of me here and the qrfs are are aligned uh a and b are going to be intact

Now, there is a tension between this tendency towards alignment, as the free energy principle will carry you, and observed reality, which is that we're not just a blob of entangled particles.

There is separability, and systems are at tension between maintaining separability and at the same time being correlated enough

to the environment so as to be able to predict a company.

And now we can maybe go into a more philosophical discussion on the free energy principle.

I should also say, in the last month, just like I talked earlier about TRFs, Lenny Susskind, whose recent paper that talks about TRF, it led me into a rabbit hole of looking into his recent work.

And he's talked a lot about complexity.

I'm being very speculative here.

So if someone can pull me up, that would be good in the comments.

But just to skimming through some of his papers, I saw a monograph in 2018 where he talks about complexity.

He puts forward the second law for complexity.

in quantum systems and increase complexity.

And it is very reminiscent of what's going on here.

You have a tension between systems tending to entanglement and the other side of the free energy function, if you wish, where systems increase in complexity.

And that necessarily requires that A and B are separate.

So, Daniel, do you have any comments at this point?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, there's a lot to it.

I like that you showed the four possibilities in the image above and said it was one of the most interesting figures.

I agree.

And how to connect this to the classical FEP

and also how to see the quantum FEP not as just a second story built on top of the classical FEP, which would be kind of like a historical chronological understanding of the theoretical apparatus, but it's almost like the quantum FEP was like a basement we didn't know about

because it it gives a broader context and though it appeared conceptually several years later in the timeline we understand that doesn't give it a secondary um status so what it really means for the classical FEP to be kind of like

a special case of this um actually more generic setting there's just a lot i'm very uncertain maybe i can i can i i can wrap it up uh and then if dean or you want to say something um we can continue with that but let me conclude and this is all i have to say for today um


SPEAKER_02:
I think, I mean, I'm sure Chris will explain this more in coming sessions and lectures, but I think the main key difference is in the emergence of space.

How it might emerge from something more fundamental, maybe a tensor network or who knows.

But that's the big difference, right?

And I suppose the quantum free energy principle generalizes

classical free energy principle because it doesn't have this spatial embedding.

Now, this, to me personally and also to folks in the audience who are asking questions, is probably the hardest part to wrap your head around.

And I foresee interest in those discussions and lectures that deal with the concept of emergent space.

Because every time you try to, and I've done this myself, I've been thinking about how you could apply this formalism to better known pictures or compare it, for instance, with thermal equilibrium, with relaxation with thermal equilibrium.

And then you start thinking about, okay, what is the boundary and so on.

It's far from obvious, right?

Because again, you have to remind yourself that the definition is topological.

So in that regard, I think it might be worth talking about one of the questions that came up that I thought was good.

And then I can call it a day on this end.

So this question, and I think it was the first question asked since the last lecture.


SPEAKER_00:
Can you just read the full question and then read the full answer?


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

It's number 28 here.

Can you guys see it?


SPEAKER_00:
Should I zoom in a little bit?

It's pretty small, but reading it will be good.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so this question, I think, I've asked myself this question too, maybe in a different way, but basically it gets to the point of what I was saying earlier, right?

That it would be nice to see how we can

use this quantum free energy principle formalism to recover maybe familiar settings such as relaxation to thermal equilibrium yeah the heat equation but that's far from always how you do it if your definition is topological right so the question says what happens when the agent becomes identical to the environment when the model has been improved so much that it does not differ from the environment is this a stadium impossible would it be thermoamical

equilibrium, maximum entanglement.

Okay, so clearly it's not thermodynamical equilibrium, but I think what the person is asking, if I'm understanding this correctly, they're wondering, okay, so if the free energy principle drives A and B towards entanglement, then is it fair to say that they have, that any distinction between them has dissolved, right?

That they have merged into the same thing.

And that has to do with this whole definition of philosophical debate of thing-ness that Carl Christen is a proponent of.

What it means for two things to be separate.

So let's see what Chris said.

Kristen has pointed out that the limit of the classical FEP, the limit of perfect prediction, corresponds to generalized synchrony between system and environment.

Each sends messages that the other can perfectly predict.

Now, however, it's clear, and I'm not reading anymore.

I'm making a quick remark here.

I'll continue in a second.

In the classical FEP, it's clear

that A and B, even if they are in the perfect limit of the FEP, they remain different entities, right?

Because you have that, if you wish, that extra layers of differentiation coming from their spatial embedding, right?

In the classical FEP, that is clear.

But they haven't, even if they are getting synchronized,

they have not lost their separate identities.

You can always say, well, this is the one that was to the left, and this is the one that was to the right, pun intended in the earlier discussion, right?

You have that extra resource for separating them, if you wish, by virtue of the spatial embedding, right?

The spatial embedding is giving you this extra information that allows you to keep track of AMB separately.

Okay, so I'll continue.

This notion depends on the system and its environment being separated and has distinguished somehow.

In classical formulations, they are separated in ordinary 3D space, i.e.

they occupy different locations.

So they are different because they occupy different locations, right?

But if you don't have that geometrical background, then how do you know that they're different, right?

Okay, so I continue.

The quantum formulation is background-free, meaning it assumes no space-time embedding.

System and environment do not have different locations, even though they have different sets of degrees of freedom in the overall Hilbert space.

Here, the limit of the FEP is maximum entanglement.

This does not mean that the system and its environment are identical.

They aren't, since they have different degrees of freedom.

So this just addresses the question I just posed.

It means that their joint state

is not separable okay um into a system s and environment t their states are no longer conditionally independent this is distinct from thermal equilibrium which means that they have the same temperature while remaining separable uh and that their interaction can be characterized as the change of thermal fluctuations ie noise so i i guess this is a nice format for things that are to come but i i do think that this

whole idea of emergent space is going to be possibly one of the most important in the course.

And it's going to help stick out between the classical and the quantum formulations for sure.


SPEAKER_00:
Dean, what's your take on this?


SPEAKER_01:
What I saw was that when you have that kind of alignment, that perfect alignment, that was one.

That was D in that diagram, right?

That was one state of a complex state that included an A and a B and a C and...

probably a whole bunch of other ways that yeah right so that one state where you've got this kind of entanglement isn't isn't into perpetuity like you don't get there and then stay there and that's where i think the question of separability and complexity

It still works because just because you momentarily got into a place that we define here as D doesn't mean you stay there indefinitely.

You could be swapping around to B and C and A in the next instant.

So that's that at least that holds the complexity piece up.

That moment, for however long that moment is, where XA and XB are aligned, isn't permanent.

So it's not predictable in that sense.

Therefore, it is complex.

I still don't know how we get, though, that the closer we get to agreement, the more complex things are.

Unless we're just talking about D in this array of A, B, C, and D.

That goes back to that quantum reference frame.

I think, like I said, again, maybe I'm interpreting this wrong, but when I message pass, the reason why I have to literally give it over to the other person and let them have it, I can't have them copy what I'm doing, is because there has to be, I guess that reinforces the separability piece of this as well.

The fact that I can't give them a copy that I

can only give them the information and then they've got to sort of unpack it in their own way of taking it off the boundary.

But again, I struggle with this.

I'm guilty as charged, but what I'm trying to do is trying to come up with my own narrative so that what Chris is saying


SPEAKER_00:
make sense to me as opposed to make sense to the world which is what chris is trying to do i'll try with another speculative fiction so um there's a screen

between let's just say the stage and the audience or whatever it's a holographic screen and on each side of the screen there's some embodied object so that means that it must have um vol it's a volume enclosing object because points and lines and planes are only abstractions every real physical object encloses volume and now

a light is going to be coming from behind each object facing the screen.

And that's this kind of

uh cone that we're seeing from each side it's like the shadow cast by the object so if the object was a sphere then it would be projecting down to a circle onto the screen if the shape were a cube it could be projecting down and so where the light is positioned is the um perspective that that cognitive entity is taking on its qrf

those lights could move.

So now we have this situation where the two spotlights are moving.

Maybe the shapes are staying the same.

Maybe they're changing too.

And it's like two searchlights scanning across this B oval.

And sometimes they are perfectly locked.

I mean, there could be a situation where they're perfectly aligned or there could be situations where they're totally disjoint

And each of those situations have different implications for what one entity sees

when it looks at the screen maybe like the shadow is the only part where you can see because the rest of it is too blinding or something like that and so then if we're in case a here where um maybe b doesn't have a projection or maybe b's projections totally somewhere else then a is in this solipsistic i'm the active agent interacting within an inert world setting

And D is like potentially the computer engineer's classical dream or asymptote, which is like all the data going through the USB cable is just being perfectly noiselessly received.

And then we also get these B and C cases

But A is kind of like the inner world.

D is like the...

perfect communication channel, and then to connect it just to Friston's concept of generalized synchrony, as we've talked about many times, generalized synchrony doesn't mean lockstep.

Two agents could reduce their uncertainty about each other, not by doing the same thing at every time step, but for example, by turn-taking.

And I think that points the way to how we get reduction of variational free energy, reduction of prediction error, surprise, and so on, without

especially spatial temporal enmeshment, but not necessarily even informational identity enmeshment, because you could have two things that through their alignment become actually differentiated.

And that could increase the mutual information between two metronomes, not just to have them going in the same direction, but to have them going in opposite directions.

The mutual information in those two settings is gonna be high,

So it's not the case that generalized synchrony means that things are becoming blurred.

We could actually also have integrated information through increased articulation, not just decreased.

And then...

life finds a way or cognition finds a way on this trade-off frontier of in our pursuit of unitarity will we blur to unify or will we differentiate to unify but those are the paths we have we don't have the um backwards ratchet yeah yeah makes sense


SPEAKER_02:
any other ladder slides enter uh no that's it uh so chris made a few more remarks at the end about uh language here uh but he mentioned that he's gonna talk more about this in the coming lecture so we'll just leave it up to him yeah there could be some very


SPEAKER_00:
powerful and interesting linguistic opportunities for updating our speaking to reflect what we are learning here.

I don't know what those necessarily are

whether it's a syntactic or a semantic thing or whether it's a narrative thing but how to actually re-enter some of these formalisms into our folkish understanding could just be immensely powerful and

we could have a lot of integrity between the natural language way that potentially were already showing up for engagement and some of these formalisms that get to first principles about interacting entities and boundary conditions and all of that.

Dean, any penultimate thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Not really.

I'm going to go back and listen to the, I'm going to listen to Chris's comments again about this common cause and the fine tuning assumption and whether that's sort of a,

metaphorically a dialing in or what what he what he means exactly by the fine tuning in the in the context of this conversation today what you just kind of said about are we dulling something here or are we sculpting something to make it more fittable like i'm going to go and now and go back and listen to what he talks about in terms of fine tuning and maybe update my priors around that so


SPEAKER_00:
are any last uh thoughts or maybe scroll over to the um schedule of the course again just so we can close on that yeah we're halfway through we just completed the third discussion section now so we've had three lectures and three discussions it's all downhill from here um by the way this was the first midterm you guys both did well

um we're gonna head into four or like session four with these last three how agents use multiple communication channels and that's going to get connected to the quantum fvp how space time emerges from communication which is something that we've brought up a bunch it's been in the background but but making that explicit it's going to be exciting and then section six i think is just going to be such a jumping off point

because the scope and the intensity of what is transpiring is extreme so connecting it to biology which is to say life more fully and where we go in in 23 and beyond that's going to be awesome so any last words enter uh no i just think of what you said um very i would i would say it's going to be uphill


SPEAKER_02:
in terms of how interesting it's going to get.

I feel in a good sense, meaning that we're planning.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, I encourage people to check out the course website and submit questions that they'd like to see addressed by Chris.

Also to register and join these participatory discussions.

There'll be three more of them.

So if you want to join, share your QRF, be part of the publication of all of these works that we'll compile at the end and just get your...

exoskeleton in the game with what is happening here it'd be really awesome to hear more voices and and to have more on board okay thank you dean and andrew till next time

## jWEcQVcgleM

SPEAKER_05:
All right.

Hello, welcome everyone.

It is Saturday, August 26th, 2023.

And we're here in Physics as Information Processing in the fourth discussion.

Thank you everybody who's joining live or watching live or watching in replay.

This should be a really fun discussion as usual.

So we're going to have Ander provide some slides and some initial clarifying questions for Chris.

And then we're going to open it up for our guests to ask some questions and check in a live chat, see what people are talking about.

So Ander, to you for some slides and overview.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, thank you, Daniel.

So last time we were starting to talk about multi-agent communication and log protocols and all of that.

So let's quickly go through the slides and sort of try to recall the main concepts.

So I guess from just to go back to session three for a second, one takeaway was that when you have noncommuting sectors in a boundary, that's necessarily going to require classical communication between them.

So that is more or less the whole point of today, how noncommuting sectors may communicate, have to communicate classically.

Another introduction in this last lecture was this new graphical notation, TQFT, if you wish to call it that way, for any of these clock ticks.

So let's recall the whole process of...

measuring a sector environment and writing it into a memory environment, it can be simplified to this sort of tick that connects to two portions of the boundary.

And everything we talk about log protocols will be written in this graphical notation.

So let's keep going a little bit.

This slide is on the paper on sequential measurements from 2022.

These are basically the formal mapping between QRFs and topological quantum field theories.

So we're more used to the picture here on the left-hand side of this slide with the QRF sectors.

But pictorially speaking, this is at least how they map.

okay and then uh from then uh we started talking about entanglement and classical communications using this notation and this is probably where my questions to chris will will start uh so in section three uh we saw this idea of the fbp asymptotically being the principle of unitarity aka

driving the system, the joint system Alice involved to entanglement, which in the graphical notation amounts to them sort of completing a cycle here where the QRS are perfectly aligned so that the S sector of one becomes the memory sector of the other and vice versa.

Now, I actually, at this point already, I have a question for Chris.

I have it written down here.

So yes, two things here, Chris.

Number one is

In the log protocol picture, we do have a distinguishing between a quantum channel and a classical channel.

And if I understood that part correctly, we said that

passage of time or expenditure of energy, free energy only corresponds to the classical tick.

So in this, you know, quantum entanglement picture where you don't quite have that, is it fair to say that there's no such thing as a classical tick, no passage of time, no expenditure of free energy?

Is this a degenerate picture of the log protocol where the sectors were aligned the right way and boom, you got rid of that classical thing?

And that's it.

And secondly, I guess it's, what does it mean for these two parts, quote unquote, from the paper to implement the joint quantum process?


SPEAKER_02:
So yeah, this is not a lock protocol, clearly, because there is no classical communication.

And in fact, Alice is not divided into multiple compartments here.

Alice is just implementing one, this single quantum process Q.

And because these sectors are, because these QRFs are perfectly aligned, we can think of, remember

from probably the second session, the picture that you were very interested in under of the wick rotation, reversing time between Alice and Bob.

So Alice's clock, in fact,

ticks in the opposite direction from Bob's clock because both of their internal clocks are counting incoming bits, not outgoing bits.

So in the right side of this picture, there is no overall time.

You can think of Alice's clock ticking forward one unit

and then Bob's clock ticking backward one unit so that the information flow is completely time symmetric between Alice and Bob.

So we can think of both of these processes, Q and Q prime,

as bidirectional in time.

That's what it means to have a pure unitary process.


SPEAKER_03:
So no time asymmetry, that's what it is?


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So there is no time asymmetry in this picture.

And when you introduce classical communication, of course, you have to have a time asymmetry.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.


SPEAKER_02:
Because you have this, I mean, classicality is defined by this notion of irreversibility.

which is just the same as time asymmetry.

And it's the irreversibility that burns energy.

So there has to be energy flow between Alice and Bob to drive what is, from a global point of view, and only an apparent asymmetry, but from the point of view of

Alice 1 and Alice 2 as components of Alice, they're the ones who see the asymmetry.


SPEAKER_03:
So I guess just to tie back to the question of the weak rotation, once this joint process is implemented, I mean, naively one can say

Is this cycle going clockwise or counterclockwise?

And is that going to define on originally whenever these guys ended up being lined up where the weak sign was coming from?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Whenever Alice sees information flowing in, Bob sees information flowing out.

So they're...

their wick rotations are going in opposite directions.

Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, very good.


SPEAKER_02:
The other thing to think of in this picture, Richard, it's impossible to draw all of these simultaneously, is that if you think of the FEP as fully aligning Alice and Bob,

then not only do these processes perfectly couple, but the area that's green in this right-hand side kind of expands to fill the whole boundary so that in the complete limit of Alice being able to perfectly predict Bob and vice versa,

then the whole boundary is green.

So there's no distinction between the S sector and the Y sector disappears.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, yes, that makes sense, actually.

And just to conclude with this slide, back in the session two, we saw something about agents requiring a free choice of reference frame for their QRFs, which amounts to being able to choose how to measure spin, right?

Right.

So is part of this entanglement picture, like, do they just have to align the sectors or also the way they are measuring a spin on those sectors?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, they have to align the way they're measuring the spin in those sectors.

It's that lack of... Remember the point that free choice of local reference frame is required for separability.

So as the systems become fully entangled...


SPEAKER_03:
then their local reference frames for each qubit uh become the same become necessarily the same thank you okay and then uh let's continue a little bit um so in in this in this talk we're mainly interested uh uh qrfs that do not commute uh now maybe uh you can chris you can tie this back

to what you were saying earlier about if you're perfectly entangled, then the sector is going to grow.

Does it have anything to do with this?

So if Q1 and Q2 here are do commute, then how do you reduce this to the picture on the right-hand side?

At a first glance, it looks like the picture on the left-hand side encompasses more sectors of the boundary.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, the point here is just that if we go back and go back to the notation where what we're representing by this simplified notation is a collection of co-cone diagrams

And if these reference frames commute, then one can take these two diagrams and find a, think of it in the information inflow direction, there will always be a common

a co-cone over the two sets of input classifiers if the two QRFs commute.

So what that means is that I go from a diagram with two sets of classifiers each going up to some apex

to a diagram with the merged set of classifiers going up to some farther up the hierarchy apex.

Because they commute, I can find that sort of yet more abstract cocoon that covers all of the classifiers in both QRFs.

So that just collapses.

these pairs of green segments down to one green segment and i've drawn it the same size i mean it would it would make more sense graphically i suppose to draw it right each one is twice as big or twice the area but yeah keeping to this kind of very topological representation where the area

isn't actually meaningful, it is convenient to draw it this way.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

So, in short, the fact that they commute means that you will have that higher apex anyway, so you can bypass that first nesting.

But when it comes to the number of degrees of freedom at the boundary, they're still the same.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

Yeah, we're not getting rid of any of the degrees of freedom of the boundary that these QRFs are looking at.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, very good.

So the next slide, I found a very interesting one.

So these are no-grow theorems, things that Alice and Bob cannot do, and they measure, you know, it's mainly having to do with measuring their own entangled amounts, entropy, and counting degrees of freedom.

I guess this has a very holographic feel to it, and also maybe even a bit of a Gödel theorem feel to it.

So I don't know if Chris wants to comment on that.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I'll just say that I think this does have a kind of...

Gödel undecidability feel to it in that there are a large number of questions that Alice can't answer, which certainly suggests a formulation in terms of incompleteness.

And the connection to Gödel's theorem is actually something that Jim Glazebrook and I are currently working on.

and hopefully we'll be able to make that connection more precise.

But the point of these statements is just to emphasize that a single observer that's uncompartmentalized

cannot determine anything about the entanglement entropy of the environment.

And this is just the result that to measure entanglement, you have to have, you have to employ a lot protocol.

So you have to have classical communication.

And this raises a fundamental issue in the theory in that

that classical communication is an exchange of information that cannot be represented as a single quantum process.

Hence, you have language like the collapse of the wave function or these various other decoherence, etc., etc., these various ways of trying to capture this idea that

something different and irreversible is happening as soon as you talk about classical communication so uh the point is for for alice to measure anything about the entanglement entropy of bob she has to be sectored so her entanglement entropy uh has to decrease

But she can't know that.

She can't actually know that she has sectored compartments when we think of Alice as an entire system.

So from now on, we're going to be talking about how

the very limited points of view of particular observers.

And to talk about that, I think it's very important to keep these various limitations in mind because there's a real distinction between what we can say effectively

from this kind of God's eye point of view that we're adopting as theorists, where we say Alice has sectors that are communicating classically, and what Alice's system can do from her point of view, or her sectors can do from their points of view.

this is a distinction that's often ignored but it's important to keep it in mind awesome thanks for this line enter yeah so we continue yeah um so then


SPEAKER_03:
uh i guess we get to the the proper material of the last lecture which is what happens when you have sectors that are not commutative such as two portions of alice involved that have to communicate classically this this is what requires the classical communication tech um let me see uh

so it would be fair to say chris uh this only such a classical channel which is the one shown in this uh slide requires free energy is that right because there's some writing into a memory involved in here compared to the earlier slide where we had that closed loop in the entire angle picture there was no expenditure of energy is that correct


SPEAKER_02:
Right, right.

So here, the example that came to mind here is exactly the process that we're executing right now.

Alice has two components, and we are currently in the position of those components.

And we're communicating classically with each other

by employing a channel that's part of our shared environment.

So we're acting irreversibly on our shared environment.

And it's that irreversible action on the environment that has the free energy cost for each of us.

Mm-hmm.

We actually have to make noise to communicate.

And our laptops are actually consuming power.

All of this is classical.

I mean, it's this irreversibility that defines classicality.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

And to continue with this question, I guess it will come in short in later slides, but the other side of this log protocol is the quantum channel.

And my question to you, Chris, is just like there is an expenditure of time and energy involved in this classical channel, is the quantum channel basically the opposite of that?

Meaning its action is instantaneous, right?

entanglement, presumably.

And also, again, back to that loop picture of entangled cycle, is there just no passage of time, no expenditure of energy?

Does any of that make sense?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and I think it's worth actually going to the next slide here where we complete the loop and add the quantum channel.


SPEAKER_03:
Is it this one?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I think to understand what's going on here, I think it's very useful to think of it in terms of a belly PR experiment, right?

Where Bob, in this case, the shared environment, includes the source that's creating the entangled pair, which A1 and A2 observe simultaneously.

They interact simultaneously with their two detectors, which are interacting with the entangled pair.

So you can think of their two detectors are entangled.

And it's only later that they exchange this classical information.

And in a Bell EPR experiment, the

the time, the elapsed time between the source emitting the entangled pair and the entangled pair interacting with the detectors deployed by A1 and A2 is designed as part of the experimental protocol to be less than

the time that is required for A1 and A2 to communicate classically.

And notice that from the point of view of the entangled pair itself, no time has passed at all.

The entangled pair is, from a special relativity point of view,

moving along a light-like trajectory, so there's no distance being traversed and no time is elapsing from the point of view of the entangled pair.

There's only an elapsed time and a traversed distance in the coordinates of the observers.

And it's those coordinates that define the parameters for the observer's eventual classical communication.

So this is why I characterize the assumption of classical communication as a stipulation.

And also why I characterized it as a fine-tuning assumption.

We're assuming something very specific about this communication channel.

And we're assuming that the part of Bob, the part of the shared environment that

implements this classical communication channel behaves differently from the rest of the shared environment.

It behaves in a way that is classical, but the rest of the shared environment doesn't.

The rest of the world is described using quantum theory.

So we're making this assumption that part of the shared environment is special.

And the specialness is that it behaves in this classical way.


SPEAKER_03:
So let me finish with this slide, I suppose.

To go back to my earlier question about that entangled loop being...

at least pictorically appears to be like a degenerate version of this log picture.

If in this log picture I have the quantum channel on the right, that hypothetical entanglement to complete the cycle on the left was only broken when A1 and A2 chose to write.

that into their memories at different sectors, right?

And then that eventually necessitated the classical communication between them.

Is that correct?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

You know, one could always take the point of view of, if you will, the observer who's outside the entire universe and just sees the entire universe evolving unitarily.

And from that point of view, there's no such thing as classical communication.

So the communication is classical only relative to this division between the observers.

And that division between the observers corresponds to their measurement procedures not commuting.

So it corresponds to what we think of classically as Alice acting on her half of the entangled state, determining what Bob will then see.

Again, all of that causal language is classical.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

We're like...

11 30 so halfway more or less let's say a few words on uh the later slides uh scouting profits and all of that um i guess before we before we start talking about this which will take us like

five to 10 minutes at most.

Could you say a few words again about the fine-tuning assumption?

So I still can't quite understand what is meant here, that this whole classical communication stuff requires fine-tuning.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, I think a way to think about it

is to think about what it means to say that Alice and Bob are able to communicate classically.

What we're saying is that Alice and Bob share some sort of language.

So when they exchange their data, we can think of their data as written in some binary code in a data table.

Alice says,

I set my instrument this way and I saw this spin.

I then set my instrument this other way and I made this observation.

So Alice's data table or A1's data table is just a long table with two entries in each row.

One entry is how the detector was adjusted, and the other entry is what the value of the spin was observed.

And Bob's data table looks the same.

And so they share this information, or they share it with some third party.

They communicate it classically.

And there are two aspects to that classical communication.

One is that up to classical noise,

their data tables don't change when they share them.

So they really are irreversibly recorded.

They're not evolving in time along with the rest of the universe.

The other aspect is that we have to assume that Alice and Bob mean the same thing by their notations in these data tables so that they can actually compare them, so that they can actually do the statistics and see if they've violated Bell's inequality.

So what that means is we have to assume that they actually share a definition of up, and that when they talk about changing the settings on their instruments, they're talking about changing those settings with respect to some shared definition of up.

And in a real experiment, that shared definition of up is provided by the Earth's gravitational field or something like that, Earth's magnetic field.

some shared environmental variable.

So now it seems like we have a situation in which Alice 1 and Alice 2 should be entangled because they share this reference frame that enables them to communicate classically.

But they can't be entangled if they're going to communicate classically.

So we make an assumption that in just this case, they share a reference frame, but they're not entangled.

They're able to communicate classically while sharing the reference frame.

And...

we can sort of wave our hands and say, they only share the reference frame up to some measurement resolution or something like that.

But despite the hand waving, we're making a very specific assumption that violates the fact that reference frame sharing

induces entanglement.

So that's the fine-tuning assumption.

We assume that the universe is such that in this very specific kind of case, we can have reference frame sharing without entanglement.

Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Let's keep it here and just open it up a little bit if Harris or Dean want to just give any thought or reflection on what we've gotten to so far.

Harris, if you want to, please.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, everything is very interesting.

Basically, I was listening...

with great, let's say, focus.

It reminded me this, let's say, elaboration on the previous talk that Chris gave two weeks ago.

It reminded me something that Michael Levin said some time ago.

It is regarding this amazing ability of cognition to scale up

So it's not only this understanding, let's say, of the scattering of cognition, but also the scaling up of cognition.

And when I try to get inside my head, actually, as Chris said in one of his talks, that if a system is a tug-of-war, one cannot draw a meaningful boundary across it.

This fine-tuning, let's say, elaboration that was made right now actually helps me understand that even better.

So thank you, Chris, for that.

And thank you, Ander, for this elaboration.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, thank you.

I'm glad that helped.

Yeah, I think this is intimately related to the question of what cognition is.

Since if we have a purely quantum system, there really is a deep sense in which nothing is happening because of the time symmetry.

So to talk about cognition as something that actually occurs, we have to think of it classically.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Also, if you allow me another comment on that.

Basically, one of the comments posted during your last talk in the chat had to do with classical memories.

And I was thinking about that, and I came to the conclusion that classical memory presupposes a gestation period.

And when I think about it, that actually makes sense, and it is true, let's say, for both physical and psychological reasons.

So, for example, a hard disk needs to write data on its magnetic surface, and a human brain needs to consolidate all those neural connections through synaptic plasticity, let's say.

However, when we start thinking about quantum information and quantum memories, let's say, we realize that such memories will be such quantum memories, basically.

will be stored in qubits or in those entangled states that you described.

So they do not necessarily have the same limitations.

And of course, quantum information theory suggests, as I understand it, that quantum memories can be created and accessed instantaneously without any form of gestation, let's say, without any gestation period.

And of course, this goes back and it has the potential, as I see it, to revolutionize computation in terms of quantum computation, but also, and most importantly, communication and quantum cryptography even.

And this is something that I am truly interested in.

So yeah, I just wanted to share also that.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's a very good point.

And the flip side is the issue of stability, which again gets to the notion of environmental decoherence, which is just the process of observation.

of the quantum state by some environment or some observer, some component of its environment.

And the reason this is a problem in practice is that we don't have complete control of all components of the environment.

Right?

we have to use things like liquid helium to try to keep the environment at bay to prevent decoherence.

Because any other components of the environment interacting with our quantum memory will alter the state of the memory.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that is a great answer.

And basically the reason why I type that question regarding super selection rules and namely I propose something called fuzzy super selection rules.

Basically, as I understand it, those super selection rules, the classical ones, let's say, they are based on symmetries or on all those conversation laws that actually limit the accessibility or our capacity to measure, let's say, certain quantum properties.

Let's say, maybe it's parity, maybe it's angular momentum, maybe it's even charge.

But if we start thinking like these fuzzy super selection rules in an effort to relax these restrictions by allowing some degree of coherence or interference between the different super selected sectors, which can be quantified, let's say, by a parameter called fuzziness.

I know that in other fields, like in my field, that is fuzzy cognitive mapping,

the production of fuzziness from us, as it was propounded by Professor Lotfi Zadegh, it actually helped a lot of our models to become more accurate, let's say.

So this is what I am proposing.

Maybe, of course, I don't expect it to revolutionize quantum information, but maybe it can help us understand a bit

better uh what is going on in the role of this the coherence that comes out of the environment so if we incorporate it as a parameter of fuzziness a priori then maybe we can understand and even what we are dealing with uh yeah um i i would refer you to uh the paper by bartlett


SPEAKER_02:
There are two other co-authors.

In 2007, a lovely review of quantum reference frames in Reviews of Modern Physics.

And a point that they make that I think is relevant here is that a super selection rule can always be interpreted as

Let me see if I, I'm not sure I'll be able to completely reproduce their argument.

But they showed that a super selection rule can always be interpreted as the absence of a reference frame or the lack of a reference frame.

And one of the examples that they give is charge conservation.

that we never see superpositions of different electric charges.

And their point is we never see this because we have no way of measuring it.

We have no reference frame that we could use that would allow us to see a state of superposed charges.

And effectively what they're saying is our reference frames are all made of matter that is composed of stuff that has well-defined electric charges.

So we can't see things that are superpositions of charge.

And it's very difficult for us to see things that are superpositions of position.

This question of what is a super selection rule, why do we have these rules, at least in their reasoning, boils down to the question of why do we have some reference frames or some measurement capabilities and not others?

What is it about us that...

limits in some fundamental way our ability to make measurements and i suspect that when you talk about fuzziness which is a sense of of classical uncertainty that you may be um sort of pointing in that direction

I think it would be worth looking at that paper, which is largely written in English, right?

The formalism is kept in the background.

So it's a very nice paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

We'll check it out for sure.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Andrew, maybe mute a little bit.

Dean on the mountaintop.

what can you throw down on us?


SPEAKER_00:
I don't have anything, anything super special to throw down.

I have a, I have a question though.

And because I am very comfortable in that fuzzy space, I kind of see relationships as, uh, and their, and their lack of definability as a feature.

So here's my, here's kind of my question.

Um,

So you talked about a minimum sort of two different memories to encode something in time, and I think it was one of the slides just after the one that's up here right now, which sounds to me like somewhere processing capacity.

It sounds like we are kind of stepping back and trying to look at this instantaneous thing from the relative position of even the things that are classical can be seen as all quantum.

So when you mentioned that earlier, Chris, that helped me quite a bit.

Which then manifests itself as a classical ability to process somewhere.

I spent a lot of my career self-labeling as a wayfinder.

So not capacity, realization, relationship.

just as a relationship, it means that wayfinding is not just an orienting or a processing where I am and being gripped by sort of the thing that I'm enveloped by.

It's also the channel, the screen, the bound, the divide, the gap, the unentangled potentiator.

It's the thing upon which traction can exist as being a gripper as well.

So if it's,

I was already hung up on, I wanted to go back like Columbo in that old 70s TV show and talk about Z-spin because I think Z-spin is an energy way of describing, but I honestly think when I went back and watched your presentation a couple of times, I'm starting to get a sense of

that Z-spin is also a relationship.

It's that affordance that allows us to be able to see up and down.

But I'm just curious, Chris, are we really talking about processing somewhere in the classical sense, but because we have these two ways of encoding different memories, we're also talking about somewhere processing, just that state that allows for

That's my question.

Is that what we're really getting?

Are we trying to open that up, that possibility up?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that's a nice way to think about it.

I think we're trying to, at some deep level...

come up with a way of describing what it means to be an agent.

And I'll say in our case, a self-conscious agent with a sense of time that's embedded in an environment that we depend on to store memories for us.

and what i what i mean by that is that we we depend on the environment to change very slowly at least from our point of view so that we can keep some sense of our orientation within the environment right we're using

everything we see as a memory that allows us to keep ourselves fixed, which allows us to have a point of view.

So we're using the entire visible environment as, if you will, a reference frame against which we can see small changes.

But if the environment was constantly and rapidly changing, we wouldn't be able to do that, and we wouldn't be able to use it as a memory, and so we would have no point of view.

So in a sense, I think what we're talking about here is kind of the miracle of having a point of view that gives us a sense of time.

That's very philosophical.


SPEAKER_05:
It's amazing.

And I wonder if along with the perspectival visual advancements, which you and Shannon Dobson have explored in the math art settings, you're almost bringing that kind of a transformative re-understanding or re-quantum reference framings

into a temporal setting where it's not just a static spatial parallax that we are aesthetically and formally re-understanding but also a temporal one which in an agent environment system necessitates these questions of communication

which in the quantum information formalism are approached topologically rather than geometrically, which is what we needed for the kind of vanishing point type math art in the spatial setting.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think they're approached geometrically eventually.

And that's really what the session in September will be about.

It's how to start with this

very topological picture where we're only talking about interactions in a sense, interactions in time but outside of space, and layer a spatial structure on top of that.

And this is

I think this is particularly interesting in this active inference context because it immediately raises biological questions about the ability of different organisms to layer space on their experience and hence locate themselves, if you will, within some sort of perceived world.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome Dean, and then back to Andre for the last minutes.

Oh wait, unmute Dean and then please continue.


SPEAKER_00:
Sorry.

So Chris, is it from the, from the pure neophyte perspective that I have, is it okay to say that it's not just a flipping of, of position of words that somewhere processing

That availability and processing somewhere in the classical sense, where am I?

It's our ability to fuse those, as you mentioned, we can slow down, we can stabilize, we can see that relationship.

Or is it about spin?


SPEAKER_02:
I think the former, right?

Spin is a very convenient abstraction for talking about binary encoding.

And we have this felt sense of spin, but the sense, its use in physics is very much an abstraction.

I mean, the difference between a proton and neutron is a spin variable.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Ander, you can, in the last minutes, take it where you need.

Also, unmute and then continue.


SPEAKER_03:
Can you guys hear me now?

So let's hope that I have time for Chris to address a couple of things.

So just to conclude the slides, and then hopefully we get to say a few words on quantum Darwinism.

So towards the end, the slides appear to start pivoting towards the next subject, which is space and time.

And here in particular, we see the earlier slide showcasing the log protocol where you can notice that half of it has been cut

and has been moved to the future.

So here we don't have two sectors of Alice communicating, but rather Alice communicating with its future.

Still, you have the classical and the quantum channel.

Now, one question that I brought up, I remember, and in the lecture, and maybe we can expand on it a little more, was,

exactly what is the difference between this quantum and the classical channel part.

Something I heard Chris say is that it is crucial for the quantum channel to be decohered, so this is going to be some sort of unitary scattering evolution that is completely independent of everything else going on.

Is that correct?

Or should be in theory?

And I suppose just like earlier, the classical channel is the part that takes time and free energy expenditure.

Now, my question to you, Chris, is on not the channels in the middle, but the ticks on either side of the boundaries that have been broken down and separated.

terms of an external time what's what's up with those ticks from one sector to the other of the boundary so in q1 for example the low the lower crf sector that's that amount to a state was prepared the upper one was i made a memory record of that state is that that's what it is right yeah okay so uh in in the lower sector we both had

a preparation and a measurement, and a measurement was recorded classically here.

That's all there is?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so preparation and measurement are effectively the same process.

And you can think of in A1 of T, what A1 is doing is

from an operational point of view, she's preparing an instrument and turning it on.

She's creating an initial state.

And she's simultaneously encoding a memory someplace

in her head or on a piece of paper of what those preparation conditions were.

Because it's only with respect to the memory of what the preparation conditions were that the later measurement is meaningful.

So let's go back to just preparing a spin.

At t, she may set the angle of some polarization filter that defines a propagating beam of photons.

And at t plus delta t, she measures something about what those photons are doing.

But the measurement is only meaningful with respect to her memory

of what the polarization setting that prepared the photons was.

So effectively, what's going on in the quantum channel is an experiment.

And it's the classical information that's preserved in this classical channel that makes the experiment meaningful or interpretable or informative.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, for sure.

Yeah, it makes perfect sense.

And in preparation of measurement, this ties back to an earlier question we had, both happen simultaneously at the same degree of freedom at the boundary.

Or do we have preparation at the lower bounds, at the top of one?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, one can think of that operator MI, if you remember the decomposition of the Hamiltonian, as preparing or measuring.

It's just a matter of interpretation.

You know, effectively, is it acting to the left or acting to the right?


SPEAKER_03:
yeah okay yeah yeah yeah and then um before we get to quantum error correction as uh more of a specialist instead of a time thing i i wanted to ask about yet another question between this one and my class so the quantum channels does involve some sort of time evolution you know it's this unitary you know portion that is uh sorry this portion that is evolving unitarily

with no interference from the outside.

However, as you said, for this experiment to make sense, you need to have a classical memory of how that experiment was prepared.

So does that mean that that classical guy on top is static?

There's no time flow in it?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, this actually gets back to the talk by Susskind that we were talking about before we started here.

that you kindly referred me to.

Part of this classical memory is memory for what counts as a classical clock.

And we'll actually get to this again in the September session.

But if you think again about doing an experiment in which a state is prepared and then it's measured,

This quantum process is a process through time with respect to some classical clock that actually provides the time coordinate for the experiment.

So this classical clock is some external reference frame that

that A1 here in this notation is using as part of her classical memory.

Again, it's a memory because it's something that's assumed not to change.

And this will be kind of the heart of the discussion in September that

that time and memory and object persistence are all different names for the same assumption that we make about the world.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Chris.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
I am going to have to disappear.


SPEAKER_05:
Only for now, though.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, only for now.

I will nonetheless persist someplace.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Chris.

So much, Chris.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Ciao.

Thanks very much.


SPEAKER_04:
Measure you later.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Ender, if you wanted to drop any other cues or clues or...


SPEAKER_03:
bring us a little bit of a preparation for where we're going to be heading in lecture five that would be pretty cool uh sure so i mean i i'm a little aware of what's coming in lecture five um it's about uh space and time and how space may be sorry time may be a little more fundamental than space for reasons that chris will show um

has a lot to do with the notion of how you define a clock.

We need to think hard about what are the bare minimum ingredients

you to talk about the existence of a clock these are deep fundamental almost philosophical questions that are overlooked and the good news and that's the saskin talk that chris and i were referring to referring to is that other people especially in the high energy community are also looking into these questions which is very reassuring so i'm talking about at wheaton saskin harlow etc they are

There is a recent talk on YouTube where they talk about what does it mean for something to be a clock?

You know, how long does a clock last?

And then Chris will also talk about space.

And the punchline of it will be that there's obviously a physics approach to emergent space time, which is very, very technical and so on.

But

from what I understood, I mean, I have yet to see the talk myself first, is that there is a parallel biological approach as to how we learn about spacetime.

So from a developmental psychology point of view,

infants, and I suppose all kinds of animals, are not born fully equipped to perceive space-time, hence the necessity of things like clay and so on, so they can find correlations between motor inputs and visual inputs, right?

And eventually things like the mirror test, which is non-trivial.

No human is born passing the mirror test already.

so that implies that at least biologically it is non-trivial and it takes a few steps until you get to have that sort of space spatial awareness right

Now, the interesting part of this for me personally is what the physics side of it is.

And I'm no expert by any means, but I think the gist of it might have to do something with quantum error correction, ADS, CFT, and so on.

There was a bit of a teaser about quantum error correction here in these slides.

But yeah, I mean, that's about all I can say.

But very looking forward to the biology also.

Yeah, cool.


SPEAKER_05:
Harris, any last thoughts or anything you want to point towards?


SPEAKER_01:
Basically, I would like to thank everyone for inviting me.

I really enjoyed it, the whole live stream.

I hope we have made some progress and looking forward to

the next live streams, number five and number six.

So that's about it.

Thank you, everyone.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Anything else, Andrew?

That's it.

Awesome.

Well, I encourage everyone to go to the syllabus page, look ahead, look back, pre-gest, digest, re-gest, ask questions, and let's make progress as you exhort Harris.

So see y'all till next time.

## _NfqCpsZPeM

SPEAKER_04:
hello and welcome everyone it's september 30th 2023 and we are in physics as information processing discussion five should be a fun discussion on a great fifth lecture so

Ander, if you'd like to give some opening remarks, and then also anyone else, whether it's your first time joining a discussion or not, it would be great to hear your remarks on Lecture 5 or just where you're coming at it today.

So first, though, Ander.


SPEAKER_08:
Sure.

Hello, Daniel.

So I may as well start off by sharing the slides, right?

What do you think?

Sure.

So just before, as a warm up, let's review some of the things that Chris mentioned last time.

So near the beginning, the main thing was this distinction between reductionist and scale-free theories.

Obviously, one very salient feature of the free energy literature is that it falls under scale-free theories.

These are theories where there is no preferred scale of energy or distance.

Reductionist theories are based on such a scale existing.

You want to break the pieces into the fundamental building blocks of the legos.

People think of usually high energy or particle physics as the archetype of this thing.

Whereas in scale-free theories, there is no such thing.

And we should have the same skeletons or the same framework at different scales

um this is going to be very important i i chris correct me if i'm wrong but especially for the coming lecture where we talk about biology chris himself made a few remarks on how the renormalization group flow

aka the process of going from from smaller to higher scale may be trivial in biology that is to say that um there is a self-similarity okay so so some features of biology should remain invariant at different scales that is um what cells are to a body different individuals of a species might be to a to an ecosystem that that sort of idea

So after talking about scale, and perhaps when we get to the question part, I guess this is the one thing that I would like Chris to explain a little more, more precisely what these diagrams mean.

I have a rough idea, but it would be nice to hear him talk about that again.

Anyways, in the second half, basically,

We started asking, as is the theme in this course so far, from first principles.

what do you need to talk about um space space and time and um there were some theorizing that time might be um more fundamental that is the things that you need for to implement the clock we're thinking about what are the most basic constituents to implement the clock and those may be even more basic than the things you need to implement qrfs or perception of space after all

It seems like you need some spatial extension to perceive the space in the first place.

I can't remember if it was somebody who was tuning in for the lecture or a question afterwards or something like that.

But I think this remark gets to a very deep point.

Somebody, I recall, mentioned

that some organisms it might have increased himself i can't remember really that there are organisms you may know the name daniel that are so tiny that if they if they try to implement a gradient to try to chase you know their food or whatever they're they're so small that they can't even perceive the gradient you know like in any any attempt at implementing such perception they're gonna feel

uh they're gonna feel the same amount of concentration in all directions so they're basically not large enough to perceive space however uh interestingly so they can they can perceive time i don't know how this ties to the remarks that chris made about space being more fundamental i suppose

Chris was getting at the point that you need fewer parts to perceive space.

And the fact that such small organisms can perceive time but not space, I guess, is further empirical evidence for this thesis.


SPEAKER_05:
And... Actually, Andrew, if I can... Yes, please.


SPEAKER_08:
I may have botched the explanation.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I proposed earlier that time is actually more fundamental than space, that one has to have time

to be able to see space.

So that's further on in these slides that issue is discussed.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah.

So do you want to say something about that, Chris?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, this is the right slide.

Yeah, one just needs a memory, really, to...

to have a clock, an external clock.

I mean, to have an internal clock, one also has to have a memory to have an internal clock.

But if you have a memory and there's some kind of activity that's periodic in the environment, then you have a clock, an external clock.

But you don't need object identity to have a clock.

And that's what distinguishes it from space.

You have to have object identity.

Or in other words, motion, the ability to perceive motion to perceive space.


SPEAKER_08:
Right.

Yeah, any periodic behavior is effectively a clock.

Whereas for space, we need

object persistence, which two comments that we've made were that object persistence is the, or rather Chris made, is the defining feature of classicality.

You said that last time, is that right, Chris?

And also that object persistence is precisely the notion of thickness, the way Friston would put it.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, object persistence is definitely a classical notion.

And it does seem to be the place where classicality enters quantum theory, as far as I can tell, is with this notion of object persistence, that that's the most fundamental place that it enters.


SPEAKER_08:
So how does that definition of, or rather, relationship between classicality and quantumness


SPEAKER_05:
being object object persistence how does it compare with other accounts coming from from qdar and decoherence and all of that um well say quantum darwinism is is a good example uh quantum darwinism assumes object persistence but it assumes that there is some persistent thing that interacts over time with the environment

according to some interaction that has fixed eigenvalues.

So quantum Darwinism already assumes object persistence, and it also assumes classical communication, as we discussed a couple of times ago, in that it's a theory that is about the ability of multiple observers to agree about

the state of some other object, which for them to agree about that object, not only does the object need to persist, the various observers need to have the same description of that object, or the same name for that object, or the same way of identifying that object.

So yeah, quantum Darwinism actually assumes a lot of classical features.

The basic theory of environmental decoherence is, in effect, a single observer theory, so it doesn't have to assume classical communication, but it does assume object persistence.

Which, obviously, if we're going to talk about empirical science, you have to, right?

You have to assume that your detector is a thing that persists through time, or you can't do any experiments.

And more importantly than that, you have to assume that you're a thing that persists through time.

So we need these classical notions to talk about doing science.

I'm not the first person to point that out, of course.

I mean, Bohr pointed that out in 1928 in his paper in Science, where he summarizes quantum theory.

So it's a very, very old idea.


SPEAKER_08:
Right.

And I guess right away I have a question that I suspect I may have asked before, but maybe we can revisit it from the perspective of today's discussion, which is, and maybe I should pull the slide.

This is actually from session four.

So if we're talking about differences between what the defining feature of classicality is,

To me, that bears the question of here, right?

This TQFT diagrammatic notation for the classical and the quantum channels.

So if we're talking about object persistence as the defining feature of classicality, and this is the cartoon picture of what goes on an EPR experiment.

Chris, could you say maybe a few words about how

that classical like how how the symmetry is broken between the quantum and classical channels i suspect it might have been mentioned that these are symmetrical but yet one of the two has to be a quantum and the other one is a classical channel the quantum channel um mediates some sort of unitary evolution is that correct whereas the classical channel is is like an information redundant redundancy reservoir um

which maybe has to do something with object persistence.

But I'm very much speculating at this point.

So I'm not sure if, Chris, you have any comments.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, well, an easy way to think about this, I think, is to actually think about a Bell EPR experiment where you have two observers that are separated in space.

So you have to assume here, though, to talk about Bell EPR, you have to assume the notion of space.

to have a laboratory reference frame in which the two observers are spatially separated.

And in that situation, then the two observers both independently collect data for some amount of time on multiple replicates of some quantum state.

that's produced by a source.

So you have pairs of photons or pairs of electrons or pairs of whatever.

And at some point, the data collection stops.

And at that point, the observers have to compare their results.

So it's the comparison step that requires a classical channel.

And if you think about how this happens in practice, it happens via a file sent over the internet or a piece of paper on which the data are written that's handed by one of the experimenters to the other experimenter.

Or it happens by

the experimenters talking to each other.

So one experimenter encodes a bunch of information in the ambient air and the other experimenter hears it.

Or it could be communicated by light signals, right?

But it's always communicated by some medium.

And that's what defines

classical communication.

It's communication via a medium that persists through time in the observer's reference frame.

And the minimum time of the persistence of that medium is given by the speed of light.

so if the observers are a foot apart and they're communicating by a light signal then it may only last a nanosecond but if they're talking to each other you know it lasts several seconds and if they're if they exchange a piece of paper then that piece of paper may last for years in a lab notebook someplace so i'll

There's always the question of persistence over time that is deeply bound up with this notion of classicality as a process that takes time.

Information has to flow, has to be encoded in a medium and then read from that medium in some finite amount of time.

And in a sense, we're assuming something like that in the quantum description.

When we think of this boundary via which the A and B, the physical components interact, if we think of that boundary as a qubit array, then each of those qubits persists through time.

And that's what allows them to encode classical information, so encode observational outcomes that are repeated in time.

That's what allows them to serve as a memory, to encode information in a way that's thermodynamically irreversible.

And if you think of the boundary in that way, as a qubit array,

then it has a certain thickness in time.

It's two Planck times thick.

The Planck time is 10 to the minus 43 seconds, so it's unmeasurably small.

But the operation of interacting with a qubit is a physical interaction.

that, from a relativistic point of view, has to take this minimal time.

So it's, in a sense, persistence for times that are significantly longer than the Planck time that is the marker of classicality here.

But even these Planck time,

Even persistence over the Planck time is a necessary ingredient for talking about communication, even quantum communication.

So it's a very, very deep concept with a very long philosophical history going back to the ship of Theseus and all that.

People have been wondering about what does it mean to say that something persists through time?


SPEAKER_04:
Does anyone want to make a comment on that or bring in a new question?

Please feel free to if you haven't brought up anything yet.


SPEAKER_08:
Sure, I can speak more if you don't mind.

I also recall, and Chris, correct me if I'm wrong, we said that related to what you just said,

that a clock tick is always tantamount to one of these classical channels.

Is that correct?

Did I remember that correctly?


SPEAKER_05:
CHRISTOS PAPADIMITRIOUX- Chris?

Yeah, an internal clock tick corresponds to an irreversible right on the boundary.

So one can then ask, what does it mean to say that that's irreversible?

What it means is it took some energy to do it.

And if you go back to read that bit again,

there's at least a reasonably high probability that it still is in the same state that you wrote it in.

And clearly that probability is going to degrade through time because that action is on the boundary.

So whatever you've written, whatever bits that you've written are now exposed to the environment.

So if Alice writes that they're now exposed to Bob,

to bob's dynamics so i'll as as time goes on by your internal clock or any external clock the probability of that memory being the same when you go back to read it slowly decreases or maybe it decreases fast and you know we know that from our own case our own memories degrade through time uh

because the physical world's interacting with our brains in ways that we don't control.

Killing neurons or changing their activity or whatever.

So whenever we talk about memory, it's always with this caveat that

The memory is exposed to the environment, and it's not guaranteed to be the same.

It's only kind of grace of the environment being reasonably benign that any of us have memories at all.

Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_08:
And so this thermodynamic cost to classical information sharing or writing, is in a sense, would it be fair to say that in a sense, the price you have to pay to protect against decoherence or entangling this sector with the rest of the environment just to preserve its identity, would that be fair to say?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, you can think of decoherence as a good thing, or you can think of decoherence as a bad thing, right?

If you're trying to preserve a quantum state, then it's a bad thing.

You have to spend energy to prevent decoherence by cooling everything down to millikelvins.

But if you're interested in preserving classical data, then decoherence is a good thing.

because it prevents your classical data from being completely rearranged by becoming entangled with the environment.

So, I mean, think about trying to write classical memories using the states of atoms in the middle of the sun and the temperature so high that...

You can't do anything.

You can't rearrange the atoms in any way and expect them to stay put.

So there you're in effectively a completely quantum environment just because of the high temperature.

So it's a plasma.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, and then just one final question that popped to my mind as you say this, and I can certainly leave it here for everyone else.

So if we're trying to protect against random loss, against the loss of information, I suppose it really begs the question of what is the source of this noise that can perturb the bits in the boundary?

There's obviously this...

distinction between thermal and quantum noise you know again it's a stretch to see if we can think back about the weak rotation about that but um

Again, I recall earlier sessions where we talk how the noise here in this quantum theoretic picture of information processing is coming from the QRS failing to be aligned.

Then, you know, you hear about notions of quantum noise versus thermal noise.

Chris, do you have any comments on all of that?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think an important point

Let me back up.

The notion of noise, like so many other notions, is very often treated as objective, as observer-independent.

And so when we're doing classical physics, we think of noise as just, you know, there's some objective randomness in the universe, and we call that noise.

So in this picture, because we're working with just a bipartite decomposition, right?

We just have Alice and Bob, and that's it.

That's the entire universe.

There's no external environment here to impose any sort of noise.

But since we only have two systems, Alice and Bob equals everything else, not Alice, then if we talk about Bob being a noisy environment, that's clearly relative to this boundary we've drawn between Alice and Bob.

So noise isn't observer-independent.

What's noise for Alice is just Bob's dynamics.

Right.

So if you think about where these systems come from, you've got some universe that is in some pure state because it's an isolated system.

And that state is evolving through time, which means it's just undergoing phase rotation.

So there's no noise in that system.

It's perfectly unitary, et cetera, et cetera.

And as soon as you draw a boundary, then there's information that the system on one side of the boundary doesn't have about the system on the other side.

So the individual systems are

their states can now be considered conditionally independent.

I mean, you can come up with a description in which their states are conditionally independent.

And that just means that what the other side is doing looks like noise unless Alice, say, can come up with a way of analyzing the data that she sees on her boundary

in a way that makes it make sense.

And then we say it's information for Alice, but what does that mean?

It just means it's behavior on her boundary that she's smart enough to assign some kind of semantics to.

And if she's not smart enough to do that, then it's just noise.

Mm-hmm.

So as soon as you make the notion of noise observer dependent, it turns into something that makes a lot more sense.


SPEAKER_08:
And just to really finish this, I guess it's been a couple of months at least, but I think it was back in July that we talked about

the distinction between what you're saying, which is things having the appearance of noise just because you have finite resources, so you cannot make sense of Bob's internal dynamics, as opposed to in that cartoon of the four possibilities for QRF alignments, right?

Some of them were thermal in the sense that one side was acting on a boundary qubit while the other one was not.

So then it truly looks like

like noise to the other side.

Does that get to the bottom of the distinction between quantum and thermal noise at all, Chris, or am I misunderstanding things here?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it turns the distinction into essentially a relative, a QRF relative distinction.

Right.

I mean, languages provide a good example.

I mean, think of going to someplace where you don't understand the language at all, you know, Papua New Guinea or something like that.

I certainly wouldn't understand the language.

That language, the behavior of speaking that language encodes lots of information for those people, and it encodes no information at all for me.

So it looks like noise to me.

I can't make sense of it.

But it's not noise from their point of view.

And now let's think about this need to have a thermodynamic sector if you're an organism that has to burn energy or any system that has to burn energy to act irreversibly on your environment.

That thermodynamic sector looks to you like noise.

It's just temperature, heat.

And you use that heat to drive your processing.

And if you're a really good heat engine, then you can use it pretty efficiently and get a lot of bang for the buck in terms of information processing.

If you're a really inefficient heat engine, then maybe you have to use almost your entire environment as heat to do any little bit of information processing at all.

So that's not a statement about the universe as a whole.

That's a statement about you and your information processing capabilities and your thermal capabilities.

your heat processing capabilities.

How good is your Carnot cycle determines the amount of information processing you can do.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Chris.

Ian?


SPEAKER_00:
Hi.

Yeah, thank you everyone for putting on this series.

It's the first time I've joined the discussion sessions.

And yeah, so it's a question about in one of the slides, there was a green rectangle.

And we were talking about that being a, or Chris was talking about that being a kind of thinking of that as a

bacterium.

And it got me wondering whether I think how else I could get an intuitive grasp of this kind of space time emerging.

And so what I was thinking is, you know, it appears like to us humans, it appears like the universe is

expanding um through time and i was just trying to think you know a bacterium sing if you placed a single bacterium on a petri dish um at time zero

and or even something more simple you know let's say deep sea hydrothermal vent where life was supposed to are you know these um agents were supposed to have maybe begun existing as um phospholipid type molecules so i was just wondering you know if i was if i was a phospholipid within that bacterial membrane um just a single one single phospholipid

and all I can measure is the existence of phospholipidness or not phospholipidness and selfness and not selfness, then, you know, I was just trying to imagine as this bacteria divides after 20 minutes, let's say the average sort of bacterial division time, then before that happened, all I could tell was I was surrounded by phospholipidness.

So there was no real distinction.

my environment but once um the bacteria is divided into two then i'm sitting then i'm observing some phospholipidness which isn't in my sort of what i call my own boundary

Um, so then I've kind of created space, space and time is starting to appear.

Um, even though the Petri dish hasn't changed in size or my, you know, the universe hasn't really changed, but it's the, um,

phospholipids, the orientation of the phospholipids.

So yeah, I kind of, I was just trying to liken it.

If this is a scale invariant principle, how can we liken it to how other things might experience space and time emerging?

That's where I was coming from.

Am I kind of totally barking up the wrong tree with that?

Or is there, is that...


SPEAKER_05:
No, I think that's a really good question.

And I think you're constructing a very good kind of thought experiment.

And it's this sort of question that I'm really going to try to address in October of how can we think about

DfEP is a scale theory in practice as applying at the level of macromolecules, as you were just describing.

How do we come up with a description of what a phospholipid, say, can actually measure?

What actually affects its state?

And to what extent does it have a self-representation?

My guess is that a phospholipid probably doesn't.

But a bacterium seems to have at least some degree of self-representation.

I mean, it has an immune system.

It can feel stress.

So it's starting to seem like an organism that's not that different from us.

But even something like E. coli, it certainly behaves in what we call space, but it's at least not clear to me that it has a representation of space.

Although there are processes in the E. coli that do distinguish, say, the two ends of the E. coli.

I mean, even if you think of the chemotaxis pathway, the two ends of that pathway are quite distinct functionally.

So perhaps E. coli has a one-dimensional representation of space.

It can tell its anterior end from its posterior end.

but perhaps it doesn't have any representation of what we would call left and right or up and down.

But if you look at multicellular organisms, even something like, say, hydra,

is a spatially quite sophisticated kind of thing.

I mean, it's not bilateral.

It's cylindrically symmetrical.

But it's got a very large distinction between anterior and posterior, and it seems to know quite a bit, at least I understand from people who work on Hydra, about its own body, the state of its own body.

And so I think these are exactly the same kinds of questions that we should be asking.

And they also apply at the scale that's much larger than us.

So if we think about a human society, for example, as an agent, what can that agent measure?

And what can that agent represent?

How complex can that agent's cognition be?

And I think those questions are all essentially open.

So yeah, it's a great thought experiment.

I think it addresses exactly the questions that we're interested in addressing here.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Chris.

Harris, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, thank you once again.

for allowing me to be here with all of you.

Interesting as always.

So I have a question that is related to this notion of the dual aspect of information, basically, that the meaning of information is not just a matter of interpretation,

but rather it is rooted in the physical properties of the system under investigation.

So basically that, as I understand it, means, translates that the meaning of information is not separate from the physical properties of the system under investigation, but it is rather an intrinsic part of it.

So, I am also familiar with this notion from the theory of computation called the Embraer-Mans limit, that is a limit on the maximum rate of computation that can be achieved, let's say, in a self-contained system within the material universe.

So my question is,

How can we parse, let's say, that sort of computational limit in terms of information processing?

Thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
I am not sure that we can talk about a... I think it's very difficult to talk about the classical information processing capability of the universe as a whole.

I mean, one has to impose some sort of classical description.

And the question is then, where does that description come from?

And from kind of whose point of view is that a description?

But certainly, as soon as you partition the universe as a whole into some system and some other system,

one can immediately talk about their information processing capabilities.

And then the question becomes quantum information processing capabilities versus classical information processing capabilities.

And

If you're looking at classical information processing, to the extent that it's not reversible, it requires energy, and so one can immediately derive limits based on the free energy access of that system.

If you're talking about reversible information processing, which purely quantum information processing is, then you don't have that energetic requirement, but you also don't have a well-defined answer in any classical terms.

And it's only if Alice is your system of interest,

that's able to do quantum information processing, then it's only her interaction partner, Bob, who can use her as a quantum computer.

And then his ability to employ Alice as a quantum computer

is limited by his classical information processing capabilities, because he has to define a classical input and a classical output.

I think this question becomes very complicated as soon as it is cast in these observer-relative terms.

Yeah.

But such limits clearly exist, right?

They just require certain assumptions to define them.


SPEAKER_01:
So quantum information can indeed be understood as a kind of dual to the classical information, right?

Yes.


SPEAKER_05:
And it's essentially one of these bulk boundary type dualities that seem now to be ubiquitous in physics.

If we just think in terms of the holographic principle, you can have quantum processing going on in the bulk in the system that has a boundary.

And that can encode, that can read classical information from the boundary and encode classical information on the boundary.

And the quantitatively, the holographic principle tells you how much, right?

What can the maximum entropy, classical entropy of the boundary be?

But

What it doesn't tell you is anything about the semantics that either the system inside assigns to the information or any observer outside assigns to the information.

It's just a quantitative statement.

So in any setting that's characterized by that principle,

the classical information on the boundary is dual in an interesting sense to the quantum processing that's going on inside.

That classical information on the boundary encodes everything that an external observer can know about what's going on in the inside.

Thank you.

Okay, yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Ana, and then Dean after.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, thank you very much.

I'm also new to your active inference and your course.

I just want to say that unfortunately I work with humans and

but and I say unfortunately because the complexities are horrific so having said that maybe my question will make sense so as I'm learning about quantum information theory and I'm what I'm trying to do is assess

how can this help me answer questions that I have in the systems that I work with my question is in order to have a time arrow irreversible process don't you need to have a goal and

And so my question is, does it matter to even worry about goals?

Because as I listen to all the descriptions and I think about Alice and Bob and systems, I immediately think about, well, so much of what we're talking about depends upon the goal of the system.

And in some very abstract way, it seems to me that there is a goal that's driving the need for the boundary, the need for the communication.

And so I'm so obsessed with this question that I wanted to ask it early on before I proceed with my learning.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, that's a very good question.

You can think of the whole free energy principle as a way of describing physical systems in a way that makes their behavior as agents obvious.

And so you could state the FEP by saying that every system has a goal, and its goal is minimizing prediction error.

Or to put it positively, its goal is to predict and therefore respond to its environment's actions,

in a way that preserves its own identity.

And I don't know whether you've read much of Carl Fristen's work, but he uses the word self-evidencing a lot.

It says the goal of any system is to generate evidence of its own existence, which sounds very psychological.

And Carl, interestingly enough, studied first as a psychiatrist.

So I expect that his point of view is actually very consonant with your question and where you're coming from here.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, actually, I started... Oh, I'm sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt.


SPEAKER_05:
No, no, go ahead.


SPEAKER_06:
No, I started... I spent some time reading...

Chris Lyson's ideas and work on the free energy principle and self-evidencing.

And yes, I will continue to dig deep.

The problem is, so I'm an anthropologist, and I've worked with Indigenous peoples and spent 20 years of my life living in these small-scale societies.

And so one of my observations is that, and that I find really fascinating, is

but we don't have a good understanding of it.

And that's why I decided to dig into physics as information processing, which is that goals are constantly being negotiated.

And it's more along the lines of, so Michael Levine's work actually was what led me to explore quantum information

theory which is you know like this collective intelligences that are exist within systems and so at each level of collective intelligence it's not just that you have a collective intelligence

dictating a goal but that those goals are being negotiated uh as different as the environments change and as relationships between the systems change so i know these these are uh very big questions but if you could just like help me uh

give me some thoughts on what your thoughts have been about these kinds of questions.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think you're pointing to something very important here, and this is a question that this kind of

free energy principle-based work motivates immediately when you consider a system that comprises a bunch of subsystems.

You know, I work with Michael Levin at Tufts in developmental biology.

And one of his slogans is, all intelligence is collective.

And that immediately brings up this issue of how do these components, as you put it, negotiate their goals?

How do they collaborate?

How do they compete?

To what extent are they trying to deceive each other or coerce each other or all of this?

And we're trying to apply this in a cell biology context.

as a description of development and morphogenesis.

If you think about cells in a developing organism, they're constantly facing new environments.

Their capabilities are constantly changing.

And how they interact with each other is constantly changing.

And this all seems very psychological or sociological.


SPEAKER_07:
Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_05:
So I think what you're pointing to is the ubiquitous need for this kind of language in areas other than the human sciences.

I mean, it's language that's developed within the human sciences

that it's language that seems to be important at much smaller scales.

And clearly, one would anticipate it being important in much larger scales, the scales of countries or civilizations or whatever.

guess my answer is yes this is an extremely important point of view with very broad implications for how we think about biology at least thank you thank you definitely looking forward to your continued learnings and journey thank you dean


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, my question has changed three times because just the other questions that have come up in the meantime.

So some context here, Chris, you've kind of answered this.

You mentioned dual as in D-U-A-L.

And then Anna brought up, like, is there some kind of competition, a dual, a D-U-E-L going on?

And how do we put those two things together?

And me always thumping the table about minimum two.

We have to keep at least two truisms up at once if we're going to gain some sense around things.

I want to go back to that LOCC slide if we can for a second, because, Chris, you mentioned

Your statement was you draw a boundary.

To me, there's a lot of information packed in those four words.

You can draw and you can undraw, you can bound, you can unbound.

Those are perfectly context-less subject matter information carrying frames.

But you also have in that packet you and at, which are imperfect orientations, an indefinite article and

All of us occupying a slide here, none of us claiming to be anything other than a contradiction.

So one aspect of that packet, two words of it, literally half of it is perfectly contextless and is information carrying.

And the other literally half of that is prediction matter or information graphing.

It's literally the byproduct or the space time construct that

is included.

So I guess what I'm wondering is, is how do we make these different matters, the subject matter and the prediction matter tango?

How do we get them to relate?

Because in the session five, you went on a detour.

You said, we'll take a detour, which is, it holds this exact same structure as you draw a boundary.

So there's perfect information and there's imperfect information in that they're dancing.

We do this all the time.

This seems to me at a minimum what information theory is.

And that's why I want to kind of go back to this slide because this slide was in a much earlier session, but it got to session five where the context could be recapitulated.

And so I'm wondering whether or not we can really talk about quantum information without the classical.

Or if that's even possible.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I'll go back to Bohr's statement in his 1928 paper.

He basically said the answer to that question is no.

that we are humans, we have to communicate with each other, we have to do it in language, and that's classical communication.

And while we are doing that, while we're having this conversation, we can't be worried about

the question of, do I still exist?

Or do you still exist?

We can worry about that question, but we can't do it at the same time that we're having this conversation about the theory of lot protocols or exchanging data from a Bell EPR experiment.

And that's, of course, deeply paradoxical.

And I think that's just the situation we're in.

You said none of us are claiming to be anything other than a contradiction.

It's a good thing that we are self-conscious about the fact that we're doing something contradictory here or potentially contradictory here.

A colleague and I wrote a paper several years ago called Science Generates Limit Paradoxes.

And we basically rehearsed a version of this very discussion that we're having right now.

And the upshot of that paper is that in any situation in which a science can turn its theoretical apparatus onto its own practice,

So, for example, when physics can turn this analysis of boundaries onto the practice of physics, then it generates paradoxes.

And those paradoxes have a particular structure, which is the structure that Priest, I can't remember his first name,

a logician who works in non-dialethic logic, calls a limit paradox.

And all of this is coupled to Gödel's theorem and these other paradoxes of self-reference or aspects of self-reference.

But I think this situation really is ubiquitous and inescapable.

that as soon as we apply the tools of science to the practice of science, we generate these paradoxical situations in which we have to acknowledge that we are entities of a certain sort and that we are

constructing our theories using a faculty of imagination that lets us act as if we don't have a point of view.

So it lets us act as if what we're talking about is point of view independent.

But our theories themselves tell us that we have points of view and that they're important.

So we're stuck in this paradoxical situation.

I don't know whether that's what you're trying to point to here, but it's what I immediately leap to hearing what you said.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, a lot there.

Anyone else want to add a piece?


SPEAKER_05:
No, I'm going to have to go away.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Chris.

We'll stay for a few minutes.

Thank you, though.

This was awesome.

We're really looking forward to Lecture 6.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Thank you all.

And thank you all for attending this discussion session.

It's nice to have this kind of real-time discussion, which is missing during the actual lecture sessions.

So I appreciate it.

Thanks again.


SPEAKER_08:
See you.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you, Chris.


SPEAKER_04:
Ciao.

Kate, do you want to ask anything?

Or anyone can just bring up anything they're thinking right now.


SPEAKER_03:
Nothing in particular.

I'm just really looking forward to the last lecture on the biology of it all.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

Well, any other thoughts or questions?

Or if anyone in the live chat has a thought or a question, they can write it and we'll read it in the coming minutes.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, I just wanted to thank you for creating the space.

It's been absolutely amazing that I was able to find this situation where people are talking about enormous questions and very difficult questions.

And I just want, I just thought I'd share that I, um, find in academia, there's, I don't know why we're not having these conversations and I've been, um, it's been like a 10 year journey and I have finally found this group.

I just wanted to express my gratitude.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you.

I'll read a question from the live chat and anyone can give their thoughts.

So Mills8102 wrote, it seems that consilience would aim to ameliorate the problems of self-reference.

Is this a category of solution that seems valuable or fraught?

Could consilience ameliorate the problems of self-reference?

Yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Can I just ask a different question built on that?

Which is, what if the contradiction is a feature as opposed to a fraughtness?


SPEAKER_04:
Do I contradict myself?

Very well, then.

I contain multitudes.

There's the Whitman angle.

Then there's the William Blake.

Life is a fiction and is made up of contradiction.

So what is the problem of self-reference?

Whose problem is it?

Harris?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I will try to answer a bit, to tackle a bit both questions by offering my views from the cognitive science perspective.

Basically, I think it has to do with consilience, has to do with the numerous co-creative bias that we all are, let's say, subjected to.

So there is a very long list of co-creative biases, and there are more than 100 listed, I think.

This is one of the challenges in terms of achieving, let's say, good levels of consilience across various domains.

So this is what I wanted to add.


SPEAKER_04:
Another thought on that is consilience, though it can mean many things, synthesis.

Sorry, you did.

Oh, yeah, please, Ana, go ahead.


SPEAKER_06:
Oh yeah, I just, so I don't really have insights into the self-referencing problem.

I need to do a lot of thinking about that.

But coming from training in evolutionary biology and

spending you know graduate school postgraduate school working on explanations where we thought of many hypotheses models etc based on a goal which is organisms are designed to maximize their fitness and of course there are lots of you know that there are lots of problems with that

And it turns out with our data, what we found is that was not the case in the populations that we're working with.

Too often, the goal did not seem to be fitness.

But what that experience gave me is that there was something we could hang on to in order to allow ourselves to propose models for why humans behave the way they do and the decisions that they make.

So that's why I go back to goals because if...

if whatever level of collective intelligence we're talking about, there is a goal, then even, and Harris, please let me know if this will be correct, that even cognitive biases exist.

They exist because there is some goal, and therefore we can talk about cognitive biases with respect to some goals.


SPEAKER_01:
yes there is some sort of teleonomy in conscious agents or personal systems as i call them and it has to do with with course yes and cognitive biases and and the limitations

the knowledge let's say maybe it's limitations on parts of the knowledge representation that each of us has and maybe there are limitations in terms of access to to knowing and there are various forms of knowing so it depends it depends on many things and uh for example one of the

Cognitive bias that I believe can have a negative impact on consilience, let's say, in addressing this self-referentiality will be the halo effect.

So where you seem to prioritize, let's say, or give some advantage to some types of individuals, ideas, or even theories, because of that, hell, or whatever reason that is.

It is based on maybe on many different things, maybe on your past history or other things.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Anna, and if I may add something rather briefly.

Your question reminded me of Levin's, and I think it was written with Phil, the proposal about reduction of stress as a goal that guides the emergence of collective structures.

One of the papers formulated that that seems to be

the goal that drives things as they grow in complexity, reduction of collective stress or reduction of stress at any level.

Yeah, I don't remember the title of the paper, but that was the gist of it if I understood it correctly.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_06:
I'll look that up.

Great.


SPEAKER_04:
Another piece of the Levinson-Fields collaboration that Chris alluded to earlier is that the notion of computation is observer dependent.

That's polycomputation.

If there was a fully encrypted computation, an observer without the key would only be seeing noise to them.

Whereas if they were to have the decryption key, then they could fully understand and go into more detail about the computation.

So then let's say that we're in relation or observing or investigating some life phenomena at some scale, but we're speaking in the scale-free setting, but we're observing a thing that's there.

People have ascribed different goals to describe

what we call goal-oriented behavior like seemingly to survive or seemingly to have evolutionary fitness however one an observer could also project different proximate goals like the goal to minimize stress the goal to minimize free energy the goal to minimize surprise those proximate observer proposed goals as if goals

may be exactly isomorphic or aligned with fitness maximization so that could just be multiple perspectives of projective goals and whatever the observer projects that doesn't mean it describes the the actual

process of the phenomena at all there's just nothing alice can make any story about bob and it it may or may not have anything to do or even be possible to be of the kind that bob tells about themselves dean this is i want to just piggyback on that dan this is really hugely important the moment you use the word goals


SPEAKER_02:
the moment you use the word fitness you are assuming context whereas a lot of this stuff that's happening on this holographic screen is completely abstract less abstracted and completely context less there's no no context required so if you're going to focus on that part of it as long as you can juggle both at the same time and keep the two

things apart because one does not require context the other completely assumes that context is given and now you're taking that into your calculus right but they're not the same thing so I'm just I want to reinforce what Daniel just said thank you Dean Ian oh I'll mute then continue


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Yeah, I was just maybe reinforcing what you were saying or...

reflecting on it, I was thinking about the behaviours we see in other animals and even ourselves that we might not think are related to fitness.

Like, I don't know, there's those kind of gazelle type creatures that just jump into the air and like, but they seem to do that at a time which might make them be predated upon by a

some tiger or lion which you know it's you have to then all the sort of

biologists try and figure out how is this related to fitness?

Um, and we may do the same, you know, if I go and mow my lawn, waste half a Sunday afternoon mowing my lawn, what's that got to do with my fitness?

Well, actually it's to do with keeping up with the Joneses and, um, my social status.

So, um, it's really hard to actually know what my behavior is about.

I can create a story to say that it's to do with, uh,

minimizing free energy or fitness, but really is it or not?

I don't know.

Is that kind of what you were getting at or something different?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that's great point.

Also, it's come up several times about goals.

The term goal is not to be found within the active inference ontology, strictly speaking.

That's why we have so much fun with what we expect and what we prefer.

How can it be what we expect and be the positive thing that we pursue?

Well, that's how paths of least action work.

then if somebody else wants to look at that path of least action and say well here was a mile point and this is where it looked like they were heading north and this is where it looked like the goal was to evade this those are all stories that an observer could tell about a path or that the path might tell itself about its own path but those goal narratives

don't need to be implemented proximally or primally with goals as a kind of core player in the active inference ontology.

I'll read some of these great comments and questions just if anybody has a thought on them from the live chat, just feel free.

John Reed wrote, what does the active inference group, I think that's us,

includes everyone think about the equation of pilot wave with many worlds recently expounded upon by chris o'dowd at pbs i found it to be mixing terms and frustrating personally any thoughts on pilot wave and many worlds and or i would also just be curious on like the physics or technical side

where does what chris is sharing connect to these kinds of discussions that people have about many worlds and different interpretations of quantum uh yeah that's a great question so i i don't know that i can answer it um i know that uh when it comes to interpretations of quantum mechanics


SPEAKER_08:
whether you know the collapse or the many worlds or whatever i i think what they're hinting at is is and chris would probably answer something along those lines that quantum theory is fundamentally about information and until until we make sense of that um fully and and and fully spell out all the details

I think these philosophical issues or the interpretations of quantum mechanics are going to linger.

I don't have any strong thoughts on interpretations, and I would say I'm an agnostic about interpretations of quantum mechanics.

I don't know that I subscribe to any of them.

And especially pilot wave, I don't have the slightest idea about it.

Cool.

Harris?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, if you allow me, I have a small story regarding PilotWave.

I was conversing with Chad GPT and I actually asked what he thought about PilotWave after watching a lecture on it.

And then I got intrigued and I wanted to ask

and this actually happened the the model started replying and i got the chance to read a bit the the reply the reply was like it is very interesting but most probably is not wrong it is not correct it is wrong and then it must have reached some sort of information goal it retracted the the reply and it replied to me can you ask me a different question

So this is my short experience with pilot wave theory.


SPEAKER_02:
Can I ask a question?

Is a pilot wave more or less than 100 feet in height?


SPEAKER_04:
I think it's exactly 100.

Any other thoughts or questions?

it's a fun and lively live chat too which is always fun yeah well we are um coming right along in the year and now 5 6 completed with this course so

Any comments that anyone here just wants to make in a closing route?

Anybody who wants to can go for it.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I have a question.

If questions come up, have come up during the session, who could I send them to and how?


SPEAKER_04:
great question in the video description you can get to the syllabus of the course and one of the pages on the course website course syllabus is a question and answer form so you'll see several dozen questions that people have already written and chris gives answers and then it's publicly posted all of the lectures discussions and questions and answers will be published after the course

So every question, no matter from where or where to, all of these questions are encouraged.

It only makes it a richer and more relevant publication.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, Ian, Harris, or Dean?

Yes, Susan also says post in Discord.

Great point.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I just wanted to add a small point as a conclusion.

From my personal perspective, I really find that the ideas of Chris Fields, they can be revolutionary, let's say, in a variety of different fields.

And I can see it in quantum cryptography and also about the

what I've mentioned before in terms of quantum knowledge representation.

So these are the two fields that I can clearly see.

So it is great to be able to participate in this conversation.

So once again, thanks to everyone.


SPEAKER_04:
Great to participate in this conversation or quantum knowledge representation, whichever you prefer.

Andrew, any last comments?


SPEAKER_08:
Not really.

Just looking forward to the next one, I guess.

And next year, I should say.

And what?

Next year, this is going to be an ongoing thing.

Yes.

We'll come back stronger next year, for sure.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

What a ride.

Thank you all.

See you next time.

Bye.


SPEAKER_07:
Bye everyone.

## dAolShffDWo

SPEAKER_01:
hello and welcome everybody this is physics as information processing it's october 28th 2023 and we're in discussion six so we'll see where and how and when we go but to begin with

thank you for watching if you're watching live please feel free to write any questions or comments in the live chat as this is our last discussion we're going to be probably ranging broadly so looking forward to people's comments there otherwise perhaps we can all go around first and say hello or just give any thoughts or reflections

to get things going.

And then we'll jump into some of the questions and answers and look at some of these great thoughts that have been sent and responded to.

So perhaps Dean and then Harrison, David, any just overall thoughts or comments to get us going?


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Daniel.

I guess my overall impression was that I think that the way that the

entire series was organized and and um structured allowed for these kinds of conversations that we're having today which i think are really really valuable as you can see on the slide here i think a lot of a lot of question and answer tends to be focused around what is um whereas the the conversations that we've had

we can sort of tease that apart a little bit and ask questions around what if, and get into the counterfactual piece of it and interact around that.

And I've really, really appreciated that.

So that's my overall sense that we haven't left it sort of on the page.

We've actually been able to sort of breathe some life into it through these conversations.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.


SPEAKER_05:
Harris?

Yeah, I just wanted to say that it was a great series.

We all learned a lot and we got the opportunity to even ask questions to Chris and get back some very insightful answers that they are very helpful in order to, let's say, push the envelope forward.

Overall, this has been a great series.

I've enjoyed it a lot.

And while conversing with some of my colleagues, they also enjoyed it.

So the feedback is great.

And thanks to Active Inference Institute for facilitating this and to you guys.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Thank you.

And welcome, David, if you want to just begin with any thoughts or what brought you into the game in the bottom of the ninth.


SPEAKER_04:
um well in in school i was actually trying to use um free energy to develop some sort of a network of agents that were deciding what information to send and what states to be in based on each other's approximation of each other's states and um so i registered at the beginning but then i guess life happened i didn't really participate

But, um, yeah, so now I'm just kind of opening up to things and participating more in the world that I exist in.

And this is a natural, um, this is really tied to, to the work that I was doing in school.

I don't know if this is a place to ask a question, so I'm not gonna ask any questions, but that's like the first one.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's begin with that.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

Oh yeah.

So I was thinking about, I was, I was, I'm still confused about like Markoff blankets and non-localism.

how would those two things work together oh well like non-localism seems to me that an entity could be distributed arbitrarily in uh like in whatever it is i don't know if the universe is like space time is what is or if that's just a construction that we create through the information processing and like putting relation like enunciating or like uh

rendering the information in a way where it's like all the related components can be mutually distinguished um but the markov blanket seems to be highly local i i don't know maybe i this is what like i'm confused about this it seems to be highly local and like uh it seems like everything is connected with everything um so i i'm kind of confused about how an entity could be defined with a markoff blanket while at the same time


SPEAKER_00:
what is seems to be completely intertwined non-local mutually like defined yes dean please so can i just david just clarification did are you thinking that local and non-local is um somehow similar to maybe arbitrary um


SPEAKER_04:
I'm thinking local is like within a volume and non-local is like distributed, like a local, like a sphere, like a small sphere where all the information is like within a sphere and everything within that sphere is causally relevant.

Everything without is causally irrelevant.

But then like I'm thinking of a Markov blanket as a sphere and everything on the inside is like independent statistically from everything on the outside.


SPEAKER_00:
I guess I'm asking around where do you see that being placed?

Do you see that being placed arbitrarily?

Like when you set that up, whenever you decide where that boundary exists, are you asking because it's local or it's non-local because it's wherever inside and outside exists?

is present is it is that is the is the what's the word I'm looking for?

Are you are you are you wondering about how the how that doesn't seem to be consistent that one minute it can be here and then the next minute it can change and arbitrarily end up being in a different place?


SPEAKER_04:
um not not that i'm not that it doesn't seem to me that that's the confusion it's more like um like you know david boehm's implicate and explicate order and the idea that the explicate order is like one hologram there's like the hollow movement where each layer affects each layer and it's all the explicate is all at once explicated in mutual relatedness i don't know

um i don't know if these words are incoherent completely like uh and uh um and then but then the uh markov blanket like i'm i'm taking the example of my skin as like i don't know if that's even um a good example but my skin is like a markov blanket but then if everything is mutually related and explicated like this whole body is submerged in the same field that everything else is submerged in


SPEAKER_01:
in that sense everything is linked to everything there's no i don't know like um let me try adding a few pieces here so welcome welcome andrew and chris will hopefully join too here we go okay opening act

just to catch up chris and enter david asked about the markov blanket and about if slash how everything is connected to everything and how we associate markov blanket or the holographic screen with localism and non-locality do you want to give any quick thoughts on this or


SPEAKER_03:
are you asking me if you want to either of you could um i don't know uh let's wait a minute for chris to show up uh yeah i'm i'm here now yeah i'm glad you found it the way finally so uh question did you guys go through the slides of uh last time the lecture on biology


SPEAKER_01:
No, no.

We just began and started with the Markov blanket question.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I mean, I think you wouldn't hurt to talk about that because a big part of that last lecture was the copy and diversify notion as a universal feature in nature.

I mean, naively, I think that the creation of new boundaries is implicit in there.

So maybe Chris can comment.

But I also thought it was very worthy of mentioning today the cycle of error correction, memory, and so on.

So those would be my only two comments in the agenda for today.

Maybe Chris can say a few words.

But I didn't mean to interrupt.

So Mark of Blankets, we can pivot it to biology, I'm sure.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, I think I'm seeing this question.

Is this a question about the definition of Markov blankets?

There's something about... I can't actually see the entire... No, it's not a question on my screen.

Oh, it's not a question on your screen.

Okay.

It's a question on your screen.

Right.

But could you tell me what the question is again?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, David, just restate it, how you see it.


SPEAKER_04:
The question was if everything is mutually connected and mutually defined and interconnected, and there's non-localism in the sense that everything is mutually connected and mutually defined.

I'm kind of implicitly working with a assumption that the implicate-explicate order makes sense, and the explicate is like one hologram.

It's all together now.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

i still hear him oh the audio chris chris yeah i lost at least half of that audio just dropped out altogether oh


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so I'll try to, sorry about that.

Just like, so if everything is kind of explicated, like if it's information and the brain is kind of rendering it all at once together, I'm just confused as, and the whole body is submerged in the same, like in the same, like the whole body is submerged in it.

Like if I look in the mirror, the whole body is submerged in it.

it's all uh non-local i mean by that i mean it's all like connected together and mutually defined and mutually uh necessary to even make sense of any piece of it uh if there isn't even such a thing as a piece and i'm wondering i mean not so that's one that's one way of looking at it and then the other way is like the local to me it seems like the there's like the skin mark off blanket and it's kind of local and i'm kind of

like confused as to how those things kind of worked, like how those things like it seems like all the information in a sphere, the sphere could be a Markov blanket and then the on the inside and the outside, they're statistically independent.

Is that the like the whole movement on the inside and the outside because of the Markov blanket separates those.

But then if everything is this whole body submerged in this thing that's mutually related, I'm just confused as to how

Like, I don't know.

I just, I'm confused as to how those things work together.


SPEAKER_02:
I suspect the, I'm not sure I understand your question, but I suspect the answer has to do with whose point of view we're talking about.

So if you are the system that's in, so let's fix a Markov blanket someplace.

If you're the system on the inside, then all you can see is what's encoded on the blanket.

And you have no independent access to what the dynamics is on the outside.

So you don't actually know what the dynamics is on the outside.

And similarly, if you're on the outside.

Now, if you're somehow able to view the whole system, you can see the whole system as having some joint dynamics.

But if the whole system is isolated, then there isn't anybody on the outside, kind of by definition.

So the idea of a whole dynamics is just a theoretical postulate that we make to make the mathematics make sense.

Now, if you move from the classical formulation to the quantum formulation, then it's possible to prove a very nice theorem, which is that if you're inside a holographic screen, you can't measure the entanglement entropy across the screen.

What that means is that you can't know that your state is conditionally independent of what's going on outside.

So if you're inside a holographic screen, you can't know that you're not entangled with whatever's outside.

So you can't even know whether you have a well-defined state, in a sense.

And I think the same thing would probably hold true from the point of view inside a Markov blanket, that you wouldn't be able to know whether your Markov blanket had holes in it or something like that.

I mean, the problem is in the classical formulation, you assume there's no analog of entanglement.

So there's no analog of entanglement entropy.

So I think the strongest thing you can say is you don't actually know your statistical relationship to what's going on outside, but you still can only see what's encoded on the blanket.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Chris.

If I could add a few more pieces.

So, David, you described everything connected to everything.

For a system with that kind of a base graph,

there aren't Markov blankets because a Markov blanket is the set of nodes that make two other sets of nodes conditionally independent.

So in a fully connected setting, again, leading to the question, what is outside of that, but in a fully connected setting, you don't have a blanket as such.

In fact, the Bayesian graph

describes the factorization or the articulation and the sparsity of the system so it is a connectedness that is usually much much much sparser than everything connected to everything but that's not to say that differences can't make a difference at a distance

just that they propagate through a local causal structure and then space-time is constructed by certain kinds of cognitive agents that was one of the key aspects of this course and so we can take as primary the topology of the active inference agent environment relation

And then Markov blanket is just the sensorium on the inbound and the action capacity on the outbound.

One question though I do have to that is what about the non-zero gravitational effect, for example, of something that's distant in space and time?

Of course, Markov blankets don't have to be spatial temporal.

They can be in arbitrary state spaces.

But how do we deal with those kinds of long range influences?


SPEAKER_04:
That's my question.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Well, here I think it's useful to contrast Newtonian gravity with Einsteinian gravity.

Newtonian gravity is infinite range and instantaneously acting, whereas Einsteinian gravity is infinite range, but it's locally encoded.

So the Einsteinian gravity that you feel is your local measurement of the curvature of your local bit of spacetime.

So that is very much happening on your Markov blanket, right?

It's a local measurement, local in spacetime.

So let's assume there's a spacetime

that's objective and characterizes everything, then you're locally measuring it on your blanket, and that's what you feel as gravitational attraction or your mass.

Whereas in Newtonian or Laplacian gravity, you don't have that sense of locality, right?

As soon as something changes anywhere in the universe, it affects you.

So Einstein was struggling, of course, to make gravity consistent with electromagnetism, where it was clear that forces are transmitted at finite speed, the speed of light.

And he didn't have the idea of a graviton moving at the speed of light.

But he did have this idea of local measurement.

So nonlocality was anathema to Einstein, and that's basically why he spent so much trouble removing it from physics.

And that's why he hated the idea of entanglement so much, because it seemed to him that from a spacetime point of view, it had to be nonlocal.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, can I bring up a point at this point?

So I think this is somewhat relevant

to a question I really wanted to ask Chris, which is in lecture six, I remember minute 23.

I wish I had written it down, but I can roughly remember.

There was that phylogenetic graph and you see a live growing,

in a self-similar way, you know, just like the genealogical tree of species, same thing happens at the individual level with growth and so on.

Anyways, I found that fascinating in the sense that the degrees of freedom of life as a whole grow, right?

And around that minute, 23, you made a comment, well, then the environment must be shrinking.

And you tie this with space-time and something about...

space-time you know we from the physics side we also have that uh you know we have cosmological inflation and whatnot are any of those things related that that remark uh I feel like was made in passing and I I think there's a lot there to to be said uh it also maybe shed some light on

the emergent spacetime issue, if it does emerge from a more basic ontological object like the tensor network and the degrees of freedom in the tensor network, is it fair to say that life as it grows gets more of those degrees of freedom, but then somehow anything that happens to spacetime is an illusion in that sense?

I don't even know if I'm formulating that question right, but I think Chris knows what I'm talking about.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, the comment makes the most sense in the context of the state space itself leaving aside space-time.

So if you think of a Hilbert space and draw a boundary someplace that separates what we're going to call life from what we're going to call non-life,

And essentially what life has done over the past three billion years is incorporate bits of the non-life part of the state space into life.

So total biomass is increasing.

So more and more of the available mass is getting incorporated into living things.

And so if we can kind of heuristically fold space-time in and say, you know, in the locality, in the locale of Earth and over this fairly short time period, the expansion of space-time is more or less negligible.

So life is actually taking up more space now.

it did certainly at the time of Luca when all of us weren't around but there was just one probably population of cells that we're descendants of but the point about the Hilbert space is just the point that if you have once if you divided it in two and you

moved the boundary then one system gets bigger at the expense of the other system which now has less of the hilbert space so that's all that remark really is right as the system uh in a sense takes over degrees of freedom of the of the

environment so that's in that case so it becomes a different system at every time step from the point of view of it has now a different hilbert space and different internal dynamics so physically it's a different thing yeah but when when we look at it we say oh this thing is continuous through time it is expanding it's growing it's developing evolving whatever


SPEAKER_03:
Right and so so then I guess the comment just that question that just occurred as you as you were talking.

That begs the question, you know, does that biomass come to dominate all the degrees of freedom in the universe?

Is that there's all presumably there's a tension with.

the rate at which those degrees of freedom are growing and the rate at which spacetime is growing.

Thus, the growth of spacetime in terms of those degrees of freedom that may be more fundamental amount to loss in error correction capacity.

How do we not

I mean, and maybe more speculatively, how you reconcile this with loss of thermodynamics.

Like, do we know, are you implying that life is going to come to dominate everything and fill up the entirety of the known universe?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that's a stretch.

But...

I would say at this point that until we have a mature theory of quantum gravity that makes enough empirical predictions to be testable, it's not clear, at least to me, how the whole emergent space-time picture fits together with the inflationary picture or the expanding space-time picture.

I mean, in some sense, taking a strict Hilbert space view, if the universe is an isolated system, then its Hilbert space is fixed.

And so your question in a sense becomes, what's the relationship between space-time and this Hilbert space?

Are

what we think of as space-time degrees of freedom, real degrees of freedom or not.

And it seems to me that question really isn't resolved.

And I'm not sure at this point how to resolve it.


SPEAKER_05:
Harris, do you want to?

Yeah, I just have something small to add.

Overall, this is very interesting and these questions are very deep.

What I wanted to add is that I was thinking the initial question regarding Markov blankets.

And I also have some equation that it's related with it, but I will ask Chris later.

What I wanted to add now is that basically Markov blankets are a way of describing the boundaries of a system in terms of statistical mechanics or statistics, let's say.

And essentially, from what I understand, they are

paramount in order to define observers and also the systems under observation.

So any physical system can be seen as an observer with a Markov blanket, let's say.

So now trying to tie it all up with active inference.

Well, active inference, as I understand it, implies that the system is actively referring to its external states from its internal states in an effort to both learn, let's say, and adapt to the environment.

This goes back and ties with this metaphorical link, let's say, with the skin.

This is how I understand it.

And it actually means that a system with a Markov blanket can actually be seen as performing physics as information processing, which is the bulk of this series that Chris is offering to us.

And a final comment in terms of non-locality.

Non-locality can actually be seen as a form of information processing.

So this is what I wanted to add.


SPEAKER_02:
Did you say how non-locality is a form of information processing?


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, this is how I understand it.

What do you think about that, Chris?


SPEAKER_02:
If we put it in terms of entanglement, entanglement is a useful resource for information processing.

But it's only a usable resource if it's combined with classical communication, either across time or across space.

So entanglement is only useful as a resource if different observers can act

locally, i.e.

without interfering with each other on the quantum resource.

So if you think of entanglement as non-locality, if you embed it in space-time in that way, then it is useful as

computational resource, but the observers also have to transmit classical communications in a way that fully complies with locality.

So in a Bell EPR type experiment, for example, if you have

Alice in one lab and Bob in the other lab making measurements of some entangled state, then at some point, to know that the state is entangled, they have to send their classical records to each other as classical communication and then deal with those records locally.

So in a sense,

non-locality in that sense is useful for computation but it's only useful if you also have locality great great thank you actually i'm working on on uh


SPEAKER_05:
on a novel notion, let's say, that is something that takes the notion of entanglement and transform it in the following sense.

I'm actually thinking of

maximum unentanglement as a resource for classical computation so that's something i am actually exploring it's i find it to be on a nice concept did you say maximum unentanglement yes maximum separability yeah okay that that makes sense i mean we need maximum separability


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Or we need to be able to factor a state space to talk about two different observers.

So to talk about conditional independence.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

In my head, this maximum entanglement as a resource can actually be expanded to perform a classical computation or even to increase the coherence of a quantum system.

So I'm playing with that notion a bit.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Can I ask something really quick about?

Yeah, there is.

Okay.

So apparently, like, from what I don't understand very much, but from Bohr, apparently the whole experimental setup was one, like, entity.

They couldn't be broken down into like constituent pieces that are interacting, but had to be taken as one and see from what I understand.

And apparently Einstein's view is, um, well, I really don't know what his view was, but apparently like it's not one entity can broken, be broken down into localized pieces that are interacting.

And I'm kind of, apparently they couldn't get along like Warren Einstein.

apparently there was like a party or something and then they all congregate to separate parts of the room and didn't really interact and apparently it was because they had these like opposing views on the same thing of like breaking down the interconnectedness into separate constituent subsystems and even like taking the partial trace i mean there was one universal function taking the partial trace which possibly defined the subsystems whenever

perfectly so i'm like it's all tied together but i can't really explain i'm trying to say like well how do you um i'm asking everyone like these seem like two very opposed views they seem like very alternative views like on on one side you have like kind of like

an indivisible whole and the other side you have like locality where it's almost like there's like a sequence of measurements leading up to an ego an eye that then measures is like a real entity as in another one is like the observer and the observed are one thing they cannot be meaningfully separated maybe functionally they can be separated but like as actually until like as actually existing sub-components they cannot be defined strictly

it's too different from what i understand one of them is saying yes you can define these subsystems and they really do exist as separate entities you know the other one is saying that's just kind of like a like a useful notion like a useful way to organize information as to operate on that information to posit a subject and an object and to have the subject operate on the object is a useful way for thinking to separate itself

And it seems like this is closer to Bohr than the other one is closer.

Well, apparently that's a distinction of Bohr and Einstein from what I understand, which is, please correct me if it's wrong.

And so, yeah, that's why I put that out there.

And I don't know what that's going to spawn in terms of responses, but yes.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think that's a fair characterization of the Bohr-Einstein debate, actually.


SPEAKER_01:
to add a response there, whether it actually exists.

It seems like in one of those framings, you had an observer looking at something.

And if we define actually existing in a relational observed setting, then to the observer, the measurement actually exists.

Prepare, measure, prepare, measure.

And then from another perspective, viewing that setup,

then it's the observer of a setup.

And so it's just, again, to Chris's first point about what perspective, and this is one of the most essential pieces that the blanket screen relationality brings into play is there isn't a view from nowhere, but there is a perspective

that may have a definite answer, and yet there are multiple perspectives that have complementary answers in our scenario.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, can I speak for a minute?

Oh, yeah.

I was muted earlier.

I didn't realize.

I meant to ask David.

I don't have an answer to your question, but I was wondering if you could reformulate.

Would it be fair to reformulate your question as saying, are blankets objective or not?

Is the Boris Einstein debate equivalent to that?

And then second, and I guess this may be for Chris, I was skimming through the answers, and one of them

was talking about how one of the big tensions between general relativity and quantum theory is the idea of object persistence.

And I don't know how to articulate it either, but I feel like it was more or less what you were getting at, David.

Is that correct?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think that's another way to put it.

And also the thing you said about the third person looking at those systems, if there's multi-agent communication, that's kind of the thing that I'm kind of stuck on in terms of trying to understand this.

Because if there's a third agent looking, those two are subsumed in the information on the holographic screen.

And then, I don't know.

Anyways, so that's what I'm kind of trying to.


SPEAKER_02:
I think a delightful thing to read here is Gene Wigner's paper where he introduces the Wigner's friend thought experiment.

And I think it's from, there's a book called The Scientist Speculates.

The editor is someone named Good, G-O-O-D.

And Wigner has a paper in this book, I think it's 1961, and it's also the paper where Wigner talks about consciousness being an essential concept in quantum theory.

But the thought experiment is,

that Wigner's friend is doing an experiment in his laboratory and making observations, and Wigner is outside the laboratory, and Wigner has to regard his friend as in some sort of superposition with his instrument.

He has to regard his friend as entangled with his friend's instruments.

until Wigner can actually interact locally with the friend and make a measurement of the friend's state.

And so it makes Wigner's friend and his apparatus look like an entangled pair.

And Wigner now looks like an experimenter who's operating on just one part of an entangled pair.

But Wigner himself tells the story very nicely.

That sort of historical text, I think, is always useful to have a look at and see how the people themselves were responding to this idea.

And Wigner is quite perplexed by this thought experiment.

And I think all of those people were quite honestly mystified with what observation actually is and what consciousness is and all of these other questions that people are a little bit scared to talk about in the ensuing several decades.


SPEAKER_04:
self-reference yeah you can go ahead self-reference seems to be like there's this ancient symbol of the uroboros uh the output is the input it feeds on itself

even like consciousness I have to contextualize my I have to contextualize to contextualize like it's self-referential I have to everything refers to itself and then at the end self-reference is where all the paradoxes are like this sentence is false or all I know is that I know nothing these are all paradoxical statements so there's some sort of mystery cell division of self-reference like that ancient view is that it's like embryogenesis cosmogenesis same thing

I don't know.

It seems to me that there's some sort of mystery.

It's like the mind just deludes.

I don't know.

Thinking tries to make these thought systems, but it just slips out.

It can't grasp it.

I don't know.

But that's already a conclusion, which I don't necessarily want to even make.

Because if it's self-referenced, I'm just thinking, okay, then maybe it goes all the way to the bottom.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, can I ask a question before we run out of time?

Actually, I have two.

Maybe one is a bit longer.

The second one.

Sure.

So the first one, Chris, is I was very intrigued.

Looking forward to hear you talk a little bit about that cycle of error correction and memory and persistence and so on.

And in particular,

I was wondering if it relates at all to the main other thing you talked about in that lecture six, the copy and diversify business.

Because intuitively, if that cycle is something that an organism has to implement, I'm talking about that slide with the error correction and whatnot, then it pays a thermodynamic price for it.

So I...

Presumably, there is an anabolic process of trying to grow so you can feed degrees of freedom into this error correcting scheme.

Thinking like a physicist, something like that might be happening.

So is the copy and diversify feature a necessity of having to run this cycle?

That's my first question.


SPEAKER_02:
That's a good question.

I don't know whether it's necessary.

I think one could think of a fairly small scale heat engine or metabolic system that can pull just enough free energy out of its environment to store a one-bit memory.

And you can think of something like a flip-flop, right?

These things aren't alive, so it's not quite as complex as an organism.

But it is using energy to maintain a memory, and its memory does influence its behavior.

So I think we have these limiting cases like this that don't have to grow.

But when you think about organisms, organisms have...

the problem of being made out of very delicate parts that need to be replaced.

And it's that degradation that I think is driving this need for constant copying.

And from a

From a physics point of view, I think what that boils down to is that the organism's living right at the edge of an interaction with its environment that's too strong to maintain.

So the environmental interaction is

constantly at risk of spinning out of control and having too large an energy transfer, which basically tears the Markov blanket apart and exposes too many of the internal degrees of freedom to the outside.

So this...

maybe one way of of saying what characterizes life that it's it's interacting with its environment right on the edge of an interaction that's too strong and it's it's it's great to have a strong interaction because then you have you have big eigenvalues and so you have large bandwidth but the risk is that the environment tears you apart


SPEAKER_01:
close to the fire but don't get burnt become become the fire and then control the redox balance and gain that autopoetic regulative capacity which works when it works yeah until something comes along with bigger teeth


SPEAKER_03:
um another comment if i may is um as as the course comes to an end one two of the two themes i realized associated to classicality that we've talked a lot about in this class are object persistence and boundaries right so classicality being a feature

intrinsically boundary related and having a lot to do with object persistence and so so so are these just things completely dual from from an fep point of view because you want to maintain the integrity of the boundary you want you know you want to preserve that classical information presumably i'm not sure i guess my question to to everyone is our object persistence and and uh and uh

Well, in the topic of classicality, object persistence and boundaries, are these basically completely dual pictures?

That's my question.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I wouldn't be surprised.

And we also need object persistence to define space.

So

This idea of object persistence is a very key idea that has to be dealt with.

And physics has largely ignored this idea, which is kind of objects are taken for granted.

But I think what Carl says in that 2019

free energy principle for a particular physics paper is fairly clear on this.

I mean, he basically says the free energy principle tells systems to persist.

That's basically what a system has to do by maintaining the integrity of its Markov blanket.

I think that's very insightful.


SPEAKER_01:
If it doesn't, it's not.

yeah, it's not a system anymore well, as we somewhat glide towards a local closure of course, anyone is welcome to bring up any reflections and also, I'd love to hear about

where we go from this now measured outcome how do we prepare individually at the institute scale ecosystem scale and what are we going to do coming out of this are we talking about that right now


SPEAKER_03:
Or any thoughts?

Yeah?

Just keep learning, bro.


SPEAKER_04:
What do you mean by the ecosystem scale?


SPEAKER_01:
Like the active inference ecosystem and our own ecosystems going beyond our own scale.


SPEAKER_03:
I guess the only thing I can comment on this is I echo the view that, or not view, or rather remark that Chris made in the lecture about quantum biology as a field.

it's in a nascent stage right now, but I mean, I think, you know, there will be a non-trivial interaction between the active inference community and quantum biology that I'm making that surmise right now.


SPEAKER_00:
So let's talk about quantum biology for a second.

I'll open up the Pandora's box here.

Let's think of it as a parable as opposed or maybe even fan fiction because Chris has shared so much with us.

I want to kind of build off of it.

If you'll indulge me for a second, I'll read you a little story.

Just hear the story out.

Quantum biology sounds like more than up or down without saying that it is more.

Up or down is what information can be counterfactually is looking at carrying capacity as in quotes can be.

And from that carrying capacity comes orientation, things like direction and scale.

Things like the ability to plan appear to fit better in the orientation category relative to the carrying capacity category, which is non-communativity in action.

So if, and this is a big if, if we agree that orientation is to follow, should our recognizing of planning affordances follow as well?

So from the session slide, there was a quote, living systems are genetic quantum systems that the FEP has driven to a high level of computational complexity.

And here, the in quotes, computation is baked in as something plannable.

With this as a reference frame to make plans, we need carrying capacity.

Check.

Agreed.

But in order to learn,

Where does the carrying capacity plus orientation relationship insist that we start with a received plan?

This perspective is compared to say actively inferring our way to the plan falls out of carrying capacity.

Just making this explicit, we can then ask, should we first apply a received plan or apply active inference?

That helps clarify when the strategy is one more based on exploitation versus a strategy more based and biased to exploration.

In summary, when did information delivery, things like product or packaging begin to trump information carrying capacity, which is essentially information processing, rather than

We need this paired relationship, the carrying capacity plus the orientation as a minimum of two so that we can compare, identify change and no change, model patterns, et cetera.

This is another way of asking when did subject matter expertise come to be seen as more valuable than prediction matter expertise when it seems like we need both capacities if we want independency?

And here's the kicker.

If not given time to reflect on what's being asked here, and I know Chris oftentimes has a nice long pause to reflect, but if not given the time to reflect, people will take their subject matter expertise strategy, which clearly is a next move perspective over one that holds up next move plus all moves, meaning that they bring prediction matter expertise in to follow.

to parameterize, to unlock, to unring, to unbound what's in and what's out.

Of course, without prediction matter expertise, what is quantum biology?


SPEAKER_02:
Wow.

Can you just post that someplace so we can think about it?


SPEAKER_00:
I'll just email it to you, Chris.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.


SPEAKER_05:
That was great.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think you're asking about the fundamental question of what does Carl call it?

Epistemic value and the role of curiosity and that whole cluster of issues.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I think I need to give you the credit that you deserve on this.

I think it's the fact that you have allowed us to interact with you

that's given us that kind of courage and confidence to be able to put things out there.

I don't know how much of it sticks or how much of it, I'm not sure that it requires disciples, but I do think it provides what you've done is provided that medium.

So again, I guess that's my way of saying thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, thank you.

That's, that's,


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, thank you, Chris.

I have learned so much this year, more than ever before.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, well, great.

This has been a great class.

And hopefully various things will come out of it.

Certainly just from looking at the questions that have been in the question forum, lots of people are thinking about these issues.

That's what I think AI needs going forward is people thinking and talking about stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
thank you chris yeah a few outcomes that we know will transcribe the lectures the discussions add in screenshots add in the q a and publish those proceedings as a book we will pick back up in 2024 with potentially having the recorded and written contents as part of a curriculum

So not just replicating, but now continuing on with another quantum flow across this now classical artifact, because it's quantum in the moment, and then once it's communicated, it becomes a classic.


SPEAKER_03:
And we have most to prepare that state.


SPEAKER_02:
All right, great.

I'm going to have to sign off, but thank you very much.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Chris.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Chris.


SPEAKER_01:
Ciao.

Does anyone else want to make any reflection or comments?


SPEAKER_00:
I just thank everybody that's helped organize, participated in all of the discussions, even the people who showed up.

the very end of the discussions because i really appreciate that again i can't emphasize enough when we get a chance to interact with this stuff when we get to manipulate it when we're able to get ask questions even though we feel vulnerable i think that that's when a lot of the really good stuff um tends to get consolidated so thank you to all of you


SPEAKER_01:
I'll read some fun comments from the live chat.

Just the last several, just to recognize some of our great colleagues.

Lucrative Leadership wrote,

yes on yes more on affordances ian wrote would love for this series to continue joanne wrote thank you this was a wonderful learning experience mills 8102 wrote the probable and the possible there are some emojis pablo sent a heart powwow dao i don't speak this language but i can definitely hear understand and feel it so thank you everybody who's watching along these were all great and um

We prepare and measure every day at the Institute.

So I really do hope that people from all backgrounds, all vectors, all preference and prior sets come engage and not presuppose too much about us or themselves or what can happen when we really do interact.

And when we take it into the kinds of spaces and timelines that we know we want to be on.

All right.

Thank you.

Bye.

Thank you everyone.


SPEAKER_04:
Bye.

## RpOrRw4EhTo

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference Institute.

This is session one of the course Physics as Information Processing with Chris Fields.

First we'll have Ander Aguirre and Chris Fields introduce themselves and then we'll carry on with the first lecture here.

Check out the video description for a link to the course overview website where you can ask questions that will be answered asynchronously

register to participate in the discussions, which happen about two weeks after each of the six lecture sessions, and just learn more about this area.

So thank you both so much for joining into this adventure we are starting now.

And first, please, André Guiré, introduce yourself, and then Chris, introduction and lecture.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
hello so i'll be the course assistant and um so i'm a post-optimist specialized in improbability and um i have a deep interest in the physics of information and i've been uh familiar with chris's papers for a while and so yeah just here to learn myself uh thank you andrew and thank you daniel um i'm chris fields


SPEAKER_01:
And I'll be presenting this course in six sessions.

And Andrew will be organizing discussion sessions after each of those.

And all of this is explained on the course website.

So let's start.

This is a course on physics as information processing, and this first session will be a historical perspective on the idea that physics is or is about information processing.

And I'll just start with a few quotations that span the middle of the 20th century from Wittgenstein in 1920 saying, the world is all that is the case, so defining the world in terms of facts, not objects.

Landauer in the early 60s proclaiming that information is physical.

And then John Archibald Wheeler, who in many ways is the grandfather of this era recently, stating it is it from bit.

So things come from information, i.e.

bit strings.

And if nothing else, this shows that formulations of this idea get pithier as the 20th century rolls on.

But the history goes back further, clearly, than the 20th century.

But I'm only going to really talk about a piece of it.

And the timeline that I'll actually discuss

Today, the most relevant history of this idea goes back to the mid-19th century.

And the first specific thing I'll talk about is Clausius' definition of entropy.

But with the beginning of the understanding of thermodynamics and the role of information in thermodynamics, you get this very interesting multidisciplinary progression of ideas that incorporates the beginning of quantum theory.

And the beginning of quantum theory can kind of be dated to the first Solvay conference in 1928.

the famous debate between Bohr and Einstein over whether quantum theory is about knowledge, information, or objects, things.

But it incorporates a lot of work in computer science and logic and mathematics.

So interestingly, computer science was born effectively in the mid-30s with the work of Church and Turing.

which very rapidly converged with the work in physics.

So today we'll be talking about both computer science and physics.

And then in the second half of the 20th century, this just exploded into a huge area.

And in consequence of that mid 20th century development, we're beginning to see a new idea about physics.

which is roughly encapsulated in quantum information theory.

And the new idea is this.

It's that what physics is actually about is information transfer across boundaries.

And the information, we can represent the information transfer like this, and this is a convention I'll use.

A boundary is always a blue ellipse.

And the agents that are exchanging information across this boundary are conventionally called Alice and Bob, which is just a more polite way of saying A and B. And when you think about this picture, it becomes clear that what physics is really about is communication.

And this is a wild re-description of the idea of what physics is compared to the ideas of Newton or Laplace or even the 19th century ideas.

And it's very different from the idea that's been preserved in 20th century physics in the lineage of Einstein.

and others who viewed classical physics as, in a sense, a fundamental, either as completely fundamental or as a fundamental adjunct to quantum theory.

So this way of thinking about physics is a very deeply quantum theoretic way of thinking about physics.

And where we're going in this course today is really

of how did this all happen?

It's the origin story.

And then in the next session, I want to discuss quantum information theory explicitly, and in particular, how quantum theory makes this conclusion that physics is about communication very simple and obvious, much more obvious than it is in classical physics, where it takes work to formulate this idea.

Then in the next session, we're going to talk about semantics and how observations become meaningful to the agents who make them, and hence how actions become meaningful to the agents who make them.

Then in August, we'll talk about communication theory a little bit more explicitly and talk about how agents employ multiple communication channels when they're communicating.

And this is obvious when you think of people communicating.

They not only talk to each other, they look at the same things, they point to things, et cetera.

So this is what I mean by multiple communication channels.

Then in September, we'll leverage that discussion to talk about how spacetime actually emerges from communication.

And this is one of the most important aspects, I think, of quantum information theory.

It provides us with a way of viewing spacetime as an emergent phenomenon, that communication is what is fundamental in some ontological sense.

And the box in which it happens, spacetime, is not.

So the final session in October, we'll talk about applications to biology via the free energy principle and future directions, both in physics and biology and elsewhere.

So it's going to be an interesting ride.

I'm keeping formalism to a minimum because we're directing this toward the broad array of people who are interested in active inference and who are involved with the Active Inference Institute.

and i would ask you to hold questions because we have a lot to get through in an hour for the interactive discussion and for the discussion forum so i hope i explained things well enough that all of the concepts will be understandable

If not, Wikipedia is actually a wonderful resource in this area for just definitions of terms.

So if there's anything that just a term that is a trip up, try Wikipedia.

It's probably a very good source for what these terms mean.

So let's start.

Our story, as I said, begins in the 19th century.

And in the mid-19th century,

lots of physicists were devoting their efforts to figuring out how to make better steam engines.

And one question that arises when you're trying to design a steam engine is what happens physically when you add heat to a system at constant temperature?

So if you're building a steam engine, you've got a boiler because you need to make steam.

And as you turn up the heat to your boiler,

you get more steam, but the temperature doesn't change.

So this is a mystery.

What is the heat actually adding to the boiler that is not increasing the temperature?

And Clausius responded to this question in a way that's sort of typical for a physicist or a mathematician.

Since he didn't know what the answer was, he just invented a new name for whatever it was and gave it a formal definition.

So he called it entropy, which is a made-up word that, if it was translated from the Greek, would roughly mean transformation content in tropy,

And he represented it by a simple equation that the change in this new concept, entropy, which is always called S, is just equal to the change in heat, Q, at constant temperature, T. So obviously this equation just reformulates the question in declarative form, saying whatever this stuff is,

Its changes in this stuff are just changes in heat at constant temperature.

Well, heat is energy, and this wasn't completely recognized in the mid-19th century.

But the way you'll see this equation in a current textbook is ds is the energy, change in energy at constant temperature.

So even more commonly, you would see it written as the change in energy is equal to the temperature times the change in entropy.

It's the most common textbook way of seeing this.

But the question, of course, is what is this quantity?

What is this entropy?

What does this concept mean?

And about 15 years after Clausius proposed it, Altman had the key insight, which is that entropy is a measurement of our uncertainty about the state the system is in.

And in particular, he again, of course, went to formalism and said the entropy, S, is

is equal to some constant times the number of states that the system can be in that look the same to us.

And since that number of states is enormous, the way to make that manageable is to take the log of the number of states.

The natural log is ln.

And this constant k is called Boltzmann's constant.

Boltzmann was able to do this because he subscribed to a radical, very unpopular theory that material things, including gases like air, were made of atoms, and heat made the atoms move around.

And as you increase the amount of heat, the atoms can move in many different ways.

So the number of states that they can be in that look the same to us increases.

And that's what entropy is.

It's this increase in the number of states that the system can be in that all look the same to us with the measurements that we can make.

And since they look the same to us, we're uncertain about exactly what state they're in.

So entropy is a measure of uncertainty.

This was really the beginning of modern physics, because what it says now is that decreasing uncertainty requires energy.

It links a measurement of uncertainty to a measurement of energy.

And if you think about the uncertainty principle in quantum theory, the core idea of the uncertainty principle is you can't measure a system without disturbing it.

So to actually act on a system requires energy, and that's what you have to do to get information.

So here's Boltzmann basically inventing quantum theory.

So we're going to fast forward by another 15 years to 1900.

And in 1900, Planck solved this problem called the blackbody radiation problem, which was basically how much heat does your hot boiler give off into the air?

And all of the measurements of the heat that hot boilers gave off to the air ran into problems in classical physics and caused contradictions and quantities that went to infinity and all of that was bad.

So many people were trying to solve this problem, and Planck solved it by making a simple postulate.

He said the energy of the radiation is proportional to its frequency, so its color, in the case of light.

And if you go higher frequency, you end up in ultraviolet and X-rays and gamma rays.

If you go to lower frequency, you go into microwaves and radio and all of that.

So this is a nice way of talking about radiation.

And it turned out that this solved the problem.

I mean, just assuming this simple proportionality relationship produced spectra for blackbody radiation that worked, that matched what you saw experimentally.

Well, this means something very important.

It means because this number H, the proportionality constant called Planck's constant, is a number, it's finite, it means that energy comes in discrete units of H. You can have one H or two H or 10 million H, but you can't have half an H of energy.

So it's quantized.

And this is widely recognized as the birth of quantum theory.

But of course, we should have known this already if we just thought a little bit, right?

We know that changes of energy are proportional to changes in entropy by temperature.

And we know that entropy is a measure of the number of states.

And numbers of states are just numbers.

You can have one state, two states, three states, 10 million states.

100 billion states, but they're all just a number, one up.

And it's not infinite.

There's not an infinite number of states unless you have an infinite amount of energy, which we don't have.

So we knew already that entropy could only take discrete values.

And since energy and entropy are basically the same thing, we knew already that energy could only take discrete values.

So we could have realized in 1900 that energy is quantized because the number of states is quantized.

So it shouldn't have really been a mystery why energy was quantized, but it was a mystery.

And it stayed a mystery.

I mean, it's still a mystery.

People still debate the meaning of quantum theory.

But another thing we could have known in 1900 was something very important.

And it's that this quantum of action, Planck's constant, which has units of action, which is energy times time, is intimately related to Boltzmann's constant.

And Boltzmann's constant has units of energy over temperature.

But this wasn't actually understood until the 1950s.

No one really figured this out.

There was this relation until the 1950s.

And when it was figured out, it was figured out by a guy named Giancarlo Wick.

And he introduced this notion of the Wick rotation by realizing that if you have an equation in classical physics

And in it, there's the term 1 over kt.

You can always replace that 1 over kt with this other expression, it over h-bar.

h-bar is just h divided by 2 pi.

And you'll get an equation that's valid in quantum theory.

And this is typically described in textbooks as a trick.

And whenever something in physics is described as a trick, what that really means is it's something we don't understand.

And lots of papers have been written about the meaning of the wick rotation.

But to start to understand the wick rotation, I want to look at this equation a little bit.

1 over kT is 1 over an energy.

And IT over H-bar is 1 over an energy, since H-bar is units of energy times time.

We have time in this equation.

And then we have this factor I, which is typically thought of as just an imaginary number.

So it's the square root of minus 1.

And what's this I doing in this equation?

And in fact, you see factors of IT over H bar, if you're familiar with quantum theory, everywhere in quantum theory.

So what's the meaning of this imaginary number?

And if you just think of IT or of I as this arbitrary imaginary number that somehow renders the equation mysterious,

then the whole of quantum theory is mysterious, but the wick rotation is very mysterious.

But what I is actually is an operator.

And if you think of the real numbers as an axis, which is always drawn horizontally, so here it is.

Here's zero, and the axis is pointing that way.

I'm sorry, I can't get the camera really far enough away to see my arm here.

So what is I?

I is actually an operator that rotates the whole real axis by 90 degrees.

So if you see a plot of complex numbers, then the real numbers go this way and the, quote, imaginary numbers go that way.

So what multiplying by I has done is rotate by 90 degrees.

And of course, if you do I squared, you rotate twice by 90 degrees.

My arm won't do this, but you end up pointing that way.

And those are the negative numbers.

So I is an operator that rotates something by 90 degrees.

And if you rotate four times by 90 degrees, you're back to the identity.

So I to the fourth is one.

So this tells us something very interesting, which is that what the wick rotation is really talking about is a rotation.

It's a geometrical equation.

And in July, we'll come back to this and really probe what this wick rotation means physically.

But as I said, this wasn't understood until the 1950s.

And by the 1950s, a lot had happened.

So quantum theory had been developed.

Bohr and Einstein had had their debate.

Particle accelerators had been built.

The atomic bomb had been built.

Nuclear physics was well in its way.

So an enormous amount of practical physics had been done.

Quantum theory was highly developed.

People were starting to think about quantum field theory before they made this simple realization that's formulated in the wick rotation.

So this is a harbinger of things to come.

But before we continue in physics, we need to backtrack in time a little bit and look at what the mathematicians were doing.

So across the hall in the math department, one year after the Solvay Conference in 1929, Kurt Gödel proved his famous first incompleteness theorem.

And the theorem states that no formal system that contains arithmetic can be both consistent and complete.

And that means that either there are true statements that aren't provable in the formal system,

or there are false statements that are provable, or, of course, both.

And Gödel's proof is actually extremely simple.

Almost all of the work in the proof is setting up all of the notation and procedures and so forth to formulate within arithmetic the sentence, this sentence is not provable.

And once you have that sentence formulated within arithmetic, then the conclusion of the proof is obvious.

If you can prove the sentence, this sentence is not provable, then you've proved something that's false.

And if you can't prove it, then there are sentences that you can't prove in arithmetic.

So this was incredibly bad news for mathematicians.

who thought that finite discrete operations, which is what proofs are and also what computations are, can exhaustively enumerate the facts.

And this was the assumption behind Wittgenstein's claim that the world is all that is the case.

The world is a collection of facts.

And optimistically, he thought that first-order logic would allow us to enumerate all those facts and we'd be done.

Dreams of a final theory again.

So, Gödel's theorem means that no system with finite capabilities, no system that can just do finite discrete operations, can fully describe its environment.

It will always be in an environment where there are true things that aren't provable or false things that are provable.

But I think more relevant to a discussion of agents is that it means that no agent can describe itself.

Any agent's theory of itself will either contain true statements that it can't derive, or false statements, or it will either miss true statements that it can't derive, or it will end up deriving things that are false about itself.

Of course, we see this in psychology all the time.

So an immediate consequence of Gödel's theorem was an intense investigation of what computation actually is, what it meant to talk about finite discrete operations.

And two leaders of this were, of course, Church and Turing.

And here's a picture of a Turing machine, which is just a little device with a couple of tapes and a tape reader and a simple logic unit that either writes a one or a zero if it sees a one or a zero.

And they defined a computation as a process that can be implemented in finite time by such a machine, or by Church's lambda calculus, or by any of the now hundreds of other methods that are provably equivalent to a Turing machine.

So what does this mean?

It means that computation is a physical process that can be mechanized, and it turns out mechanized in any one of a huge array of ways.

It means that many different implementations of any computation are possible.

So I can do it on a turning machine, I can do it on my laptop, I can do it in my head, etc.

The most important things it means is that there are questions with no computable answer.

This is the revenge of Gödel's theorem.

And two of the most famous questions of this kind are, given some arbitrary program, will it halt?

Will it get to an answer in finite time?

And the answer to that question is, this is undecidable.

No procedure can figure this out.

And the other undecidable question is, given some arbitrary program, what function does it compute?

And you'd think that would be simple, that you can read a program and figure out what function it computes.

But it turns out that is undecidable.

That cannot be done by any finite process.

So this was another body blow to the goal of understanding everything with finite discrete processes.

But it also set the stage for something new.

It set the stage for thinking about an agent who interacts with a computational process by giving it an input and then looking at its output some time later.

And this, of course, will look familiar because I've included the blue ellipse, which is the boundary, which these days we call a user interface.

And the user interface just allows some finite action on the system and then the ability to observe some finite response by the system.

So we can now ask, what can Alice determine by acting in some finite way and then making some finite number of observations, i.e., receiving some finite number of outputs from the system that she's acting on?

And the first 20 years of this produced a large number of answers, all of them negative.

So to go back to Turing, he proved that Alice can't tell what's implementing the function that she sees being implemented.

She can't tell whether a given input will lead to an output.

That's the halting problem.

Shannon showed that Alice can't tell what the inputs mean to the system.

His whole theory of communication is completely independent of semantics.

And his theory of communication actually accurately describes what Alice can observe.

Rice is the one who proved that you can't determine what program is generating the outputs.

And then Moore proved a very similar result in a completely different formal setting of general cybernetics that you can't tell what process is generating the outputs by finite observation.

But what Alice can do is build a predictive model of what generates the output she sees in response to her inputs and test it by designing new inputs.

And this is, of course, as Karl Popper told us, the process that we call science.

So Alice can do science even though she can't answer any of these fundamental questions.

Now this, of course, has a huge technological consequence.

Since this theory of computation tells us that processes are effectively virtual, we don't know what they are and we can't determine what they are except in theory, by making a theory.

Technologically, it means we're free to use virtualization everywhere because we have to deal with it anyway.

And this allows us to build multi-level architectures.

It means that we can architect computers where no layer of the computation has any idea what's going on below or above it and doesn't need to.

And that's what makes practical programming possible.

So from these no-go theorems that tell you what you can't do, you actually get an enormous boost into it

and use to probe the world and develop theories and on and on and on.

So in a sense, Gödel birthed not only computer science but practical computing by showing us that virtualization is just the way the world works.

So now let's go back to physics, where these ideas were replicated, basically reintroduced, reinvented,

by Feynman in developing his path-integral formulation of quantum theory.

And basically what Feynman realized was that in any physical process, the observer, Alice, prepares some state that she's interested in.

She prepares some input to an experiment.

Then she lets something happen

And then she sees what the result of the experiment is.

And the canonical experiment in physics is scattering.

You fire two protons at each other and they intersect someplace and stuff comes out and you measure the stuff that comes out.

And what you can measure is momentum and spin, energy, things like that, position.

So these processes...

conserve the total values of the things you can measure.

So in particular, they preserve momentum and angular momentum, and they preserve other things that are harder to measure and are only approximately conserved anyway, like lepton number.

But Feynman's contribution to this way of thinking about experiments was to say, look, if you want to understand the output,

you have to sum over all of the possible processes that could have produced the output from the input, no matter how improbable they are.

So the famous idea from Feynman diagrams is if you have

an electron that's scattering off an atom.

You measure the initial state of the electron that you've generated with an accelerator or something.

And you measure the final state, which involves momentum and spin and so forth.

And for all you knew,

partway through the process, the electron disappeared and an entire universe appeared and then annihilated with a copy of an entire anti-universe and the electron came back out.

And you have to include processes like that if you really want to understand and correctly predict the outcomes of your measurements.

And Murray Gelman lifted the bumper sticker slogan from T.H.

White in The Once and Future King, Everything Not Explicitly Forbidden is Mandatory.

That sums up Feynman's idea.

And this is called the totalitarian principle, since it's what's written in T.H.

White's book on the kingdom of the ants, for which everything not explicitly forbidden is mandatory.

So let's think about a real example that's a bit, actually, it's the same as scattering.

The ultimate scattering experiment in physics is a black hole.

Stuff goes into the horizon, stars, whole galaxies, whatever.

Something happens and stuff comes out.

And what comes out is Hawking radiation.

And

Information is conserved if the information in the Hawking radiation is actually the same as the information in the stuff that went in.

And conservation is not qualitative, it's quantitative.

It's only the quantity of information that's supposed to be preserved.

And you can ask, how much is the information that's being emitted by a black hole that's emitting Hawking radiation?

And Bekenstein was the one who figured this out using an incredibly simple argument.

But I'll just give the answer here.

The answer is that the total entropy of the black hole is its area divided by four.

And the area in this equation has to be computed in Planck units, which are units where Planck's constant and the speed of light and Boltzmann's constant and other interesting things are all set equal to one.

So one Planck area is the Planck length squared, which turns out to be about 10 to the minus 70th meter squared.

So this says that black holes are the most entropic entities we know of.

So a black hole about this big, with a radius of about a meter, has an entropy of about 10 to the 70th, which is, of course, an astonishingly big number.

And a black hole with the area of the Sun, so a moderate-sized cosmological black hole,

a real thing that we can observe with a gravity wave telescope or something, has an entropy of about 10 to the 79th.

And really big black holes, which are bigger than the entire solar system, have entropies into the 10 to the 80th, 10 to the 85th or something.

So these are enormously entropic entities.

But Bekenstein didn't just tell us that.

He told us something about the structure of the interface, the horizon of a black hole.

And this is what he told us.

You can compute entropy in bits just by using...

log space two instead of log space E, natural logs.

And that's just multiplying the natural log by about 1.4.

So we can write the entropy of black hole in units of bits, and it's about A over six.

So what does this mean to say that we can think of the entropy in terms of bits?

What it says is that we can think of the interface in terms of a bit array.

And we can think of all of these bits as encoded on this interface.

at a density of one bit every roughly six Planck lengths squared, six Planck areas.

So this is an incredibly dense encoding in a black hole.

And it's an interesting idea about black holes, but what gets really interesting is what happens when you generalize it.

And of course, physicists are prone to generalization, and that's what happened next.

Gerard de Hooft, almost immediately thereafter, on the basis of Bekenstein's work, formulated the holographic principle.

And what the holographic principle says is we can think of any

system as approximately a black hole.

And the only approximation is the encoding density.

The boundary of any system encodes the information that we can get about the system at some density.

And the density is less than the density for a black hole because we're not black holes.

And this rules out a lot by limiting the amount of information that you can extract from a system to the amount of information that you can actually write on its boundary.

And one of the things that it rules out is knowing the geometry on the inside of the system.

And Tuff put it this way, which I think is a brilliant thought experiment.

He says, look, the metric inside this system can be so curved that

effectively the space-time inside the system can be so curved that you could stick an entire universe inside, and we'd never know, because it wouldn't change the amount of entropy, the number of bits that are encountered on the boundary.

So the inside geometry can be anything, and you can't find out by looking at the outside of the system.

Now, the holographic principle

almost follows from classical physics.

There's Euler's theorem, which tells you about 1 over r-squared forces, and you can think of the force as penetrating the boundary at some density.

And the difference between

Euler's theorem.

And the holographic principle is just that the density in classical physics can go to infinity.

And in the holographic principle, it can only go to this maximal density that's achieved by a black hole.

Why?

Because if you try to get any higher, more information, the information gets sucked into the black hole and you can't get it out.

So the holographic principle becomes a guiding principle for thinking about any physical system and what it means to extract information from a physical system.

And in fact, and we'll talk about this next time, you can say exactly what the information encoded on the boundary of any system is.

And what I'll go through next time is seeing that the information that's encoded on the boundary is a specification of the energy that's being exchanged by the interaction, which of course is linear in the number of bits.

It's just counting the number of bits.

Okay, so with the holographic principle, we now have a complete new science about systems that are exchanging finite discrete information across a boundary by encoding that information on the boundary and then reading the information off the boundary.

So here's a new way of thinking about physical interaction.

Alice writes a message on her boundary with Bob, and Bob reads the message off the boundary and then writes his own new message, which Alice then reads.

And, of course, that's what's happening right now.

I'm writing information by speaking on an interface, which is effectively the Internet,

And you're reading that information off the internet by listening to it.

And when we get time for questions, you'll be writing information on the internet, which I'll be reading.

Now, the key thing about this new science is that it's topological.

It's about connectivity across some communication channel, which we represent as a boundary.

It's not geometric.

So it doesn't assume anything about space-time.

So it allows us to build a model of space in particular as an emergent phenomenon.

And it allows us to see time as not some absolute external abstraction, but something that the communicating agents measure for themselves

And so they each act in their own time.

And we get a very natural measure of time in terms of how many bits I see coming across my boundary.

And again, we'll talk about that in the next couple of sessions.

And then talk about it more thoroughly in September when we talk about emergent space time.

So quantum information theory looks very different from the physics that came before

not because it's adopted a new formalism, the tools of quantum theory.

It's because it's entirely changed the thinking about what physics is and what it's about, and replaced this idea of forces and balls banging into each other and all of that with the idea of communication between agents.

And, of course, that's familiar from an active inference perspective.

So we can now back up a little bit to see what they were doing in classical physics during this period.

Well, let me go on a little bit.

Sorry.

This is just a slide quoting Wheeler, who, of course, is the most radical and pithiest in terms of formulating these ideas.

But here's his characterization of this new physics.

It's not reductive.

All of the reasoning is circular.

You don't have smaller things and then yet smaller things and then yet smaller things forever.

There are no laws.

So what you see on the interface is a message.

It's not something that's governed by laws since the beginning of the universe.

There's no continuum.

So there's nothing described by real numbers.

It's all described by integers.

Everything's done in finite dimensional spaces.

And finally, and most importantly, there's no space-time box in which things happen.

So think of how radical this is.

It means there's no big bang.

There's no big rip.

There's no bouncing universe.

All of those ideas are out the window because they're classical and they're about space-time.

And what the new physics wants to do is derive space-time out of basically users' experiences.

So the agents here are all observer participants in Wheeler's language.

But what that just means is agents that want to communicate.

And it's their communication that gives rise to physics.

So now we'll go back to classical physics.

And what was happening, or one thing that was happening in classical physics at that time, was a lot of thinking about stochastic causal networks.

And Pearl realized that if you have any stochastic causal network that's unidirectional, then around any node, you can draw what he called a Markov blanket.

And a Markov blanket is just the set of nodes in the network that absorb all outside causation and then transmit that causation into whatever node you're interested in.

and that absorb all causation coming from the node you're interested in and transmit it to the rest of the world.

And so we can redraw that in part B here, and it should look very familiar.

Markov blanket is just a classical physics way of talking about a holographic screen.

And the number of nodes

in the Markov blanket, or in particular the number of degrees of freedom times the number of nodes, is just the number of bits that flow across that Markov blanket.

So it's the number of, it's the entropy of the effective holographic screen.

So all these ideas were reinvented more or less independently within classical physics.

And it was from this classical physics background that Carl Fristen came up with the idea that a Markov blanket defines a persistent.

At least from an active inference institute point of view everyone is familiar with because it's the foundation of the idea of active inference.

Any system

is that persists through time does so by making sure that it doesn't dissolve into its environment.

Well, what does that mean?

It means that it persists through time by maintaining the integrity of its Markov blanket or the integrity of its boundary.

So this, of course, is just a tautology, but it's a very interesting and very productive tautology.

Because it says that any system is using the information it gets on its boundary from its environment to build a model of how its environment behaves.

And then it uses that model to act back on its environment to test and refine its model.

And again, as Popper told us, this is just what science is.

So what the free energy principle really tells us is that all systems are agents that are doing science all the time.

So physics is effectively not just the study of communication, but it's the study of agents doing science with each other, pairs of agents who are trying to figure each other out by their communication, communicative exchanges.

So that's the history of how we got from 1850s thermodynamics to the free energy principle.

And how the free energy principle connects to these very deep and extremely radical, especially within context,

ideas in quantum theory and quantum cosmology and computer science, all of which tell us that the world we see is a projection that's being written on our boundaries by a process that we have no access to except

the procedure of active inference or the procedure of science, which is to formulate predictive models and test them by doing things in the world and seeing how the world responds.

So that's it for this session.

The first discussion session, which Andrew's going to lead, will be the 3rd of June at this same time, i.e.

5 o'clock European time.

And then my session number two will be in mid-June.

And if you look at the course website, there's this subsidiary website for interactive Q&A.

And I invite everyone to post questions and discuss them and hope that we'll have an interesting exchange and that

Everyone will come to sort of an understanding of what was talked about today through discussion.

And we'll be interested in being back in June to see how to formulate this in quantum theory.

So thank you very much.

And thank you again, Daniel, for organizing this and hosting it and putting together all the technical things necessary to pull this off.

I could never do that on my own.


SPEAKER_00:
thank you we're really um excited here any closing thoughts or or Andrew I'd love to hear your reflection just briefly what how would you have told that history or how does that history reflect on the areas that you're familiar with well I I don't think I have much to add I um I've been you know mainly interested in the weak rotation part I I'm excited to


SPEAKER_02:
hear more about that chris uh but no i mean i i found this to be a very very nice summary i don't think i i'm less familiar with the with the staff on on computation formal computation despite being a mathematician by training um and and it was a little more familiar with with all the physics stuff but yeah i thought it was great


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Thank you.

I will close it.

So in about two weeks, we'll have the first discussion.

Everyone's welcome to join.

I will share with Ander and Chris the questions and we can develop that and we'll have that on the course front end before the coming discussion.

So thanks again, fellows.

See you next time.

## k55mAFCIQ60

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome, everyone.

This is Physics as Information Processing, Session 4 on Communicating Observers.

It's the 10th of August, 2023.

Chris, looking forward to this lecture.

Off to you.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Daniel, and welcome to this session.

As Daniel said, this is about communicating observers and fasten your seatbelts because we have a lot to cover in the next hour.

So just to do a quick review, we've been talking about quantum information theory, and we've been talking about it in the simplest possible setting of two systems, Alice and Bob, that exchange information through their mutual boundary.

And we've assumed that everything is finite dimensional, so we don't need to worry about infinite energy transfer across this boundary.

And of course, we assume conservation of energy, so there are no sources or sinks in either of the systems, Alice and Bob.

And we emphasize that this way of depicting things is topological.

We're not assuming any background geometry, no sort of spatial embedding, which is going to become very important in this session.

In the last session, we talked about how the boundary, which I'll always call B,

It can be thought of as a channel that comprises n qubits that are independent.

And Alice and Bob each can prepare and measure those qubits.

And they can always choose independently their reference frames for doing so.

So how they define up and down when they're measuring a spin with effectively a z-spin operator to interact with these qubits.

We talked a little bit about the free energy principle and its quantum formulation.

And the principle basically says that interacting systems will behave in a way that aligns their reference frames

and that they therefore asymptotically approach entanglement.

So the FEP is a classical limit of the principle of unitarity, and that's one reason for studying quantum information to learn more about the FEP, and so to learn more about active inference and what the theory of active inference says about agents.

And last time, we talked a lot about the constraints that are imposed by a limited free energy supply on any agent.

Recall that we talked about the fact that in the absence of sources of free energy within an agent,

So as long as you conserve energy globally, that the free energy that each agent uses has to come from its environment.

That's clearly true for us.

We have to consume oxygen and eat food and things like that to keep running as systems.

And we discussed a little bit this theorem that if two reference frames or quantum processes, Q1 and Q2, don't commute, they have to be implemented by compartments that communicate classically.

And we'll use this extensively today.

But the bottom line last time was that physics alone gives us compartmentalization in systems whenever the systems are complex enough to have multiple kinds of measurements that they can't deploy simultaneously.

So where we're going, today we're going to

I'll start from this place we left off last time of the possibility of agents that are compartmentalized and into compartments that have to communicate classically.

So we're going to talk about agents that can be compartmentalized into multiple sub-agents that share an environment, the environment consisting of Bob, and how those agents talk about that shared environment.

So the motivation for this is simple.

It's that what we do all the time is a group activity.

And what we're doing right now is a group activity that involves sharing an environment, what's shown on this screen, and talking about it.

And the whole post-session discussion process will be another example of just that sort of thing.

So to talk about science at all, or to talk about any kind of social relations, or to talk about anything other than solipsism, we have to be able to talk about how multiple agents communicate about some shared environment.

And so that's what we're going to develop a formal way of talking about.

And there are two things to notice right off the top about this.

One is that the way we've defined interactions at boundaries, they're effectively instantaneous.

So each agent, remember,

interacts with its boundary with some set of operators.

And what those operators do is effectively measure, each operator effectively measures the spin of a qubit.

So this is a very fast process.

The other thing that we then need to notice is that if we have two agents and they're communicating with each other classically,

then they're going to be using degrees of freedom of their shared environment in order to communicate.

And that's exactly what we're doing right now.

For example, we're using degrees of freedom of the internet to communicate.

I'm using degrees of freedom of the local atmosphere to talk to my microphone.

And I'm using degrees of freedom of the local photon field to see my screen.

So all communication between agents, and certainly all classical communication between agents, uses degrees of freedom of the environment.

And the environment, remember, is the other system, Bob, that's on the other side of that shared boundary.

So we're going to be interested in how components of ALICE use Bob as a communication channel, and in fact, as multiple communication channels.

And I just wanted to quote my colleague and friend Mike Levin in his statement that all intelligence is composite.

All of us, all organisms, even single cells, are composite systems that comprise many, many different agents that are able to make different kinds of measurements and execute different kinds of actions.

and so have to communicate classically.

So we're talking about all of life here as well as all of social systems and ecosystems and such things as that.

So the first thing I want to do today is simplify the notation so that we don't have to draw quite such complicated diagrams.

So the picture on the left here is a picture from the last session.

It shows the structure of a very simple agent that makes some measurements using a reference frame called E and then writes some results of those measurements to memory using a reference frame called Y. And those two processes are connected by an internal clock.

that ticks between the input process and the output process.

And the clock tick corresponds to the expenditure of free energy to write information irreversibly on the boundary.

So the memories are actually written on the boundary because that's where classical information lives in this theory.

So you can think of this whole process from E through the clock and back to Y as a single quantum process or as a quantum computation that maps some sector E of the boundary to some sector Y of the boundary.

And so we can represent it in this much simpler way that's over on the right side as some process Q that maps some sector on the boundary to some other sector on the boundary.

And formally, that process can be thought of as a topological quantum field theory.

Topological here is important.

It's not geometric.

It doesn't assume an embedding in space, and this will become critically important later on.

And the operation of that TQFT requires a clock tick, or it incorporates a tick of this internal clock.

And we can do this because we were able to prove, Jim Glazeburg and Tonino Marciano and I were able to prove last year, that we can always represent a quantum reference frame as a topological quantum field theory.

And this just illustrates the two kinds of transformations between quantum reference frames that are important.

We can take one and divide it into two pieces that commute.

Or we can take a two-part reference frame and we can swap in another part

that doesn't commute with the part that we've swapped it in for, but that does commute with the remainder of the reference frame.

So here R is the reference component of some object identification system, and we can swap in some different way of looking at the object once we've identified it.

So for example, if the object that we're identifying

is a box that can measure both Z-spin and X-spin, then P and Q can be the Z-spin and X-spin settings on that box that allow us to effectively rotate the filter from this way to that way so that we measure vertical spin versus horizontal spin.

And that's really it.

I mean, those are the ways that one can transform quantum reference frames.

Of course, we could do arbitrarily many compositions of this kind of transformation and do something very complicated, but they map very simply to TQFTs with the structure.

And you can construct categories out of this and find a functor that's well-defined that maps one category to another.

So it's an example of a nice use of categorical techniques for solving a problem that looks difficult, but in fact, it's very straightforward.

So using this simplified notation, it becomes very easy to see

that if we have two systems, Alice and Bob, on opposite sides of this boundary, and we perfectly align their quantum reference frames, which is what the FEP says they will tend to do, then they become entangled.

And you can see that they're entangled by seeing that once the reference frames are perfectly aligned,

they jointly implement one quantum process.

And jointly implementing one quantum process just means you're entangled.

The two sides no longer have conditionally independent states.

If one quantum process, which is time reversible, information preserving, is implemented jointly by the two systems,

So a lot of things like this become very simple when we think of these processes as just quantum computations going on inside some system, implemented by some system, and how those processes relate across some boundary.

So that's what we're going to do for studying communication today.

Another thing to recall from a couple of sessions ago, or last session, is that if two reference frames, Q1 and Q2, commute, we can always join them together to form a single reference frame.

And this is just a graphical depiction in this simpler language of how that works.

topologically there's no distinction between the left side and the right side what i've done is just squeeze the top two green circles together and the bottom two green circles together into one circle and that just makes a simple process connecting the top one to the bottom one so what we're going to be interested in is situations where this doesn't happen

where Alice consists of two components that execute reference frames that don't commute.

And so the two components are conditionally independent.

They do each have free choice of reference frame.

And so they have to communicate classically.

They don't share a single quantum process, so they're not entangled.

And before we go ahead to do that,

I just wanted to remind you of some of the no-go theorems that follow from this situation depicted on the right, where we have a single agent executing a single reference frame, a single process, a single kind of measurement, any set of commuting measurements that can be combined into one measurement.

And here are some things Alice can't do.

And we've talked about some of these previously, so this is basically a reminder.

But Alice can't, using just one measurement, measure the entanglement entropy across her own boundary.

So Alice can't know that she has an independent state.

She can't know that she's not entangled with Bob.

And that's a useful thing to think about philosophically, as it applies to you and me.

We can't actually know that we have independent states.

Alice can't measure her own entanglement entropy, so she can't know whether she has components that have to communicate classically.

She can't measure Bob's entanglement entropy,

So she can't know whether Bob has compartments that have to communicate classically.

And if you think in terms of perception theory, this says Alice can't know whether Bob consists of separate objects that behave classically.

Their behavior can look classical to her, but she's not able to determine that their behavior is classical because she can't measure Bob's entanglement entropy.

She can't measure the dimension of her own boundary.

And recall from a couple of times ago that the boundary includes some sector that supplies free energy that Alice can't extract information from for further processing.

She can only extract free energy from.

So she can't measure the dimension of that sector.

And so she can't measure the dimension of the whole boundary itself.

And this, of course, means that she can't measure her own dimension either.

And of course, she can't measure Bob's dimension because the only information she can get about Bob is the classical information that's encoded on this boundary.

She can't reach past the boundary to see how large a system Bob is.

And that's clearly connected to this first point that she can't measure the entanglement entropy across Bob, because the entanglement entropy can only be small if her dimension and Bob's dimension are both much larger than the dimension of the boundary.

So that's a condition she can't check.

So all of these kind of no-go theorems lead off in interesting directions.

And the only one that we're really going to be interested in here

is the third one, the one about measuring Bob's entanglement entropy, because we want to talk specifically about how multiple agents, so multiple components of Alice, can access information about Bob's entanglement entropy.

Okay, so recall from the end of the last session that the last thing we talked about was classical communication.

We talked about the fact that classical communication involves assumptions and pitfalls and that we have to be very careful whenever we talk about it.

What we're going to do today is standard practice in physics.

We're simply going to stipulate that

these components A1 and A2, the separable components of Alice, communicate classically.

And so we're going to draw it like this.

We're going to draw a classical channel between them.

And that classical channel passes through Bob.

It uses degrees of freedom of the ambient photon field or the ambient atmosphere or pieces of paper or email or something like that that's out there in the environment to exchange classical messages.

And there are a couple of things to note here.

I haven't even written down here.

We're assuming that A1 and A2 share some language for this classical communication.

That's a big assumption, as we talked about last time.

But I will note explicitly that classical communication takes time.

That's what defines classicality here.

It's causal, so it can't work faster than the speed of light.

This is a topological theory.

We don't have an embedding geometry, so we can't at this point talk about light, which is a relationship between space and time.

Because we've got time, we've got clocks, but we don't have any space.

But we can say that whatever passes through this classical channel requires at least one clock tick on Bob's side.

So it's a process that Bob has to execute.

and executing that process takes time.

So getting the signal from me to you on the internet takes some time, so the environment's clock has to tick during that.

And all of these assumptions bundled together turn out to be a fairly serious set of assumptions, and they involve assumptions about fine-tuning, about the universe being just right,

And they should make us nervous.

And I just want to leave it at that.

We always assume with complete aplomb that agents can communicate classically, but it's not a straightforward assumption.

And it's worth, any of you who are looking for interesting research projects can look into the nature of classical communication.

It's full of hidden assumptions and surprises and things that aren't at all straightforward, even though they look like they ought to be.

So there's a challenge.

So why do we assume this?

Why do we assume classical communication?

We do it because we have to if we're going to talk about detecting entanglement.

And most of you probably know the history of the notion of entanglement.

It was first noticed by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, ever after called EPR.

in 1935, and they wrote a paper which is infamous and called the EPR paper, in which they argued that the phenomenon of entanglement made no sense and couldn't possibly be physical.

Since quantum theory included this notion of entanglement, it couldn't possibly be a complete theory of what's going on in the world.

And Schrodinger replied the same year with a very detailed paper where he introduces, among other things, Schrodinger's cat as a paradox.

And he explains very clearly what entanglement is and why entanglement follows from quantum theory.

And he uses that discussion to argue that the classical notion of a physical state is not actually applicable to the world as it is.

So he answers the EPR paper very directly.

And this discussion is currently mostly known as the Bohr-Einstein debate because, of course, Bohr already in 1928 had said in print that the classical notion of causality in space and time simply doesn't apply anymore.

And Einstein objected to that vigorously.

That was 1935, and it was almost 50 years later that entanglement was first observed in the laboratory.

Here, the 1982 picture is a picture of the interior of Alan Aspat's laboratory when he performed the first entanglement experiment for which he finally won the Nobel Prize last year.

And these days, this kind of experiment is done all over the world and is even done with satellite-borne sources.

...resource is the key to quantum security, quantum security communication, as we'll discuss in quantum cryptography and quantum banking, the quantum internet, all this other stuff that you may have heard of.

So before talking more about these experiments, I just want to provide a definition of entanglement.

Entangled simply means not separable.

That's the definition.

So a state, a joint state AB is entangled if and only if it does not factor.

into two separable states.

And that's it.

That's the definition.

And the literature, and especially the popular literature, is absolutely rife with hype and various kinds of mystification of entanglement and authors trying to convince you that entanglement is this amazing kind of woo-woo thing.

And whenever you run across that, go back to the definition.

I mean, entanglement simply means this simple mathematical condition of not separability or a state that isn't factorizable.

And that means that the state does not display classical conditional independence.

So classically, that's the way to think about it.

It's a failure of conditional independence.

And it's ubiquitous in quantum theory, even though it wasn't actually observed for almost 50 years after it was predicted.

So here's what all these experiments look like.

They're called Bell EPR experiments after John Bell.

who derived the statistical criterion for detecting entanglement, and EPR, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, who did this as a thought experiment and said, if this occurs in the theory, it can't possibly be real.

And of course it is real.

It's now amply demonstrated by experimentation.

Here's how they work.

There's a source,

The source produces a state that is entangled.

And I've written the typical, what's called a Bell state.

It's up plus or minus down divided by the square root of two, just to normalize it.

But up plus or minus down is clearly not the same as up times down.

So this is not a separable state.

And this state propagates outward in space and time.

to two observers who have independent laboratories, for example, on different continents in that space-based experiment that I showed you the picture of from the cover of Science a few years ago, 2017, I think.

The two observers have freedom to choose their own reference frame, their own z-axis for measuring spin.

They do a spin measurement, and they do this over and over and over again.

They accumulate statistics.

And they exchange their results so that they can analyze the joint statistics of their experiment.

And they check to see whether that joint statistics is consistent with classical probability theory.

And if it isn't to a statistically significant level, then they've been able to detect entanglement.

Now, notice that this process requires classical communication.

They have to make their independent measurements in their own laboratories, and then they have to exchange results.

Or one of them has to send results to the other one, or they both have to send their results to some third party.

But in all of these cases, they're exchanging some classical data.

And so we have the assumption that whoever gets that classical data knows the language it was recorded in, and so can do a joint analysis.

So I'll just show you another picture of this experiment that's in a standard space-time diagram.

Here, time is vertical, space is horizontal.

The two observers are labeled Alice and Bob.

They share a quantum channel that goes from Alice to the source to Bob.

That's the entangled state.

They do some processing and then one of them here, Bob, sends the results to Alice.

And that's a classical communication.

It takes time and it traverses space.

So this step is classical.

So this is why we have to assume classical communication to talk about detecting or using entanglement.

So now I want to represent this in a different way.

using our little picture earlier.

We're going to think of Alice again as two components, A1 and A2.

They're separable, so they have to communicate classically.

They have a classical channel that goes through Bob, and they also now share some quantum channel.

They share an entangled state.

And the entangled state, of course, is produced by Bob.

The source is part of Bob.

And their detectors, if you want to think about it that way, are located on this boundary B, or their interface with the source is on this boundary B. And each of them executes a process that accumulates data from the quantum channel and communicates it to the other observer via the classical channel.

Now this picture illustrates what's called a LOC protocol.

LOC means local operations and classical communication.

So A1 and A2 are each operating locally on their boundary.

They're making measurements locally on their boundary.

And they're communicating via actions locally on their boundary and observations locally on their boundary.

So, for example, I'm communicating with my computer here.

We can consider it my boundary.

And stuff is happening in the environment that's implemented by the internet.

And you're receiving those communications locally on your boundary, on your laptop or whatever it is you're using.

So that's what local operations means.

And these protocols specifically involve classical communication, and so they're able to detect entanglement.

And a Bell EPR experiment is just an example of a lock protocol.

the observers exchange information about how they're going to do their experiments.

They're both going to measure z-spin.

They're going to use independently chosen reference frames, and they're going to look at the output from some agreed-upon source.

So that's all classically set up.

Then they actually make their observations, and then they classically communicate their results.

So classical communication front and back.

Lock protocols are not limited to this sort of Bell EPR sort of setting.

We can also represent a scattering experiment as a lock protocol.

So here's a representation of scattering as a lock protocol.

And you can see all I've done is cut that previous boundary

at the division between A1 and A2, and I've then extended it in some external time, the time that is counted by Bob's clock, not by Alice's clock.

That's what's meant by external time.

And I've relabeled Alice 2 as Alice 1 at a later time.

So now what Alice is doing is communicating with her past self, or A1 is communicating with her future self.

And they're each doing something different.

A1 is executing a procedure that in the laboratory we call state preparation.

She's preparing a state that we'll call N, which is just the initial state of some scattering experiment.

So, for example, at the LHC, N is some state of two protons that are portaling around the ring at the LHC at close to the speed of light.

And Alice then later on at T plus delta T is doing a different kind of quantum process.

She's analyzing the data coming out of something like the Atlas detector, which is a multi-particle counter that's located at the LHC.

So they share a quantum channel, which is the scattering channel that takes the incoming state and produces the outgoing state.

And I recall from the very first session, as Feynman told us, to understand this transition from in to out, we have to integrate over all possible paths that are consistent with conservation of space.

spin-holicity, basically momentum plus spin.

All the different spins that are relevant in a high-energy physics experiment, including things like lepton number, which is basically a spin.

Now, how do we know?

How do we know what we have to conserve?

We know what we have to conserve because Alice is doing the experiment, has a classical memory

that allows her to remember what she prepared.

She can remember that what she did back in the past was set two protons counter-rotating in the LHC.

And they had certain energies, and so they had certain momenta, and they were protons, so they had certain spin variables.

All of that has to be remembered to make any sense of the output of the detectors.

and so to actually come up with a measured state that makes sense.

And very often this memory channel is neglected by physicists.

And I'm going to pause here and let Ander ask a question.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Chris.

So does this imply that every time you have a log channel, the quantum part is like a scattering picture, like a unitary evolution, even in the earlier EPR picture?

Is that quantum channel portion always a unitary evolution scattering picture?

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, for essentially the reason that...

To find the classical channel, you're always assuming you have something that's protected from decoherence by the environment.

So, yeah, if you're doing an EPR experiment, you have to assume that you don't have an environmental decoherence between the source and the detectors.

And similarly, when you're doing a scattering experiment, you have to make the assumption that

the environment is not reaching in there and messing with the outgoing state that you're going to see or reaching in and messing with the incoming state and changing it in some way that re-prepares it in a way that you don't know, that you have no knowledge of.

So yes, you're making a fairly strong anti-decoherence assumption in any of these settings when you're talking about having a quantum channel.

Does that answer the question?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, great.

So we can think of Locke, we can think of scattering as Locke.

And I just wanted to now emphasize that effectively what Locke is implementing is two parallel memories, a classical memory

which, as we said in the case of scattering, is memory for preparation.

In the PR case, it's memory for preparation, for what the experimental setup is, for what the instructions for doing the experiment are.

And we also have a quantum channel, which is effectively another memory.

It's something that's extended through time,

And again, it's implemented by the environment, implemented by Bob, and it involves Bob's clock ticking.

So whenever we have two memories in parallel, we can construct an error-correcting code.

So think of a simple classical error-correcting code.

For example, the use of parity bits

in exchanging digital data.

So if I send you a bit string, classically, and I send it to you two or three times, so there's some redundancy in my signal, and I send you a parity bit, I say, okay, add up your bit string and the result should be one.

It's one on my side.

If you add it up and you get zero, there's an error someplace.

you can use that parity bit to detect errors.

So you can throw out the bit strings that you receive that have parity zero and say, oh, the environment interfered somehow with the signal or some eavesdropper interfered with the signal and made a mistake or something like that.

So this corresponds to environmental decoherence not being a good assumption, even though it's classical.

Environmental interference is not a good assumption in this case.

So a quantum error correct encode is basically the same idea.

I use some feature of the fact that I have two different memories and that I'm encoding something in time.

I'm encoding multiple replicates of something in time to provide a way of checking to make sure that I'm sending the correct message.

So I can, for example, consider the message to be my classical memory and consider the quantum process as a process that tests that memory.

So I remember that I need to do experiment X and I will get result Y. I actually do experiment X on this quantum channel and see if I get result Y.

and if I don't get a result Y, then something's wrong.

Either I can't trust the quantum channel, or I've remembered my preparation conditions incorrectly.

So I'm using one memory to check the accuracy of the other.

And this problem

using something about the environment, some channel in the environment, to check memory is absolutely ubiquitous.

And we use it all the time.

So, for example, look around your room, and your room hopefully looks more or less the same now that it did at the start of this session.

And that's very reassuring.

It reassures you that something's not happening in the environment that's dangerous and disturbing.

And if you couldn't do that, if your environment was constantly changing and there was no familiarity about the environment, you wouldn't be able to check your memory.

You wouldn't be able to check your sanity.

So even though we don't think about

our local environments as effectively an error correcting code.

That's exactly how we use it.

We use Stigmergic memory or memory out there in the environment as a way of checking our own memories and assuring that our memory is OK.

So I talked a little bit about quantum security.

Here's how quantum security system works.

Again, it's a lock protocol.

We have some classical signal that can be thought of as a code or a key or a one-time pad, for example, that encodes a way of doing experiments.

And once that's been exchanged, assuming it's secure, then we can use the quantum channel to communicate information.

And the classical channel has told us what we have to do with that quantum channel.

We have to make certain kinds of measurements at, say, particular clock times as measured, and we'll get information sent from the past, from the sender.

The classical channel protects the quantum channel from adversarial agents because anything that an adversarial agent does to the quantum channel, if some agent tries to eavesdrop, for example, on the quantum channel, they'll disrupt the quantum channel and the results of our measurement

will not be what's expected given the protocol that we have run.

So quantum communication is secured by the fact that interfering with some entangled state actually destroys the state, so it's detectable.

We can always know if someone is trying to disrupt our communications, which isn't true if we just have two classical channels.

Charlie can always intercept a message and then recreate it.

And that's not possible with a quantum channel.

So let's refold this diagram so that we've taken the external time back out of it.

And we have this picture where the two components of Alice are just interacting via their shared boundary with their environment, Bob.

And now we can see that the source of redundancy is not time, it's the boundary itself.

Just sharing the boundary allows Alice's components, A1 and A2, to put copies of the same information on different places on the boundary.

So the boundary now becomes a resource for redundant storage of information.

So Alice 1 and Alice 2 can use different parts of the boundary to check what other parts of the boundary say, to check the information that's encoded on other parts of the boundary.

So they can define an error-correcting code on the boundary itself using this lock protocol.

So I just want to leave you with this idea that using classical and quantum channels together allows us to define error-correcting codes on boundaries that we share as separate agents.

And leave you to think about

What shared measurements, what shared quantum reference frames, let us as agents see the same things?

And this is what we'll talk about next time in September.

We'll talk specifically about how space provides us with an error-correcting code.

and try to understand why space is treated as emergent from something else, basically from communication, in most of quantum gravity.

So thank you very much.

I encourage you to use the interactive QA and to attend the discussion sessions, and we'll see you in September.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome, Chris.

Thank you for the lecture.

Andrew, do you have any remarks or questions?


SPEAKER_02:
Not right now.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll just ask a few quick questions, and if anyone has one, quickly end the live chat.

So you mentioned the tick of the clock.

And in active inference, we often hold up side by side both the discrete time models and the continuous time models.

So do clocks have to tick discreetly?

Or how do we think about continuous time modeling?


SPEAKER_00:
In this quantum setting, they do have to tick discreetly.

because one has to be able to distinguish Alice's preparation of the qubits on her boundary from Bob's measurements of the qubits on the boundary.

And this process can be extremely fast with respect to any kind of sense of macroscopic time.

Your eyes are responding to photons in, I think it's hundreds of femtoseconds.

So the discrete transitions that are effectively time measurements for you are at that very fast molecular timescale, much, much faster than our typical clocks are.

Now, when we try to do very fast timing, we're constructing a faster clock than that.

But it's a clock that we can only observe indirectly.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome okay now this one maybe connects a little bit to application but with all the developments happening in theory some of which you're reviewing here and also in practice with quantum computation and then keeping in mind this distinction sorry i've lost you back i've lost you daniel

Okay, we'll wait until you're back.

I can see you.


SPEAKER_00:
No.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Just repeat your question, please.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so given these rapid and ongoing developments in theory and practice related to quantum information science and quantum information security, how are people using this distinction of the classical stigmergic memory and then the quantum cognitive process

to anticipate how to develop information systems that are reliable going forward?


SPEAKER_00:
I don't know of any instances in which thinking about quantum cognition has entered directly into any design of communication systems.

the ability of humans to interact with these systems is just assumed.

So it's just assumed that the user can interact with, say, a computer interface, which is the sort of interface that will be provided or is provided to any quantum computer.

So if you think about a quantum computer, a practical quantum computer, it has classical interfaces front and back.

So in thinking about interacting with the computer, I'm giving it some classical problem statement, for example, and asking for some classical answer.

And what it's going to give me is a probability distribution of classical answers.

But I can, by running the calculation many times, make that probability distribution fairly tight.

So yeah, I don't know of anyone talking about quantum BCIs at this point.

It would be an interesting question.


SPEAKER_01:
And was it always understood, these sorts of blind spots and axioms associated with classical communication?

Was it developed as kind of like a proposal or like a special case and, you know,

more unpacking was left for later or are these blind spots things that we're now coming into awareness of given what we're learning in the quantum information sciences i think we're learning how serious they are but they were certainly recognized even by bohr in his 1928 paper


SPEAKER_00:
And that's a very good paper too.

It's called The Present State of Quantum Theory or something like that, and it's in Nature.

And it's available on the web somewhere.

I have a copy of it.

But it was written, in a sense, as Bohr's summary of the 1927 Solvay Conference, which was the conference at which everyone doing quantum theory at that time

got together to talk about their results.

And in it, Bohr essentially presents what came to be the Copenhagen interpretation, which I think is probably unfairly called an interpretation.

It's sort of the Copenhagen pragmatic stance toward quantum theory.

and essentially what bohr says is that if we're going to do science we have to assume that people can talk to each other and if we're going to do science we have to assume that there are instruments that we can manipulate

and have reasonable confidence that we know what manipulation we've done.

So if I turn a knob from one to two, I have to be reasonably confident that I'm making a particular change that I can understand.

And we have to have reasonable confidence that different laboratories can replicate the same experiment.

And if we think about any of those assumptions in purely quantum theoretic terms, then all sorts of questions are raised, right?

Every quantum system is unique.

We have the no-cloning theorem.

So every scientific instrument is unique.

So there's no such thing as exactly replicating an experiment, right?

That's a coarse-grained description of what I've done with a completely unique quantum system.

And my brain, of course, is unique.

And yours is too, and everyone else's is.

So talking about sharing a language is essentially a coarse-grained assumption.

And what the Copenhagen stance is all about is coarse-graining yielding effective classicality.

Or what that really means is coarse-graining yielding a description that we can use in the language that we understand.

So these are very, very old issues that have been recognized for a long time.

But I think in part because of the disaster of shut up and calculate, they haven't really been talked about in the classroom.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

I'll just read short questions from the chat.

We can pass them to the discussion section, but there's a lot of great diverse questions.


SPEAKER_00:
So Alexi wrote... I think I've lost you again.

Oh.

The revenge of Zoom.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, we looked at the chart earlier where Bob was talking to Alice.

The unidirectional communication.

Okay, good.

yeah okay okay okay the unidirectional the third party is recording it i'm sure um alexi wrote uh regarding the environment for uh being used for error correction a symptom of derealization in psychological trauma breakdown we don't recognize the environment around us and it's scary

makes sense makes sense all right from bala nice presentation i heard chris say entangled states are locc for a specific reference frame is this entanglement unitary or is it related to the numbers of degrees of freedom uh i i think the the quick answer would be both


SPEAKER_00:
If you have a complex system with many degrees of freedom, some can be entangled while others aren't.

It depends on what parts of the state are separable.

So again, entanglement is just a statement about components of a joint state that factor or don't.

So you can have a joint state that looks, that looks separable along some dimensions, but other dimensions.

And the other big complication here is that whether a state looks entangled depends on the reference frames that you use to measure it with.

And if you, if you pick entangled reference frames, then what we ordinarily think of as separable, as entangled states become separable.

So you can move entanglement around.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Okay.

From Roland Rodriguez is the discrete temporality only within the context of a given holographic screen interface with time being bracketed.

Otherwise beyond interface systems is continuity or discretion kept agnostic.


SPEAKER_00:
I think if I understand the question correctly, it's yes.

If I don't draw any boundaries, I just have the joint state, then the evolution is unitary.

And in a sense, time plays no role.

And if unitary evolution is perfectly time-symmetric, so time actually drops out altogether.

So to talk about time, we have to draw boundaries.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Time must have a stop.

Huxley.

And I'll ask one last question from the appropriately monikered question quandarer.

All communication is abductive is a sentiment that I've been using to develop some arguments.

Does that scan for you?

How do we connect what we're discussing here with quantum to abductive logic?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I...

i i could go along with that i'd want a lot more detail uh all communication is is essentially analogical i i would agree with that yes andrew


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, thank you.

So going back to the picture where the scattering picture.

So we have so far everything is topological and certainly induces breaking the boundary in different sectors.

I suppose it induces a topology on the boundary.

Now, I have a couple of questions.

As for the geometry, and this might be getting ahead.

Is it an emergent property of those channels between different boundary sectors?

And if that's the case, then what does it mean to have a QRF for space?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is really the topic for September.

But you do point out the fact that it's something of a chicken and egg situation.

The way I think of it is, I suppose, to choose the chicken side and think about what kind of reference frame does the agent have to implement to see space on their boundary?

And the reason I think about it that way is that's a question I want to be able to ask about biological systems.

And this actually gets into probably what won't be talked about until October.

But I want to be able to ask essentially a phylogenetic question of what sorts of organisms, where in the lineage from Luca—

do we find systems that are able to assign spatial coordinates to their boundaries?

And what coordinates come first?

And I suspect that sort of discrete location names with no metric come first, that a system can talk about, for example, this part of their membrane versus that part of their membrane,

without even having any ability to say how far apart they are.

That some sort of metric representation of this angular space comes later.

And that a radial space comes even later than that.

That's, at this point, speculation.

But I think these are questions that we can end up asking, given the right kind of formalism.

the right understanding of what it means to to to be able to make a spatial measurement so the conjecture is that uh the metric would emerge from a discrete network metric of counting ticks sort of thing yeah yeah i think that's i think that's correct and uh that the sort of the sort of symmetries of space that we see are very much tied up with object identity so if we think about

something like rotational symmetry.

Let's see.

I should stop screen sharing.

So, you know, I've got this object, right?

And I can do this, and I say, oh, you know, space has this rotational symmetry.

But for me to say that, I have to recognize that this is the same object, right?

I have to implement

object persistence, which we all learn to do when we're nine months old or something.

But we tend to regard those as separate things, as we learn object persistence because space is rotationally symmetric.

But we can view it the other way around, that space is rotationally symmetric for me because I implement these constraints that are called object persistence.

Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you think we can understand phylogenetics as a whole, as a kind of scattering experiment, like the high-energy LUCA event, and then dissipating and propagating in a very tangled bank?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I do want to be able to understand phylogeny in exactly the same terms as embryology.

And Mike Levin and I have published papers about that, that we should be able to view the lineage of LUCA in exactly the same way that we view the lineage of the zygote that produced us.


SPEAKER_02:
So that's why it's no coincidence that during pregnancy, the development of the embryo mirrors evolution in terms of the parts that are developed first?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is the old idea that phylogeny and ontogeny are related in some way, which from an embryonic development point of view, they're certainly analogous in ways.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, if I may ask one last question, I think it should be very quick.

Regarding the weak rotation, I'm still a bit unsure how it ties to this diagrammatic notation that we had with quantum channels and so on.

And there was a note in the second session, we briefly talked about the weak rotation being a reversal in the direction of time.

Is there any relation to today's session?


SPEAKER_00:
You know, I...

Whenever we think about the flow of time as driven by the input-output cycle, the input-output cycle for agents separated by a boundary is always, there's always a sign change, right?

My input is your output and vice versa.

So when we think about the

Bob's clock ticking when Alice does something, his direction of time in a sense points with respect to the boundary opposite to hers.

But that's only with respect to the boundary.

He sees information flowing in, and she sees information flowing in.

That's the only point being made here about wick rotation as an operation.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Chris.

Very well appreciated by the viewers and by us.

So we'll certainly look forward to reviewing the Q&A and everybody is welcome and encouraged to join for the participatory discussion in about two weeks on Saturday.

So till next time.

All right.

Thank you.

Cheers.

## Il9sBNAia7g

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It is September 14th, 2023, and we are in the course, Physics as Information Processing.

It's lecture five.

Looking forward to this lecture and then a little conversation.

Chris, off to you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Thank you, Daniel.

And welcome to session five of Physics of Information Processing.

And today we're going to talk about space-time.

And particularly about the idea that space-time is emergent from information processing.

And this has now become a very mainstream idea in the quantum information and quantum gravity communities.

And there's still, of course...

some people holding out for the idea that space-time is fundamental.

But I would say that at least in these communities, I expect it's become now the dominant idea that space-time is not fundamental, that space-time is not part of the basic ontology of reality or something like that.

and that instead, spacetime is a construct.

So that's what today's session is going to be about.

So for those of you who are just joining or who would like a little review, we started this course talking about quantum information theory.

And the idea that quantum information theory is actually a new science about systems that communicate across a boundary.

And the systems are always called Alice and Bob for kind of historical reasons.

And emphasize that this new science is topological.

It's about connectivity between systems.

It's not geometric.

So it doesn't assume a spacetime embedding.

So it leaves open the possibility that spacetime is actually a construct.

It doesn't assume spacetime up front.

And in the second session of the course, I think, we talked about how this boundary could always be represented as an array of qubits, and that what the systems on each side of the boundary do to communicate is prepare and then measure the states of these qubits.

So they communicate by exchanging

classical information via a quantum channel.

And this introduces a particular kind of quantum noise whenever they don't share the reference frames that they use to prepare the bits and measure the bits.

So it's not necessarily a perfect communication channel from a classical fidelity point of view,

but all of the noise is quantum noise, it's not classical, and it always derives from differences in the reference frames that are used by the two agents.

We reformulated the free energy principle in this setting, and the free energy principle turns out to be very simple.

It turns out to be a classical limit of the principle of unitarity, which is just the principle that information is conserved.

And we saw that the approach to perfect alignment between the two agents or perfect prediction on the part of the two agents becomes more challenging, not surprisingly, as system complexity increases.

So the more complex

the communication, the harder it is to predict, as one would expect.

In the last session, we talked about how constraints on thermodynamic free energy induce compartmentalization in agents.

So whenever agents interact with their environments in fairly complex ways,

then they end up being compartmentalized into compartments that have to communicate classically.

And this is solely a result of quantum information theory.

You don't have to assume any biology to get this compartmentalization.

But clearly this is something that we see in biological systems.

Not only do we see compartments, we also see hierarchical control, which is likewise a sort of automatic outcome of the theory for complex systems.

And finally, last time, we talked a little bit about how these compartments communicate and introduced the idea of communication protocols that involve local operations on a shared quantum resource of some kind.

and classical communication.

We talked a fair amount about how classical communication is a little bit problematic to define in quantum theory because, of course, you're introducing classicality, and so you have to make some very specific assumptions about what's classical.

And we'll see later on today what the key assumption that gives you classicality is as we talk about space time.

But before I go into the topic of space-time, I want to spend a little time... Okay, so this... Sorry, this is where we're going.

We're talking about space-time, and we'll talk about applications to biology next time.

But before we get going on this, I want to spend a little bit of time talking about explanation.

And this is motivated...

by a question that came up, a very long question that touched on many different topics that came up in the interactive Q&A last time.

And a fair amount of that question had to do with, directly or indirectly, the question of what scale-free explanation looks like.

and how it compares to scientific explanation in general, most of which is reductive.

So I want to make a short detour into the question of how reductionist theories, which all of you are probably very familiar with, relate to scale-free theories.

And particularly, the free energy principle is a scale-free theory.

So it's a theory that's unlike most of the theories that most of you probably learned about in college.

So we're all familiar with reductionist theories and the reductionist idea of scientific explanation, which is really an outcome of philosophy of science in the 20s and 30s.

People like Rudolf Carnap.

were among the first to actually make precise what this idea of reductive explanation is.

But the basic idea is that the laws or the dynamics or the formalism that describes behavior at some micro scale, the behavior of little things,

actually explains the behavior of big things.

So the basic reductionist idea is that what the little things are doing is what's important, and what big things are doing are either emergent phenomena or they're just epiphenomenal.

They're essentially just appearances.

And this defines a fundamental scale.

So the real assumption in any reductionist theory is that there's some fundamental scale at which the real dynamics takes place and everything else is just an appearance or it's some sort of emergent phenomenon.

And

I try to be very careful when I use the word emergence because it's one of the most ambiguous words in the philosophy of science and people use it to mean all sorts of different things.

But whenever you say emergent, it always sort of implies the idea that it's emergent from something.

And so the idea of emergence is essentially a reductionist idea.

because it at least implicitly assumes that there's some microscale from which the macroscale is emergent.

And so the discussions of emergent phenomena are often very consistent with reductionism, even if they claim not to be.

And

We're all taught that science is reductionist.

And there are certainly people who publicly claim that science is reductionist.

Richard Dawkins is certainly a shining example of this.

But I suspect that a lot of scientists just kind of play lip service to reductionism without really believing in it.

because they don't really believe that the macroscopic phenomena that they are studying, life, for example, is completely determined by what's going on at the microscale, or what's going on at the microscale plus some stochastic noise or something like that.

So I want to explicitly contrast this with a scale-free theory.

In a scale-free theory,

is not simply a holistic theory.

It's much more precise.

In a scale-free theory, little things and big things obey the same laws, or they have the same dynamics, or they're described by the same formalism.

So it's not that the macroscale is emergent from the microscale.

The macroscale and the microscale actually obey the same laws.

And the relationship between macro and micro is probably best stated as one of implementation.

Macroscale things have microscale components, and those microscale components are doing something or other, and whatever they're doing implements the macroscale system and its behaviors.

But this implementation is not an explanation, or at least it's not an explanation all by itself.

And the bumper sticker version of scale-free theories is just as above, so below.

Whatever laws you have at the macro scale are the same ones you have at the micro scale and vice versa.

So scale-free theories, in a sense, are simple.

It's the same theory at every level of description.

So what is this idea of scale, and how does it relate to what we've talked about in this course?

Well, what we've talked about in this course all has to do with what an agent can observe on its boundary.

So scale has to do with how information is encoded on the boundary.

And we can describe that scale in many different ways.

Here's a commonplace way to describe it in physics, by a relationship between energy and distance or size.

You've probably all heard of the Planck scale.

The Planck scale is the smallest scale at which current physics makes any sense.

And in energetic terms, it's defined by energies on the order of 10 to the 19th GeV, which is giga electron volts.

The LHC, the Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland, gets to about 10 to the 4th GeV.

So many, many orders of magnitude less than the Planck scale.

So the Planck scale is extremely energetic compared to what we can probe experimentally.

The Planck scale energy of 10 to the ninth GeV corresponds to a distance of about 10 to the minus 35 meters, which is incredibly tiny.

An intermediate scale on this diagram is about the scale of a nucleon.

So for example, a proton or a neutron.

They have a rest mass of about one GeV and a size of about one femtometer.

So this intermediate scale is roughly the scale of nuclear physics.

And then if you go to our scale, the scale of things that are about a meter in size, human beings, tables and chairs, lots of animals,

the things we're most familiar with, that corresponds to an incredibly tiny energy.

10 to the minus 5 electron volts is about the energy of a photon of radiation.

And a meter is about the wavelength of long wave radio.

So if you think about visible light,

has a wavelength of about 10 to the minus five meters and energy of about an electron volt.

So it's not surprising that visible light feels energetic to us because it's orders of magnitude above our natural scale of energy, of this sort of thermal environment in which we exist.

So it's the encoding scale and the boundary

that is going to relate theories of things that we see to each other.

And this ends up giving a kind of complicated picture.

If you think of Alice interacting with Bob and measuring things on the boundary,

Sorry, I'm a little bit ahead of myself.

I just wanted to show you a picture of a reductive theory.

This is the Big Bang.

You're all familiar with this.

Something happens at the Planck scale, and the entire universe results from it by just a scale change.

So this is a reductive theory.

A scale-free theory is much more complicated.

So here's what a scale-free theory looks like.

Alice interacts with Bob, and she's looking at her boundary, and her boundary states, the boundary states she sees could be encoded at different scales.

So there may be a small scale, scale one, and a bigger scale, scale two.

And what Alice is looking for is some sort of theory that

that relates the first scale, the microscale, to the macroscale.

And so it's not that the microscale came first like it did in the Big Bang and the macroscale came later.

These are encodings that can be happening simultaneously.

And the theoretical task is to find theories that relate between these scales.

And these are implementation theories, or you might call them embedding theories from one scale into another.

And what we want as a consistency criterion is for these theories to be constant in time.

So as Bob evolves in time,

And so what Alice sees are these encodings on her boundary.

She wants the relationship between encodings at different scales to stay constant, because if it doesn't, she'll never be able to figure anything out.

She'll just have this chaotic relationship between things happening at different scales, and nothing will make sense.

So you have this complicated picture in scale-free theories.

And if you look at this and it seems vaguely familiar or even very familiar, then it should, because this is exactly the kind of explanatory structure or semantic structure that you have in computer science.

If you're studying the behavior of a computer, which is just some piece of hardware, some physical system, then you can describe what that piece of hardware is doing at different scales.

And in fact, what we call the hardware level of description, when we talk about our laptops, for example—

is typically the level of description of circuits of transistors inside microprocessors.

We think of that as the hardware level.

But of course, that's just a description, too, that's layered on top of lots of much smaller-scale dynamics, all the way down to the scale of atoms and eventually nuclei and elementary particles and all that other stuff.

So there's some quantum stuff that's going on that we describe as having a classical hardware level of bit exchange.

And then we describe the behavior of programs on top of that.

So what we want, what makes a computer useful, is that we can assign semantics to programs

And we can talk about semantic relationships between programs.

For example, the relationship between the internet protocol stuff that Zoom is doing and what you actually see on your user interface and hear on your user interface.

That needs to stay fixed over time or Zoom becomes incomprehensible and not programmable, and in fact, not even well-defined as an algorithmic system.

And the same is true for the relationship between the operating system and the hardware description, or between the operating system and Zoom as a program.

Computer science works in exactly this scale-free way.

And so, in a sense, scale-free explanation is very familiar.

It's exactly the kind of explanation that we have in computer science.

And that's why I referred to the relationship between scales as one of implementation, because that's a term that we're familiar with from thinking about

computers implementing programs.

So what are these theories?

If we think in biological terms, we can think of pathways being embedded in a cell or cells being embedded in tissues all the way up to

niches of various kinds, which may be social niches being embedded in ecosystems and ecosystems being embedded in the biosphere.

And so we have all of these essentially semantic theories that talk about how one scale embeds in another scale.

And if we have these sorts of scale transitions, we can think of representing the relationship between transitions at different scales in terms of the activity of some kind of renormalization group, which is transforming entities and processes at one scale into entities and processes at another scale.

And I think in biology,

we can at least put forward the hypothesis that in all the way from pathways embedding in cells to ecosystems embedding in the biosphere, we could put forward the hypothesis at least that the renormalization group flow across all of these scales is trivial.

That is that the embedding theories all have the same formal structure, that the structure that describes how pathways embed into cells is the same structure that describes how ecosystems embed into the biosphere.

Now, I certainly can't prove that.

I believe that it's likely.

So I think it's an interesting hypothesis to investigate.

And this is an hypothesis that I want to leave you with as a result of this class is something to think about.

To what extent in thinking about biological systems or even social systems

are the embedding theories the same?

So, in thinking this way, that the physics of the situation has the same formal structure as computer science has in terms of explanation, we're of course faced with a problem

which is that we're not just reconstructing physics.

We're talking about the physics of interacting observers.

We're talking about the physics of communication.

So we're modeling how we do physics.

And that makes our theory self-referential.

And so we have to base the music from Gödel's theorem

which tells us essentially that powerful self-referential theories can't be both consistent and complete.

And by powerful, I just mean powerful enough to express arithmetic, so not terribly powerful.

So this becomes an issue that we have to live with.

We will always be faced with this issue

of having to construct meta-theories, which tell us how our lower-level theories work.

But we never get to the end of that process.

We never can get to theories that are both consistent and complete, because our tower of theories becomes progressively actually more powerful as it goes up.

in a sense, poses a problem, but in another sense, just tells us what life is like as a scientist, that you can't have everything all the time doing science.

But we probably all already knew that.

So let's now talk about space, end of digression.

and see how these ideas apply to a system or a tower of systems that can construct a spatial embedding in its world, in its observed world.

So let's start out thinking about a system that can see its environment, but what it sees is a completely uniform environment where nothing is happening.

So if you have a uniform environment where nothing is happening, you can't distinguish one part of the environment from another.

So you have no sense of space.

So what I want to do is build up from scratch what's needed to have a sense of space.

And then we'll talk a little bit about what organisms are doing.

And I think a very interesting question is, if you look at phylogeny, at what points in phylogeny, what lineages in phylogeny actually need to have a sense of space?

And what do they have to have in terms of computational power to have that sense of space?

So if you just have a uniform environment, you don't have a sense of space.

But the first thing we can do with an environment is to divide it up into some number of parts that are somehow distinguishable.

So suppose we can segment the environment into two different parts.

And if you think about E. coli, for example, E. coli has a bunch of sensors on the front and a bunch of effectors on the back.

So it can sense much more about the front part of the environment than the back part of the environment.

So already with E. coli, you have this kind of segmentation of the environment into parts.

But so far, nothing has happened in this environment.

We just have segments that can be distinguished.

So let's consider an environment like this that has distinguishable segments.

What one next wants to know about these segments is whether they're next to each other.

And if we just have a bunch of segments,

We just have a set, and a set doesn't have any order or any relationship information.

So I've drawn this environment as a rectangle of rectangles, but that's just a representation

And it looks like there are relationships between these rectangles, but if they're just a set, then there are no relationships.

If we want to add relationships, then we have to add them explicitly.

So let's add some connections between these different segments of the environment to turn that set into a graph.

that says explicitly, for example, that the light green segment is attached to the light blue segment, and it's also attached to the dark green segment.

And the dark blue segment is attached to the light blue segment and attached to the dark green segment.

So now we have something that's much more mathematically complicated than a set.

We have a graph that has some connection information.

So we have a connection topology.

Now, adding this topology does something very important.

It breaks the exchange symmetry that is there if you just have a set.

So if we just have a set, it doesn't make any difference if I exchange, for example, the positions of the upper right light blue segment with the upper left light green segment.

But if we have this connection topology, then it does make a difference.

I've twisted the graph around.

And if I have to break connections to exchange things, then I've actually changed the topology.

So adding a topology, adding connections, can disrupt a symmetry that's there if there is no topology.

So now let's think about, now we have the structure that's required to think about something happening.

So suppose that at some time, as measured in the bit counter time reference frame of the observing system, something happens.

So a dot appears in the light green segment.

And we can express this actually in the notation of quantum field theory.

We can think of the light green segment as a field, and the dot appearing is the occurrence of an excitation in that field.

And so we can write this notation that says that the green field was excited to produce a dot.

which is up arrow green dot.

And sometime after that, it may turn out that the dot disappears in the green field, and some sort of dot appears down in the dark blue field.

And again, we can write this in this kind of creation and destruction operator notation that one has in quantum field theory.

And so this says that the green field is no longer excited, but now the dark blue field is excited.

So this doesn't imply anything about these excitations being the same.

In fact, they're completely different.

One is an excitation of the green field and one is an excitation of the blue field.

But at least now something is happening in the environment.

So we can think about what does it take for an observer to notice that something is happening in its environment.

It has to be able to detect

a change occurring in some segment of its environment.

And that change can involve something happening or something stopping happening in that segment of its environment.

But it doesn't yet have to have any idea of what an object is.

But we can add that.

If the system has a memory

we can have the system connect these events happening in different parts of its environment.

So if the system has a memory that has some number of steps, say, n steps, but here it could even just be two steps, it can see transitions between these two different states.

where there's a dot in the green field, and then a dot in the dark blue field, and then a dot in the green field, and then a dot in the dark blue field, and then a dot in the green field, et cetera.

So I've expressed this in this sort of field theory notation over on the right side.

And what this is is a flip-flop.

It's an observed periodic behavior.

So this is the basic idea behind a clock.

So any observer that can see this, a number of time steps internally, can interpret what's going on in its external environment as a clock ticking.

It can see some periodicity.

So as long as you can have memory and the ability to detect change, you can see periodic behavior in the environment.

So you can see the environment acting like a clock.

So let's think a bit about what this does and does not require.

So seeing a clock in the environment

requires having distinguishable, non-exchangeable sectors of the environment.

So you have to have this connection topology that breaks the exchange symmetry.

It requires having these sectors implement some sort of flip-flop, so something periodic happening.

And you have to have enough memory to see that periodicity.

But it doesn't require any sense of object identity.

So the excitation in the green part and the excitation in the blue part can still just be field excitations of the green part and the blue part.

There's nothing that says that those have to be the same thing.

They just have to appear and disappear in some periodic way.

And having a clock doesn't require a metric space.

You don't need to have any sense of distance defined on the environment.

You just have to have this segmentation that is not rearrangeable.

So this tells us something extremely important, which is that time is more fundamental than space.

Time in the exterior environment is much simpler and easier to observe than space in the exterior environment.

So if we're thinking biologically about phylogeny, we might expect to see organisms

that can detect periodic behavior in the external environment long before they can detect spatial organization in the exterior environment.

And we know that organisms, even down to microbial mats, can respond to the diurnal cycle.

So we know that organisms, in a sense, can detect environmental clocks.

Even organisms that we have no reason to believe divide the environment up into spaces or the sort of space that we're used to, like a Euclidean space.

So now we're talking about adding space to this idea of time and the environment.

So the next step is to be able to see motion.

And being able to see one thing move from one segment of the environment to another segment, as opposed to something happening in one segment and then something happens in another segment.

One has to have this idea of object persistence, that there's a thing that has an identity.

and its identity doesn't change over time.

And it doesn't change when you move it someplace else, when it appears someplace else in the environment.

It's the same object.

So this is an idea that psychologists call object persistence, and it's an idea that physicists call translational invariance.

Translational invariance

means two things.

It means that if I have an object and I move it to a different location, I don't change the object.

It's the same object that I move from here to there.

So the location doesn't change the object.

But it also means the reverse of that.

It means that the object doesn't change the location.

my container remains invariant even though I move the object around in it.

So these are kind of the two faces of translational invariance, and they're the two faces of object persistence.

As the object moves through time, its identity remains fixed, and it doesn't change the time that it's moving through.

So if I'm measuring its motion with a clock, moving the object doesn't change the clock.

These are clearly very classical ideas.

And we talked about earlier classical communication.

And when we talked about classical communication in, for example, the context of a Bell EPR experiment,

We talked about the observers being able to write down some data on a piece of paper or on a disk drive or something and hand those data to someone else.

So this is translational invariance.

The data can't change when Alice gives it to Bob.

Otherwise, there isn't classical communication taking place.

And of course, there's an up to noise built into here, right?

The piece of paper might get wet and the ink might run a little bit, but it's still the same message.

There's still some identity being assumed.

So object persistence is not an idea we get from quantum theory.

It's an idea that we impose on top of quantum theory.

And it's this idea that's intrinsically classical.

So we're looking right here at the quantum to classical transition.

This is it.

This is what gets added to quantum theory to get classical physics.

It's this idea of object persistence.

Now, once we have object persistence, we can kind of go to town constructing space.

And here's how we do it.

We all learned about object persistence this way when we were six months old, doing motor babbling and observing our hands and feeling how our bodies worked and seeing objects that we could manipulate and that didn't change when we manipulated them.

So this is the birth of object persistence.

This is the birth of classicality in human psychology.

So now let's start thinking about building a coordinate system.

What's a coordinate system?

A coordinate system is just a set of labels that are attached to these segments of the environment.

And to build a coordinate system, you have to have an origin.

And an origin means an object, something that's fixed, something that doesn't move around.

And so a coordinate system requires the ability to identify a stigmatic memory, requires the ability to find something in the environment that has a meaning that stays constant over time.

And that's what a stigmergic memory is.

It's something in the environment that provides us with a memory resource that we can count on being the same.

And it's having this fixed point that allows us to label these connected segments of the environment that contain objects that move.

and be able to say, okay, the object moved from this part of the environment to another part.

And I can give those parts labels with respect to this other part that doesn't move, this origin point.

And once I have this, I can construct other invariances.

So for example, I can consider an object that rotates around this origin without changing its identity.

And that defines what's called rotational invariance.

And I can also talk about an object that gets bigger and smaller compared to this fixed point.

And that defines radial distance.

And if you think about the baby in the previous slide that's doing motor babbling, it sees things getting smaller as it moves them farther away.

So the visual system does this computation for us and constructs this radial coordinate for us with respect to our bodies, or specifically our heads, our eyes.

So in doing this very early motor activity, we're actually building the spatial coordinate system

for our brains that's implemented by the hippocampus, the play cells in the hippocampus.

And if I have an origin point in the environment, I can also infer that I am moving, that I have changed my location with respect to that object.

And that's a considerably more complicated inference because you have to have a representation of the self, of you, to say, I moved.

So this is something that comes after you've developed this spatial coordinate system.

You have to be able to locate, in a sense, metacognitively, a particular object that's you in that coordinate system.

So we're going to set that aside and now talk about adding some numbers, so adding a metric.

And adding a metric requires another particular kind of object, which is a ruler, a particular fixed object that can be moved around.

and that has translational invariance and rotational invariance up to some transformation, up to some tensor.

And in Euclidean space, that tensor is the identity.

So in Euclidean space, you have perfect translational and rotational invariance.

As you get into general relativity,

then the ruler can actually change its length as you rotate, or the ruler can change its length as it moves through space.

So effectively, your spacetime can deform.

The coordinates of your spacetime can deform, and that gives you the representation of mass, of course, in general relativity.

So we talked several sessions ago about quantum reference frames.

And I use the example of rulers and clocks as quantum reference frames.

So now we see how to construct those from observations and symmetry breaking and object identity, all of which we need to define a quantum reference frame out in the environment, like a ruler.

And notice that we don't need any of that environmental stuff

to define those QRFs within our own processing.

And in fact, the ones that exist within us, we have no direct access to.

We can look at someone else's brain and talk about their spatial representation system, but we can't look inside our own brains and talk about our spatial representation system.

So this is how we get a metric space from the ground up.

And we've talked about this from a very psychological or biological point of view.

Starting from sort of motor capabilities, motor babbling, for example,

a measure of effort which gives you some sense of mass so if it's easy to move something it's light and if it's hard to move something it's heavy and we understand that when we're six months old because we can measure how much force we're having to apply with our muscles we have a reference internally for this force that we're applying and we

use that internal measurement to attribute this idea of mass to things in the environment.

We have to have memory for manipulations.

We have to be able to identify variances that define objects, object persistence, and we have to be able to build a ruler that we can move around and use to define a metric space.

Now, this is very different from the way physicists approach this.

If you look at the physics literature, then people start with information transfer.

They talk about entanglement as a basic resource.

There's a lot of discussion of bulk boundary duality, and the most well-known one is...

the duality between anti-de Sitter space, which is the sort of space you see inside a black hole, and conformal field theory, quantum field theory on the boundary of the black hole.

So things you can see, for example, going on on the horizon of a black hole are dual to the geometry and the interior by this mathematical relationship.

You can use that mathematical relationship to construct a quantum error correcting code by using the symmetries of the field theory as a resource for redundancy that allows you to represent the same thing in different places.

And as soon as you can do that, you can build up a network of elements that look basically like elements of a lattice.

And a lattice is a graph to which you can assign symmetric relationships and you get a metric space.

And in physics, typically the goal is to get Einstein's equations out of this, to start with some information theoretic sorts of constructs and get the equations of general relativity.

But what are the equations of general relativity?

These are things that Einstein derived by doing fairly simple thought experiments using the invariances of ordinary Euclidean space combined with ideas from special relativity about the speed of light being constant.

And he added the principle of equivalence, which is the idea that

essentially mass and acceleration are the same thing, or that gravity and acceleration are the same, that weight and acceleration are the same thing.

So it's at least reasonable to expect that this inferential process that's going on in theoretical physics is generating the same thing

although in a very formalized way, that we can generate by thinking about how organisms deal with their environments.

And so I want to leave this with you as the second hypothesis here.

The first one was the hypothesis about a trivial renormalization group flow across scales in biology.

The second hypothesis is that these two approaches to emergent spacetime are actually giving us the same information and maybe starting out with the same information, in fact.

We may be able to think about these fundamental building blocks

of information flow and entanglement in terms of the sorts of perceptual relationships that we've been talking about in this class.

So there's our second hypothesis to think about going forward.

And I just want to leave you with the idea that organisms, at least,

manage this very interesting process that we can think of as starting with the construct of memory.

Organisms have memory of multiple scales, and it's memory that allows them to formulate the idea that they're objects.

And as soon as you have objects that persist, you have a source of redundancy.

So you can do error correction.

And if you can do error correction, if you can move the same thing from one place to another and have it encode the same information, then you can build spacetime.

And as soon as you have spacetime, you can use the spacetime as more memory.

You can use the space-time itself as an error-correcting code because space-time has the nice ability to hold lots of copies of some informative structure.

So you can build libraries, you can build computers, or you can build the internet if you have space-time, which gives you more memory, which gives you more object persistence, which gives you more error correction, and the circle just spins around.

So organisms do this.

And the question is, how does it get off the ground?

And next time we can at least speculate about that kind of origin of life type of question in the context of the FEP and its realization in simple systems of communicating observers.

So as always, I encourage you to use the interactive Q&A.

The fifth discussion session with Andrew, who's unfortunately not here today, will be the last day of September, Saturday at 5, as usual, 5 o'clock European time, 8 o'clock California time.

And then the last session of the class will be the 12th of October.

So thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions in the interactive Q&A.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Chris.

Can I ask some short questions?

Sure.

All right.

So first from Lana wrote, is the periodicity the time lengths between and during the excitations built in?

So this was when we had the four cells and there was the inklings of a clock coming into play.


SPEAKER_00:
I think the simplest answer is that if nothing else is happening in the environment except this periodic behavior, then it's not actually meaningful to talk yet about the time between the events.

So if I have a periodic, a system that's quasi-periodic, for example, and nothing else is going on in my environment, then I can't distinguish that from a perfectly periodic system because I would have to have a perfectly periodic reference to know that the other system was aperiodic.

And if you think about the internal clock being driven by information flow into the system, then something has to be happening in the environment for information to be flowing into the system and being counted.

So again, as we talked about a few sessions ago, the internal memory only gets updated when something happens.

So internal and external get tied together.

And this is why we can use external clocks.

But it's also why we depend on external clocks, because our intuitive sense of time is very malleable.

And so we actually, as humans, use external clocks

to correct for the malleability of our own intuitive sense of time.


SPEAKER_01:
Wow.

And there's probably a lot to be said for that Procrustean nature of having the chronometer, the clock on the wall, and the tick, tick, tick as an evolutionarily novel ruler of time playing a logistical role in time-bound society.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and think of earlier clocks that earlier cultures have used and that animals use.

I mean, we have the solar clock, the lunar clock, etc.

And the orbit of Venus clock that was so important to the Mayans and so on.

So there are lots of available clocks in the environment if you have the ability to notice them and enough memory to realize that they're clocks.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

All right.

Here's a question from Upcycle Club.

They wrote, how does representing the network structure and dynamics with quantum embeddings affect the semantic interpretation of the network?


SPEAKER_00:
The embedding theory is the simplest semantic interpretation of the network.

And again, a good way to think of this is through the lens of computer science.

As soon as you have a programming language that allows variable binding, then you've built a very simple kind of semantics into the language.

if you have X as a variable and you have variable binding, then at different times in the execution of the program, X can have different causal consequences for downstream computation because it's been bound to a different value.

So it has different semantics.

So the semantics of X

Again, go back to Gregory Bateson.

The basis of semantics is differences that make a difference, make a difference to behavior, make a difference to actionability.

So variable binding gives you differences that actually make a difference to what the program does.

So what is that?

that is the semantics that's assigned by your embedding theory between what the programming language is doing and what the operating system is doing and so forth.

And I think it's no surprise that the semantics of programming languages end up being

represented with these very general mathematical constructs like category theory, which are essentially tools for representing arbitrary relations between systems.

And that's what embedding theories are.

They're theories that state relationships between systems.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

And very provocative to explore on the biological and life and on the space-time and matter sides, which are, of course, seamlessly integrated through, if only, our own experiences.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is another place where it's useful to go back to this difference between reductive theories and scale-free theories.

And scale-free theories are all about semantics because they represent the existence of stuff happening at different scales.

And so they naturally raise the question of what are these relationships?

What are these embedding theories?

And in reductive theories, there's a very deep sense in which semantics doesn't matter.

If you think that all that's going on that's important is the stuff that's going on at the Planck scale, then you don't need any semantics.

And so...

You see this in late 60s, early 70s old-fashioned AI, where people talk about...

Computation is purely syntactic.

And this is a very reductionist view of computation that leaves out the semantics.

And without the semantics, the computation is useless.

It doesn't tell us anything at all unless we can map it to something.

So, we have this philosophy of science tradition that tells us that semantics is not important.

And we end up

with tools like the FEP that essentially tell us that semantics is all important.

And from a biological point of view, the most natural response is, of course, we knew that all the time.

That's why we're doing biology.

So all of this ties together.


SPEAKER_01:
Would you say that FEP says semantics is important, and then what does it say about what semantics are important?

Or is that entirely left up to the modeler?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, it tells you a lot about what's important for the system itself, right?

The system itself is dealing with its environment.

And it's trying to increase its predictive power.

So it's building a theory of the environment.

And that theory is intrinsically semantic, right?

It's about the environment.

And it's actionable.

The theory is meant to drive action on the environment that will either yield more information,

or get the environment to behave, to do what I'm predicting it's going to do.

So I think the FEP is intrinsically semantic in that sense, that it's about an agent modeling its environment.


SPEAKER_01:
yes and about the semantics of action as opposed to a partial or limited semantics of passive inferrers or semantics of abstraction

Which kind of leaves the important link between the agent and the environment through sense-making and decision selection basically unaddressed because it's kind of Descartes in the thought experiment in the room, and here when we actually engage with the boundary of the room, that's where we start.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah, the FEP completely destroys this classical notion of the passive observer.

as does quantum theory.

There are no passive observers in quantum theory.

So this is a construct that we inherited from a classical worldview that is seriously misleading.


SPEAKER_01:
A lot more to say, but that's a great place to end.

Thank you, Chris.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Thank you, Daniel.

And thanks to you all.

And ask questions.


SPEAKER_01:
See you next time.


SPEAKER_00:
Cheers.

We'll see you next time.

## bSPQ3BkqTh4

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It is October 12th, 2023, and we are in the final lecture, session six in physics is information processing with Chris Fields.

So Chris, thank you for this journey.

Exciting to get to this final lecture, which will be followed only by the last discussion for this go around.

So it's really awesome.

And to you for this lecture.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Daniel, and welcome everyone to this last session that I'll be doing with a focus on biology.

And just to give a brief review, as usual, we've focused in this course on generic quantum systems, by which I mean just any quantum system that has some number of degrees of freedom.

And we really haven't made any assumptions about these systems other than the assumption that both interacting partners have sufficient degrees of freedom that they can be considered separable.

So their boundary is small with respect to the total size of each of the interacting systems.

And I want to emphasize again that the approach we've taken is completely topological, so we haven't assumed anything about embedding in space.

And as we've characterized these systems, we focused really on two things.

One, the amount of information that the two systems can exchange.

And that amount is determined by the size of their boundary.

It's determined by this number N, which is the Hilbert space dimension of the boundary.

And as we've discussed now in several of the sessions, we can think of this boundary as a collection of N qubits via which the two systems A and B communicate.

The other feature of the interaction on which we focused

is the reference frames that are used by the two systems to interact with this set of qubits.

And it's these reference frames that assign the information that flows between A and B meaning or functional significance or actionability or however you want to refer to

the idea that when a system gets some information, it does something useful with it.

So those are very generic kinds of ways of characterizing an interaction.

You can think of it as a qualitative characterization, the semantics of the information, and a quantitative characterization, the amount of information.

But other than that, we've left the nature of these systems open.

And this characterization allowed us to reformulate the free energy principle in quantum information theoretic terms as the principle that interacting systems behave in a way that will asymptotically align their reference frames.

And we saw that

full alignment of reference frames is equivalent to entanglement.

So the FEP drives systems toward entanglement, which is not surprising because that's what happens to generic quantum systems.

They may start out separable, but if they interact long enough, they'll become entangled.

So we've had a discussion that is really very generic.

Now, we showed a couple of sessions ago that under these very generic assumptions, we got some interesting outcomes.

And one is that if systems have sufficient degrees of freedom, under the action of the FEP, they will be driven toward making

a diverse set of measurements of their environment because they're trying to get information about it so that they can predict what it's going to do.

And that as they add ways of making measurements, they'll come up against non-commutativity of their measurements.

And this may be due to intrinsic mathematical facts about their measurements, and it may just be due to their limited supply of free energy.

So either way, what this induces is compartmentalization and the requirement for internal classical communication on internal boundaries.

So I just wanted to reemphasize that this is a result of basic physics, and we see compartmentalization, of course, ubiquitously in biology.

But this suggests to us that features of biology that are very familiar actually follow from fairly deep physics, and compartmentalization is one of them.

We then talked last time about space and time and the computational requirements

on any system that is able to perceive an external clock or perceive an external spatial layout.

And we discussed these from a very kind of developmental psychology point of view.

We discussed it using essentially the kinds of terms on the right here.

as opposed to the kind of language that's much more technical and mathematical that's used in physics to derive spacetime as emergent from information transactions.

But we at least hypothesize that both of these are ways of getting to the same sense of emergent spacetime.

And one important outcome of this discussion was that systems can perceive external clocks, so external periodic behavior, with fewer computational resources, so before they're able to perceive spatial layouts.

And we'll get back to this later.

So organisms and maybe other complex systems seem to manage

a collection of capabilities that are all mutually dependent.

So memory depends on having layouts of persistent things that can be distinguished.

So it depends on space, and it certainly depends on time.

Space gives structure to persistent objects.

Memory allows you to identify persistent objects.

And objects, in turn, give structure to space by being located in different places.

And objects enable the fundamental requirement for memory, which is some form of error correction, so that one has enough redundancy

in the memory to check to see whether a memory has been degraded.

So organisms seem to manage a physically very important process, which is the use of space-time and memory as a basis for cognition.

You'll recognize these four functions that are mutually interdependent.

as underlying complex cognition across the board.

And you can't really do complex cognition unless you have these capabilities.

So today we're going to put some of these things together in a discussion of biology and end by looking forward to future directions, not just in biology, but in all of quantum information theory.

So let's talk about biological systems, living systems, which of course includes us, but also includes all other organisms and communities of organisms and so forth at multiple scales.

And I want to put forward a fairly radical hypothesis that living systems are just generic quantum systems

that the FEP has driven to a high level of computational complexity.

So what does this really say?

It suggests that living systems are just quantum systems that have enough degrees of freedom and a sufficiently complicated internal dynamics

that the FEP, by requiring them to predict what their environment is going to do next, has driven them to make complicated measurements and complicated inferences on the basis of those measurements that enable fairly complicated actions on the environment.

So these are systems that you would characterize as computers, essentially, information processing systems,

with a high degree of computational capability.

Now this is clearly as much a philosophical hypothesis as an empirical hypothesis, and that's due in part to the fact that we don't really have a good definition of what a living system is.

We can just point and say that's a living system and that thing over there isn't.

But beyond that, we don't have much of the theory.

And of course, people have worked on a theory of what is life for decades.

But there's not a lot of agreement.

And so this is, in a sense, a definitional kind of hypothesis, and we test such kinds of hypotheses by seeing if they're useful conceptually to help us understand what living systems are doing.

Now, as soon as we put forward something like this, inevitably the question comes up, are living systems really quantum systems, or are they classical in some intrinsic sense?

This question is really an artifact of two things.

One, the continuing association between quantum systems and microscopic systems, which is, of course, traditional.

Quantum theory was developed to deal with microscopic phenomena.

It was first tested.

is the theory of microscopic phenomena.

And it's only in the past couple of decades that quantum theory is being applied to big things, to cosmology, for example.

So there's a long tradition of association between quantum and microscopic, and living systems are mesoscopic, much bigger than atoms, bigger than molecules.

So, and they're not nearly as big as cosmological systems, so they're somewhere in between.

And those systems have traditionally been regarded as classical.

And even chemistry, even biochemistry is still taught in a very classical way.

So we're not used to thinking of these things as quantum systems.

But at least in the approach we've taken in this course,

All physical systems are quantum systems, and classical information exists only on boundaries, only on boundaries between systems, and it only describes their interaction.

And I want to emphasize, I've said it before, but since this is the last class, I want to say it again, that this is not a universally held view.

It's a view that's becoming more common, and I think a generation from now it will probably be the dominant view of things.

But it's not fair to say that it's the dominant view now.

It's, I think, quite fair to say that it's a view on the rise, especially in the quantum information and quantum gravity communities.

But from a strict empirical perspective, we know a number of things.

We know that accurate molecular dynamics calculations require quantum theory.

We know that a lot of biologically important molecular processes use quantum coherence.

We know that things like hydrogen bonding can only be understood using quantum theory.

We know that cellular free energy budgets are way too small to support fully classical information processing if we think of information processing in terms of what proteins are doing or what other molecules are doing in terms of changing shape.

We know that shape changes in proteins and other molecules underlie all cellular information processing.

So if we think of them as actually implementing cellular information processing, we have way more information processing than could be funded classically.

And finally, we know that human cognition exhibits contextuality.

So human cognition uses quantum coherence.

It's not a classical causal process in all cases.

But this is still a very nascent field.

And it's a field with a lot of potential.

And I think, again, a generation from now, quantum biology is going to be regarded as a very mainstream endeavor, even though it's something of a small emerging field now.

And I'll just show you one picture in support of this third point.

This is a plot of measured free energy usage converted to numbers of bits processed at one kilohertz for a number of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, all that I could find a few years ago that had good caliometric measurements, versus the log of their area, their membrane surface area.

And the thing to note here is that these cells are processing classical information at pretty low rates, kilohertz to gigahertz rates for a thousand bits at a time.

And we know that a lot more is happening in cells than that.

Cells have many more than 1,000 proteins, and those proteins are all moving all the time.

And if that motion is processing information, then there's not nearly enough thermodynamic power to power all of that information processing.

So let's now talk a little bit about life and living systems and what they look like.

Here's a view of living systems from the point of view of genome diversity.

This is a few years old, so it's out of date by now.

But it tells us a lot qualitatively.

It tells us that almost all genome diversity is microbial, that the sorts of organisms that we're familiar with, medium-sized organisms like us, animals and plants, have only a tiny amount of genome diversity.

So we think of ourselves as pretty diverse.

We think of ourselves as quite different from other animals, from flies or worms or

sponges or something like that.

But in fact, we're not all that different from them.

We share many, many proteins with all of those other organisms.

We share the same cellular organization and so forth.

We're not, in fact, all that different from plants.

And we're much more similar to the fungi than to the plants.

So

We get a very biased view of genome diversity when we just look at familiar large types of living systems.

Most genome diversity is buried down there in the microbial world.

This isn't the only way we can look at life as a diverse set of organisms.

We can also look at it in terms of a cell lineage.

The fact that we're all related at the DNA level tells us that we're all descendants of a common ancestor, which is usually called LUCA, the last universal common ancestor.

And LUCA is generally modeled as being a cell, more or less like a bacterial cell, so fairly simple, with not very many pathways.

with maybe a DNA genome.

And if LUCA didn't have one, then they arose fairly shortly thereafter because all organisms that we know of have DNA genomes.

But the point of looking at life as a lineage is that we get a diagram that looks very much like the cell lineage

from an embryological situation, much like the cell lineage of our own body is growing from a fertilized egg.

And in particular, looking at life as a lineage shows us that not only do we share DNA with all other organisms, we actually share a membrane, a cytoplasm that's continuous in time all the way back to Leuco.

and so continuous in time between us and bacteria.

So if you look at life this way, you realize that life is in a sense all one organism, all one connected structure that's developed over time through division, cell division.

And so we're very closely related to all other parts of life in the same way that different cells in our bodies are closely related to each other.

The time spans just longer.

I mean, here the time spans three and a half or four billion years between us and Luca.

These lineages have been diverging for that long, but they're still continuous.

And in particular, they form a continuous cell membrane.

So when we think of life in this way, we realize that we're reasoning from just one example when we think about terrestrial life.

And this strongly limits what we can say about living systems, what we can say about biology.

that we really only have one example, the lineage that descends from LUCA here on Earth.

And at some point we may have more examples, and there's certainly groups working on artificial organisms that aren't part of this lineage, that are constructed from parts derived from this lineage, but aren't members of this lineage themselves.

And that may tell us something new about life.

But if we think of life this way, we see something very important, which is that as life grows, its boundary gets bigger.

And since the boundary of a system constitutes its informational environment, its dimension getting bigger,

means that more information flows into it from its environment, and more information flows out of it into its environment.

So as life develops from LUCA, it gets a larger and larger informational environment, and this dimension of its boundary grows and grows.

Now what that means, if you go back to our original picture of two interacting systems,

is that the number of the dimensionality of the physical environment is decreasing.

And we think of the physical environment as increasing in size.

We have the expanding universe and all that.

But what's increasing in size is space.

And if space is emergent, then that increase is not a real increase in degrees of freedom.

What we're really interested in is

the Hilbert space of the physical environment as distinct from the Hilbert space of life.

And as life gets bigger, it literally, quite literally, eats the physical environment and turns it into more life.

So there's less physical environment around.

So the trajectory of life is toward a bigger informational environment and a smaller physical environment.

And as the physical environment gets smaller, you might imagine it gets easier to predict.

And as the informational environment gets bigger, you have more information with which to predict the behavior of the physical environment.

So this all hangs together very nicely with the free energy principle.

Here's another picture of this same thing.

If we start with some boundary here on the left labeled B around some system labeled S, and it's embedded in an environment E, then as S makes copies of itself through some process like cell division,

then it starts to fill up more of E. It's actually converting degrees of freedom of E into degrees of freedom of its copies that it's made of itself.

And if we think of some larger boundary drawn somewhere in E, here on the right side, I've labeled that B prime, what happens is that B prime gets slowly filled up with copies of S,

And it starts to look like a large organism.

And that's what life is doing in the physical environment.

It's making a bigger boundary for itself at the expense of degrees of freedom of its physical environment.

So we can ask, what drives this process?

Why is life doing this?

Why is it making copies of itself?

And the answer to that question, at least one answer to that question, is the free energy principle drives it to do this.

And I'll just show you some simulations from several years ago of a cell population in this upper left panel.

The green cells are stem cells that divide.

And they've been embedded in an environment that's safe on the left side and 100% lethal on the right side.

So they're embedded in an environment that's conducive to life on one side and very dangerous as you get toward the middle.

And the purpose of these simulations was to study what happens

When the stem cells are able to divide and create not just other stem cells, but create specialized progeny that don't divide, so somatic progeny that don't divide, and hence have free energy resources, thermodynamic resources, that they can devote to doing something other than dividing.

Cell division is incredibly expensive when it comes to energy.

So if you take that energy and apply it not to cell division, but to protecting the stem cells, you can allow the stem cell population to expand.

And that's what these other simulations show.

The blue cells are somatic cells that have very varying ability to protect the stem cells.

And if they're fairly good at protection and they're fairly hard to kill down in the right bottom quadrant, you can actually get a population expanding well into the highly lethal part of the environment.

So this shows you the FEP in action.

What the stem cells are doing

is constructing a very predictable neighborhood around themselves in the environment by dividing to make progeny that don't themselves divide, that just sit there and help protect the stem cells.

So the stem cells are now living in a safer, more predictable environment.

And that allows them to invade more and more of their physical environment by having this fairly benign informational environment.

So this is the FEP in action, driving the expansion of life at the expense of the physical environment.

So that lets us go back to this question that was raised last time.

about the mechanism of these scale transitions that we see ubiquitously in life.

Life gets bigger and bigger as time goes on phylogenetically and as time goes on developmentally.

We start with some molecular pathways that somehow get assembled into a cell.

That's the origin of life question.

How does that happen?

And about 2 billion years later, cells start to group together to make multicellular organisms.

Now, bacteria group together to make facultative multicellular systems like microbial maps 3 billion years ago, very, very early on.

But we don't see the emergence of obligate multicellulars until much, much later.

before the Cambrian explosion, but still less than a billion years ago.

And from there, things get more complicated very quickly.

So one has large multicellular organisms.

They develop complicated social relations that probably first emerged with social insects.

but are certainly well developed in invertebrates, including in mammals.

Organisms group together in very complex ecosystems.

And recall here that it's now known that all multicellular organisms have obligate microbial symbionts.

So all of our bodies are in fact very complex

ecosystems populated by many, many different species of bacteria.

And that's true not just for us, but for trees and insects and worms and sponges and everything else.

So organisms from a body point of view are themselves ecosystems, and organisms organize themselves into ecosystems.

And these ecosystems come into contact across the entire biosphere.

So processes as simple as the wind disperse organisms as small as bacteria all over the planet.

So this scaling of life toward larger and larger organizational structures

is in a sense the major thing for biology to explain.

And the hypothesis that we floated last time was that this transition from very small scales to very large scales uses the same mechanism over and over again, or a mechanism that has the same structure over and over again.

So the renormalization group is trivial, basically.

It's just the identity operating at different scales, or mapping from one scale to the next.

So the question is, can we approach this in any way?

Does this make sense?

And to try to make sense of it, we can go to the one real developed theory that we have in biology,

which has been formulated by Dawkins and others as universal Darwinism.

This is just kind of an abstraction of the modern synthesis between Darwinian evolution and genetics.

But universal Darwinism is incredibly simple and very obvious.

It says if you have systems and they can copy each other, they can copy themselves and the copies can diversify,

Then if you want to know what's going to happen at the population level, what you will find is the systems that copy themselves and diversify most efficiently will win because there'll be more of them.

So they end up dominating the population.

And winning gets called natural selection.

But natural selection is not an extra part of the Darwinian process.

It's just the outcome of efficiency, of the systems that copy themselves most efficiently coming to dominate any population.

So there's no sort of...

kind of hand of God or whatever reaching down and selecting some organisms and not others.

And of course, when Darwin put the idea of natural selection together, he was thinking very explicitly of the analogy of a gardener or a farmer selecting the crops or the animals or whatever that the gardener liked best and keeping those.

And that's where this selection metaphor comes from.

But there's no real process of selection in evolution by natural selection.

It's just copying and diversifying.

But this clearly is just the outline of what a real mechanistic theory would be, because we need to have a story about what copying is and what diversifying is,

and what efficiently means.

And in particular, to address the question that we raised a couple of slides ago, we need to know whether these mechanisms are the same or at least isomorphic of the same form at different scales.

So that's what I want to talk about for the next little bit.

Let's start with copying.

Up until the 70s, copying in biology really meant DNA replication and, to some extent, cell division.

But the focus in evolutionary theory was on DNA replication.

And in the 70s, it was realized that whole genes could be duplicated, so whole genes could be copied.

And then shortly after that, it was realized that particularly in prokaryotes, where functionally related genes are next to each other in chromosomes often,

in what are called operons, that operons could be duplicated, and so entire pathways could be duplicated.

And as genomes began to be sequenced and structures of genomes were understood, it became clear that genomes could be copied.

And of course, we have two copies in each of our cells, with the exception of red blood cells, of our complete genome.

But some plants, for example, have six or eight or even more copies of their genome in each of their cells.

So there's large-scale genome duplication.

Cell division is clonal duplication of cells.

Organismal reproduction works by cell division in all known systems.

colonies or societies of organisms reproduce themselves, in part through cultural transmission, and entire niches reproduce themselves.

For example, in processes like forest evolution or desertification or even urbanization, we see humans reproducing the same sorts of niches in city after city, for example.

So these forms of copying have the kind of hierarchical dependencies that one might expect.

So to duplicate pathways, you have to duplicate genes.

To duplicate cells, you have to duplicate the genome.

To duplicate organisms, you have to duplicate cells.

And this suggests that this copying operation

is indeed scale-free, that each level, the copying operation at each level enables the copying operation at the next level.

Now, with diversification, we see much the same thing.

In the early days of the modern synthesis and still in the work of people like Richard Dawkins,

diversification is is generally thought of as random so mutation for example is thought of as random and um here i have barbara mcclintock who is kind of the hero of non-randomness in doggedly over decades pointing out that much of genome diversification is not random at all and um

that genomes actively diversify by moving whole clusters of genes around and duplicating them or just changing their positions so that they're under the influence of different local control.

So at the gene and genome level, you have active diversification by various processes.

enzymatic processes, as McClintock showed us, transposon-mediated mechanisms, which are enzymatic at the bottom.

Cells actively diversify by lots of different mechanisms.

And in the 70s, Carl Woese was, in part, personally responsible for pointing out that

In the microbial world, there's a lot of horizontal gene transfer.

And again, no one believed him for quite a while.

But now it's broadly accepted that microbes exchange DNA very frequently and across large distances phylogenetically.

And this is how things like microbial resistance to antibiotics spread so quickly, or one way that it spreads so quickly.

And it's a tremendous agent of essentially speciation, to the extent that that even makes any sense in the microbial world.

Of course, in our cells, we have functional differentiation.

As mentioned earlier, there are lots of symbiotic interactions that lead to diversification in cells by radically altering their local environments.

And of course, sex is a mechanism for diversification.

Organisms actively diversify in many different ways.

The most obvious one is just by moving around, by moving to a different environment.

the organism is exposed to different inputs and is allowed different outputs.

And so it can move into a different direction, morphologically, genetically, etc.

Organisms can regulate their own evolvability by altering things like DNA repair systems or activating transposons.

Again, these are sorts of things that...

went very much against the grain when they were first discovered, but are now pretty well accepted.

And of course, organisms can learn and so can diversify their behavior by diversifying their computational capabilities.

And social groups, of course, actively diversify in many different ways.

And organisms are increasingly, non-human organisms are increasingly regarded as having cultures that they pass on intergenerationally by intergenerational learning and can exchange with other groups.

So diversification is active.

and occurs at every scale.

And again, diversity, although this is a bit less clear than in the case of copying, diversification mechanisms at one scale enable diversification mechanisms at other scales.

So, for example, transposon-mediated mechanisms enable horizontal gene transfer in microorganisms.

And the FEP tells us that efficiency is actually about intelligence because the FEP drives systems to build good models of their environments or the behavior of their environments.

And what a good model lets a system do is reach a single goal by many different means because it allows, in a sense, planning.

and it allows flexibility and adaptability.

And I put William James here on this slide because he was the first, as far as I know, to define intelligence as this ability to use different means to reach the same goal.

Now, in evolution, that's long been known, and it's called convergent evolution.

When you see two lineages adapting to a single environment,

with very different genetics and very different morphologies.

And often the organisms will end up with similar morphologies that work well in that environment, but very different genetics and very different biochemistry.

So throughout evolution, we see this phenomenon of functional convergence

balancing structural divergence at many, many different levels.

So we have multiple genes for very similar proteins.

We have multiple pathways that do more or less the same thing.

We have different cell types that support the same basic functions.

We have tissues that are fairly different, but that have the same functions.

For example, eyes and different kinds of organisms that allow vision, but have very different structure.

And of course, we have functional convergence and social relations.

And if we look at how cells interact, traditional evolutionary theory really focuses on competition.

But

We now know that cells cooperate, that they exchange resources in various ways, even across vast differences in phylogeny.

For example, the interchange between plants and fungi, or between bacteria and us.

We know that cells, in a sense, persuade each other by secreting things like hormones that cause other cells to do different things.

Cells deceive each other.

For example, microbes that are trying to escape the immune system.

And cells coerce each other.

Cells even kill each other when they detect, for example, genetic defects.

So these sorts of social and economic and even political ideas are useful for describing living systems.

from the level of cells on up.

I mean, they were developed in social settings to describe what goes on in human societies and then extended to other animals.

And now it's very clear that they extend to individual cells.

So when we think about social intelligence, we can think about social intelligence even at the level of individual cells.

And we see these sorts of competition, cooperation, resource exchange, et cetera, even at the level of microbial mass, so biological structures that are 3 billion years old.

Now, of course, intelligence is necessary, but it's not sufficient for being selected.

It won't protect you from impacts of asteroids that happen to land on your planet.

which has happened often in the evolution of the Earth, and we're now trying to figure out how to predict and prevent such things.

But it's, you know, who knows whether we'll be successful at that.

But this intelligence

is necessary when it's viewed in this FEP sort of way.

Intelligence is what lets you build models that enable you to predict the environment.

So where does this leave us?

By thinking of evolutionary theory in terms of scale-free mechanisms, we seem to have a picture

in which we start with quantum systems with a certain level of complexity, and the FEP actually gives us scale-free biology or something very close to scale-free biology.

And that's very interesting because the FEP, of course, is a generic principle.

It just says that systems do what they need to do to keep existing.

And this way of thinking gives us some predictions.

One is that we'll find compartmentalized problem solving everywhere because the FEP drives compartmentalization.

And the reason is just non-commutativity of measurement processes.

It predicts that we'll see hierarchical organization everywhere, in the same way we did on that first compartmentalization slide, where once you have a number of compartments, you need a metacompartment that, if nothing else, distributes free energy.

So some sort of very basic attention system.

And we see attention systems, of course, throughout biology.

It predicts that living systems will have very limited classical data structures.

So since they have to write classical data on their boundaries, and their boundaries are much smaller than they are, then they'll, and because writing classical data is expensive, living systems will tend to use as little classical data as they can get away with.

Since classical data is needed for

thermodynamic irreversibility.

Where we see thermodynamic irreversibility, that's where we look for classical data.

We saw that organisms will be able to detect time first before they can detect space.

So we can expect organisms to have clocks even before they can represent space.

And of course, we see things like diurnal variation throughout biology.

And finally, the FEP predicts this asymptotic collapse of separability back to entanglement.

So it predicts that living systems will eventually degrade and become indistinguishable from their environments.

And we know that happens at the cell level and the individual organism level.

We call it death.

So

The FEP seems to give us a lot of the features of biology, and it gives us these features in a scale-free way, and it derives them from this very basic physics.

So where does that leave us?

I think it leaves us here with a challenge, not just to thinking about the FEP, which is what this course has been about,

but to quantum information theory in general.

And that challenge is to evolve from the kind of conceptual and theoretical utility that we've been discussing in this course, and which is very well developed in the physics community, to some sorts of empirical and technological utility

And I've listed three areas here where QIT is very active.

One in quantum gravity and cosmology.

And you're probably familiar with things like string theory that sort of fairly famously seem not to be empirically testable.

And the quantum gravity community is enormous.

Many thousands of people working in this area

But coming up with theories that can be tested empirically at the scales that we can actually do experiments, so at accessible energy scales, for example, has proved to be very difficult.

So this is a real challenge to the field, is somehow getting not just to empirical testability, but to some sort of technological utility.

And you can imagine that if the main prediction of

quantum gravity is that space-time is emergent, that there could be enormous utility in that, some ability to manipulate the way space-time emerges.

The second area, of course, is quantum information and computing.

And here, massive resources are being put into technological utility.

And I think it's reasonable to expect that we'll have useful quantum computers within a generation at any rate.

So there I think the field is going quite well.

And the last area of what we've talked about here is quantum biochemistry and biology.

And this, I think, is an area with enormous promise that maybe some of you will actually contribute to.

making this area more useful technologically and more accessible empirically.

But at least we have a picture of how these different areas fit together.

So that's it.

Thank you very much for participating in this class.


SPEAKER_00:
sorry um could you just repeat the last like 30 seconds from andrew will be chris


SPEAKER_01:
And it will be a discussion session on Saturday, the 20th of October at the usual time, 8 a.m.

Pacific time.

And the interactive Q&A is open.

I really appreciate your questions.

I try to answer them.

And thank you very much.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I ask a question or do you want to call it here?

Sure, go ahead.

All right.

Inks wrote, Chris spoke last time

Introducing the mechanisms of scale transition.

I'll read your question, then I'll fix the cropping on the live stream.

Chris spoke last time introducing the mechanisms of scale transition of these essentially semantic theories about how one scale embeds in another scale.

I would love to learn more about this, especially in terms of natural language semantics and human cognition semantics versus machine learning.


SPEAKER_01:
Wow.

Well, that's a very good question.

I think that's a very relevant question given the sorts of machine learning that we see deployed in systems like ChatGPT.

And especially as these systems

start to associate language with images, for example, and as such systems are embedded in robotic systems that can actually move around in the world and interact with real objects.

I think one of the key questions in natural language semantics is to what extent does it depend on reference?

To what extent

do the meanings we attach to words or the usages that we allow for words depend on our ability to connect words to external objects?

And to what extent do those abilities rely on connections between words themselves?

So if you think of an LLM like ChatGPT by itself, it's just a statistical model of relationships between words as used in some corpus of text, which is large, of course, but we can debate its representativeness.

And so that's a model of semantics that's entirely self-contained.

It's entirely relations between different pieces of language.

Whereas when we start to connect those words, statistics to images, or better yet, to actual objects that are interacted with, not just visually, but haptically, for example, by a robot,

they start to be connected to external reference.

And that transition, I think, is going to be very, very interesting to watch.

And it's just starting, so we all have ringside seats on an incredible experiment in semantics.

And so that would be my response really to that question is keep your eyes on this experiment and see how it goes, because it's bound to tell us something about how semantics really works.

And I suspect that there will be enormous opportunity to start relating the results of that experiment to what we see in developmental psychology, for example.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Awesome.

All right.

Tucker asks, Areas of macroscopic quantum-mediated phenomena in biology that get Chris Fields excited?


SPEAKER_01:
I think the one that excites me the most right now is just this question of how cells are managing to do the information processing that they're doing.

And how much of it

they can accomplish, or I think the right way to put it is, how can they get away with so little classical information?

And I don't think we have the cell biology yet to answer that question, but I think asking the question may help us design the right kinds of cell biology to look for an answer.

And our cell biology has been organized around the idea that the structures that we see are essentially static, that they're classical, and that they're constructed in a way that's thermodynamically irreversible.

But if we think of what we measure as not necessarily reflecting a static structure,

I think we'll start to conceptualize it differently and build models of it differently.

I mean, clearly, when we look at things like protein structure, we're looking at snapshots of something that's very dynamic.

And when we look in a chemistry textbook and we see pictures of this conformation that changes to that conformation, we think of those as static, stable structures, that that's kind of a switch.

But it's not actually a switch the way a light switch is.

It's a much more dynamic process.

And the kinds of molecular dynamic simulations that allow you to study that process are incredibly complicated and time expensive and uncertain.

Good resolution problems and other things.

But

I think thinking of these as kind of fluid, reversible processes is going to change the way we think about them.


SPEAKER_00:
That's a great point.

And it reminds me of the more physics-based way of thinking about the paths that could happen between observations or the statistics-based way of samples of a dynamical process.

And in biology,

we know that even if we take a snapshot, okay, this organism is one centimeter today, it's two centimeters tomorrow, something changed.

So we know there was a developmental process, then we know there's an ecological process, and then there's an evolutionary context, eco, evo, devo.

And then from that more biological understanding of contextual developing organisms, all of these different biological phenomena,

actually help us expand our space of measurement and analysis for material that on one hand some people may have called inanimate but then they have their own dynamics different time scales and so bringing some of those like the challenges of measuring and observing intervening in historical and biological

things gives us a big understanding even on measuring and summarizing analyzing ensembles or scales that that don't immediately appear to have that kind of historiosity like pieces of silicon or carbon yeah that's that's that's well put and and i think uh we have the same problem as we go up in scale also


SPEAKER_01:
We tend not to think of things like societies as living systems.

But in one sense, they clearly are.

And to the extent that we can think of these structures that are much larger than we are individually as living systems, cognitive systems, etc., I think we'll understand their dynamics better.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, final question.

upcycle club wrote how can a quantum system detect and respond to quantum context shifts switches which are changes in the measurement basis or the entanglement structure of the system um well uh


SPEAKER_01:
The answer here is simple and not very informative.

It's by making measurements, which is all that quantum systems can actually do, and making measurements that follow probing actions that try to push the boundaries of the model of a context.

When having this discussion, I always like to go back to the frame problem in artificial intelligence, which is the problem formulated in the late 60s of predicting what won't change as the result of an action.

So it's sort of the inverse of the problem of predicting the side effects.

And if you could predict all of the side effects, you can predict what doesn't change.

So it's equivalent to the question of predicting all the side effects.

And context change is a side effect.

And it's often an unobserved and maybe unobservable side effect.

But if you have a model,

that says, I'm working in this context, then you can intentionally probe the boundaries of that model and see if you can actually alter the context you're in as a way of discovering what context you're in.

And humans do that in social settings all the time.

But I think this is something that we need to...


SPEAKER_00:
think about happening at many different scales i suspect that cells are doing this all the time we just don't know how there's so much to say there it just makes me think of the the paradox or the tension between expecting the expected expecting the unexpected and life needing to expect both of that right

so thank you chris it's been an amazing lecture series many people in the live chat are very appreciative and and um we'll look forward to their submitted questions and their participation in the final discussion coming soon so thank you chris until next time okay and thank you all bye ciao

## cxJuA012HvM

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

At the Active Inference Journal, we are eagerly seeking contributors who would like to help improve the transcripts, named entities list, and topics discussed in the ongoing Chris Fields course, Physics as Information Processing.

Right now it's May 2023.

if you're already planning to spend time on this course we hope you'll consider working with the journal as well this is a unique opportunity to build editorial skills and make high leverage open science contributions to the active inference ecosystem specifically this work entails listening carefully to the course lectures and discussions and making corrections to the ai generated transcript for this we use assembly ai for example

For the transcript of the first lecture, see this link here.

This is what the transcript looks like on the GitHub.

We have a markdown file that allows line-by-line editing, and we use this markdown file as the basis for further rendering and translation into different languages, as well as training on language models and other functions.

also building out the list of entities named that is people and topics so here we have people named and already from the background video and first lecture we have dozens of names that have been mentioned and we have topics discussed so this will continue to grow and that will improve the scholarship and the relevance of this work as we know so many of the interesting topics being mentioned

All the transcripts and materials related to this course will be published open source.

If you want to see what that looks like or what that can look like, check out the earlier transcript of the Marc Solms live streams.

where we enrich the transcript with images and tables of content as well.

So this is a really important open science way to improve the impact of the live streams and the videos that we have.

And it is also really important for accessibility.

We have synchronous meetings with the Active Inference Journal in the Active Inference Institute's Discord on Mondays at 13 UTC, although most of the work on this project is done asynchronously, for example, via the GitHub links above.

If you're interested in participating in the journal on this project, please let us know by joining the journal channel on the Discord or by emailing activeinference at gmail.com.

Dave, what else would you add to this?


SPEAKER_01:
Working on detailed editing of a transcript is a great way to learn the material in depth and particularly to spot things that you might have thought you understood that you didn't really understand.


SPEAKER_00:
So do it.

Great.

Great points.

Totally agree.

All right.

So looking forward to people's participation here and till the next update.

Thank you.