SPEAKER_02:
all right hello everyone so we're here it says july 3rd 2026 we're doing the um part one review basically the fundamentals of active inference uh so we've gone through chapters one through five that uh constitute the first half of the book part one there's three parts uh so today's really kind of a session opportunity to ask questions about the entirety of part one anything that anyone would like cleared up or elaborated upon

before we move into part two.

And that's going to be, part two is going to be active inference proper, where we actually begin to look at action, how action is selected, how we plan, how we do, quote unquote, active inference.

So that's kind of what we're doing today.

I shall share my screen.

I'll give, I think, maybe just a little bit of review on what we've done, where we've gone, where we are.

And then I'll open up the floor for questions.

from you guys for anything at all related to part one.

And hopefully that will kind of set us up to being able to begin to see where we're going to have to go for part two.

So I guess very basically, we've seen this picture here.

This is, I think, the first figure in the book from the introduction.

This is the outline of the entire book.

And again, hopefully everyone can see my screen.

Please do make a lot of noise if you can't.

So part one, chapters one to five.

This is, you know, the book itself is called The Fundamentals of Active Inference.

But part one is really the fundamentals of the fundamentals.

What do you even need to understand in terms of the constituent mathematics and formalisms and ideas that surround active inference and where it comes from in order to be able to understand active inference itself?

So that's part one.

I'll give a brief overview of each chapter and the core ideas.

So what we had to do initially,

is we had to come to part one here.

The entirety of part one is completely concerned with the problem of perception only.

So with active infants, we have this fundamental notion of perception and action.

But we're just going to completely assume actions, and we're going to look at perception only.

So we're going to have to try and formalize what it means to be doing perception.

And that's the entirety of part one, really.

And that's going to carry through to the remainder of the book as well.

so chapter one this was all about uh perception as inference okay so the whole point of chapter one was that we have this question what is perception how do we do perception and how are we going to think about perception in the context of the modeling paradigm that is active inference and the idea fundamentally is that perception is inference we have beliefs about hidden states of the world uh we do not directly observe hidden states we only observe

through our sensory apparatus.

And on the basis of those operations, we can update our beliefs about hidden sensory, well, hidden states of the world.

And that process is inference.

So inference is just the process of changing your beliefs about something, right?

And that's what we're going to mean by perception.

And there's a whole story to be woven here.

Well, before we get to that story, the most fundamental distinction is this distinction here.

Where is it?

Yeah, this one.

This, again and again and again, is the most fundamental thing.

And we're going to see something like this diagram repeat throughout the book.

We've already seen it repeat throughout the chapters that we've gone through so far.

So the fundamental separation, the really bedrock starting point, is this idea that we have the environment, which is in some sense the real world, and we have the agent, which is somehow contained in the real world but not identical to it.

And they are separated from one another.

Okay, so there's some process out there, there's some dynamics, there's some physics, whatever that's quote unquote out there.

And the agent is trying to predict what is going on in the environment.

And it can only do that on the basis of observations.

so observations come in and never the agent never gets access to the real world the real environment but on the basis of those observations the agent has a model of the real world and using that model it's able to update predictions or beliefs about the real environment okay and those predictions and beliefs we see in chapter two

we formulate this idea of perception as hidden state inference using Bayes' rule.

So chapter one was all about what is perception?

It's this process of inference.

And we're doing inference because we're separated from our environment in the sense that

there's a boundary between the agent and the environment and chapter two that makes this precise mathematically okay so we actually start doing some mathematical operations here in chapter two so we we know we're doing inference but specifically chapter two says we're going to be doing Bayesian inference okay so and the the recurring the recurring you know running example throughout this book is this really really really simple example where we have some notion of an agent that's farmed for food

So the idea is that some food out there in the environment has a certain size.

That's the state of the real world.

I'll get this picture up here.

So the state of the real world is out here in the environment, there's some state.

It's food sizes and arbitrary food sizes from 1 to 5, let's say.

And those generate observations.

And the observations are light intensities.

So the observations are related to the hidden states in some way.

We don't actually know really how the observations are related to the hidden states.

But what we say is we're going to assume that there is some kind of relationship.

And our assumptions about the relationship between the hidden states and the observations, between the food sizes and the light intensities, those assumptions are going to be our generative model.

And we're explicitly reasoning probabilistically.

So the entire North Star

the whole sort of guiding apparatus of what we're doing is we're trying to, as best we can, implement Bayes' rule, which is the rule that tells us how to update our beliefs about hidden states on the basis of sensory evidence.

And Bayes' rule tells us this precisely and exactly.

So what do you need?

You need a generative model that encodes our assumptions about the relationships between hidden states X and observations Y.

And we've seen that we can factorize this generative model in terms of our likelihood.

So we have a probability distribution of our observations given hidden states and prior beliefs about hidden states.

Those two things together constitute our generative model.

And then the last piece, the missing ingredient that we need

is our model evidence.

This is the probability of observing something independent of any state.

And those three things together, they compose Bayes' rule.

And then we can get our posterior belief about hidden states on the basis of sensory evidence.

And then bingo, bango, bongo, we're doing inference.

Very nice.

So that fills in the picture of what's going on

at least abstractly, mathematically, ideally, inside the agent.

We're doing inference by means of Bayes' rule, or at least we're trying to do that.

And indeed, that's what we did in chapter two.

We used Bayes' rule exactly.

We made certain assumptions about how we were going to be doing things.

We discretized the state space.

We were able to do exact marginalization.

We waved our hands a lot, and we got rid of a lot of problems.

I see there's some people in the waiting room still.

Let me just admit some people.

But that was crucial.

We assumed that we could do exact basis rule.

Do I have the waiting room?

Let's have a see here, participants.

Admit, admit, admit.

All right, very good, very good.

Excellent, all right.

I shall share my screen again.

Very nice.

So we have this notion that what we're doing is we're trying to implement Bayes' rule, at least ideally.

That is what it is to be doing inference inside the agent, by means of our model.

And then out here in the real world, in the general process, there is some actual relationship between observations and hidden states.

We never know this exactly.

But of course, as modelers, we're in the unique position of being able to specify this.

So for our really trivial example,

we said, okay, and typically throughout all of chapter, well, part one, the relationship between hidden states and observations has been linear.

Okay, that's one kind of relationship, very basic kind of relationship.

And that's been the case in the model and in the process.

So that was chapter two, where we actually sort of, you know, rubber meets the road.

We did some real calculations.

We saw what it is to update beliefs by means of Bayes' rule.

okay and i should note just by and by the by that what we're doing we haven't made a big song and dance about this yet but all of our beliefs have been with respect to or by means of continuous probability distributions so these these bell curves okay gaussian distributions um that's and we're going to continue this in part two

and going on, but we're also going to see a distinction that will come up later when we put action in for simple models where instead of reasoning about these bell curves, we're going to reason about categorical distributions.

Instead of a continuous interval, we're going to be dealing with discrete things, but that's going to come later.

The big takeaway from Chapter 2 is this here, I think at least.

We're reasoning about things in terms of Bayes' rule,

We're updating the posterior over hidden states on the basis of sensory evidence.

Very nice.

And we're doing this exactly.

We're doing exact Bayesian inference in chapter two.

And the big thing that we saw is that if we do this, there are certain relationships that hold between the prior, the likelihood, and the posterior.

So what we saw is that depending on the precision, the degree of spread or uncertainty that you have,

about your prior and your likelihood that affects the precision or uncertainty of your posterior beliefs so and you know canonically you can sort of mix and match but imagine you've got a very precise prior belief okay and a kind of spread out likelihood of observations this in some sense encodes an agent that's very stubborn one that doesn't really want to

its observation model very much.

It wants to trust its prior beliefs.

And so you see, OK, well, if we do a Bayesian update with a model that looks like this, the posterior that we get is pretty close to our prior belief already.

So that's encoding an agent that's stubborn or that doesn't want to change its beliefs very much, kind of a closed-minded agent.

On the complete other side of the spectrum, if your precision

for your your prior is quite spread out so the agent doesn't really have a very fixed idea about what it's what the real world is going to be like but it's going to it's very precisely attending to sensory evidence then when we do a bayesian update you can see that the posterior is much much more like the uh the likelihood model so it's trusting the observations it's getting in more than it's trusting its prior beliefs okay and it's precisely this precision

or variance or uncertainty on either the prior or the likelihood and how they how they relate with each other that affect the precision or the uncertainty of the posterior belief so that's something that you get with basis rule you start being able to reason about the uncertainties um in our beliefs our prior beliefs and like well yeah is that a question i hear oh well

I hear some grumbling.

Hang on, stop sharing.

Was there a question?

Going once, going twice.

Sorry, my bad.

I thought I was on mute.

Okay, no problem.

All right, I'll just share.

Yeah, I just want to briefly go through just so that we're all on the same page, at least at a high level what we've sort of gone through.

So that was chapter two.

Chapter three then was a bit of a change of pace.

The idea is that, yes, very nice.

We've seen how we can operationalize this procedure of inference for perception.

OK, but there were assumptions that we made in chapter two, namely that we have a model.

OK, and we're going to use that model to do inference.

And we saw lots of different ways to do inference in chapter two.

But of course, and I want to just show you, where is it here?

So we go, this is this very central diagram here.

So we have a model and we did inference with our model.

Of course, our model is, you know, there are certain settings of parameters of our model that need to be set well, if we're going to do inference well.

Okay.

So our model is made out of probability distributions.

We have our likelihood, we have our prior.

These have parameters.

These have variances.

Our observation model has parameters theta.

Because it's a linear model, typically, we have a slope and an intercept.

Those are parameters.

Those are things that have to be set well enough so that when we do inference with our model, we're going to be doing inference well.

So there's problem number one, how do you do inference?

But above that is problem number two, and it's kind of a harder problem.

What should the setting of the parameters be for my model?

In chapter two, we just completely ignored that problem.

We assumed that the parameters of our model, the settings of the dials of our model were already perfect.

They were set to be excellent, and then we can just do inference.

And we told that story.

But realistically, in the real world, your model has parameters and you need to know

how to set those parameters.

And we're going to see this more and more going forward.

But this question about how to set the parameters of your model, this is typically operationalized as what it is to be doing learning in active inference.

So we've got sort of fast changing things down here, hidden states.

How are those changing?

That's inference.

But then above that is the question, all right, how do I learn or how do I do inference on what the parameters of my model should be?

So they're two different but related problems, basically.

And realistically, you need to be able to do both of them if you're going to be doing inference well.

So chapter 3 was all about different ways of estimating model parameters.

And we saw how to do deterministic model parameter estimation.

We saw techniques like gradient descent.

It comes up again and again and again.

Maximum likelihood estimation, Bayesian linear regression, all very nice.

This culminated in something called the expectation maximization algorithm.

That was the jewel of Chapter 3.

Why is that important?

Why did we care about the model premise?

Just briefly before I answer that question.

In some sense, this figure here, this is a very nice depiction of the process of parameter learning that we saw in Chapter 3.

broadly speaking and we're looking at a process of gradient descent here and gradient descent is a very fundamental algorithm that shows up everywhere in machine learning um and it's going to continually recur across the textbook the general idea is let's say i've got two parameters okay for my observation likelihood in this case i've got beta zero and beta one you know you could have hundreds of parameters or thousands of parameters but let's say we've got two

And we have some notion about how costly those parameters are.

So these two parameters here, they sweep out a two-dimensional space.

So a point in this space is a setting of beta 1 and beta 2.

And this surface, this curve, is some kind of notion about how costly those pairs of parameters are.

So what we can do is if we can operationalize a notion of cost,

We can start somewhere on this surface, and we can say, all right, let's just walk down the surface in the direction of greatest steepness, right?

And we're just going to keep doing that for some number of steps or iterations.

And once you get to somewhere that's sort of vaguely flat, a local minimum, maybe a global minimum, but typically a local minimum,

We're going to say, all right, well, you know what?

The setting of those parameters where the cost is basically flat, those are going to be good.

And those are the parameters that we're going to use for inference.

That is, in so many words, the basis of gradient descent.

And that's going to show up again and again and again.

But it's different from the problem of inference.

However, there are interpretations about what it means to learn.

such that we can treat parameters as themselves another kind of hidden state and we can do inference on those okay so that that idea is going to show up in chapter five at least in disguise when it comes to this idea of separation of temporal scales so you've got fast changing states down here and slower changing states up here and these are your parameters and they're coupled to one another all right so the last thing on chapter three

very nice that's a nice story about how to do parameter learning but you need to do parameter learning and inference kind of at the same time right basically and there's there are chicken and an egg okay you need you need to be able to do inference in order to be able to learn parameters but you need the good parameters in order to be able to do inference so it's it's a very vicious problem and the expectation maximization algorithm uh is the thing that solves this chicken and egg problem where

We assume that we can take the expectation about what parameters should be given beliefs about hidden states.

And then on the basis of that, we can maximize the evidence for certain parameters and we can kind of do them jointly.

And that solves the problem.

So we can do joint hidden state inference and parameter learning at the end of chapter three.

And that's the whole point of chapter three.

That's the really central thing that it's about.

But there's a problem.

The big problem is that the expectation maximization algorithm, at least of the kind that we've seen here, assumes it assumes that we can know that we can we can evaluate the true posterior.

So if I go back to Chapter two.

assumes that we can exactly calculate the true posterior belief okay and unfortunately that assumption is just usually wrong it's usually the case that we simply cannot evaluate the true posterior for any number of reasons the big reason is because marginalizing out the um model evidence is usually very very hard if not impossible and so you just can't use base's rule so we're kind of stuck you know we know abstractly what we

should be doing if we wanted to solve the problem of hidden state inference and parameter learning but we can't actually do that so chapter four this is really where we kick into high gear in terms of the you know mathematical foundation of active inference itself this is why we say look we can't calculate the exact posterior so we're going to approximate it we're going to find a posterior that's close enough to the real posterior okay

the process by which we do this is variational inference so we're going to assume that the real posterior takes a certain shape or is a certain kind of probability and usually we're going to assume that the posterior is a gaussian right or a bell curve that's an assumption the real posterior might be something wiggly it might be something very strange okay but we're going to assume that uh at least it's good enough to assume that the true posterior is is a gaussian

I don't have figures here just yet.

And then there's a question about, all right, we're gonna try and make that Gaussian, that bell curve as close as possible to the real posterior.

And how do we do that?

Well, there's a quantity called variational free energy, which bounds the surprisal, bounds the negative log of the model elements.

And this thing we can calculate.

So on the basis of that, we can do variational free energy minimization,

And there's various ways of talking about how to do this in terms of free form, mean field, fixed form, mean field.

We didn't end up talking about those very much at all, actually.

And this is something we can do.

So this is actually how we're going to do our approximate Bayesian inference.

Admit, admit, admit.

I see, Andrew, you have a hand up.

Sorry, I didn't notice that before.

Would you like to jump in?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, yeah.

Yeah.

No worries.

It is going to be brief.

I didn't want to slow your momentum.

But yeah, just on on parameters, I think for those who are still wondering, like, what what are these extra parameters?

If we've been talking about things like perception and taking in a, you know, a sensory observation and then inferring a hidden state.

So what are these parameter things sort of about?

You've already addressed that, Fraser.

But it's just to say.

um you know we we take in an observation we sort of update a belief so if i were to use more colloquial terms here to think provide more of an intuition um it's sort of like you know we see our y and we update our x um but how do we do that right so so if you think of of the the you know the y is like what you perceive and then and then x is your beliefs then parameters are sort of like

your understanding they're they're what help relate the x and the y right because without some kind of understanding so to speak of how um you can link up your your beliefs with what you see or what you observe um like without any kind of parameters like we have no way of relating those two things right

So it's the parameters that kind of lead to this equating different sorts of things.

It's like, oh, well, X is simply, you know, we take our Y and then we run it through our understanding.

We run it through our parameters and the sort of combinations of these things, right?

So that's sort of what's essential about this idea of parameters.

And then, of course, why we have these things like chapter 2 and chapter 3, right next to each other, because they're, they're so sort of inextricably tied up with each other.

And then, as Frazier was going into now.

variational inference then becomes this sort of tractable means of running that sort of process of going from our y to our x as well as being able to invert that to go from an x to a y via parameters and being able able to to update those parameters over time that is they don't have to your understanding of how states and and observations also does not stay fixed that's why we have not just inference but we also have

But, yeah, that was also just supposed to be, like, kind of a brief point along the way.

I think your explanation thus far has been really great tying things together.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, no, fair enough.

Thank you, Andrew.

I mean, we've seen along the way various representations of our model in terms of maybe a graphical representation.

This is one representation here where very quickly, this is exactly expressing the idea that, look, you know, there are hidden states that generate observations, but our model about how observations are generated from hidden states is dependent on parameters.

And we can also have beliefs about parameters, okay, that are

parameterized by further other parameters and we can update our belief about parameters in addition to getting states so you can kind of do inference on parameters as what it means to be doing learning so that's an interpretation that shows up again and again at least later but um we've seen the beginnings of it here so uh yeah so okay so chapter four this is this is you know i i say where we're

introducing how it is that we're really practically going to do approximate Bayesian inference by means of variational free energy minimization.

We spent a long time motivating where it comes from, what VFE even means, why it bounds surprise, and why that's a good thing.

But the upshot is that once we can formulate our inference problem in terms of variational free energy, this is something that we can solve practically.

That gives us the mathematical machinery

to be able to do the inference problems, attack the inference problems we want to attack, in addition to being able to learn parameters.

And that's going to be the mathematical foundation for the rest of the book, really.

So that gives us the story of perception so far.

But the story about how action comes in and how actions are selected is a very, very similar story.

We're, quote unquote, just going to be minimizing variation of free energy.

But we're going to see a little bit of a wrinkle

it means to be doing planning and expected free energy but again that's coming later much later actually now in some sense okay so you know chapter five comes next right now that's still part of part one but really i tend to think that chapters one to four is sort of spiritually part one you know so i think part one kind of ends at chapter four in some sense chapter five is kind of a historical

or motivating additional perspective on what chapter 4 is about.

So chapter 5 is about this other thing called predictive coding or predictive processing.

And really, the whole idea is that we can re-express what it is to do variational free energy minimization in chapter 4 in terms of another process called prediction error minimization.

or more precisely, precision weighted prediction error minimization.

This is just a different perspective on what it is to do via theme minimization.

And historically, it sort of comes from a different or slightly adjacent tradition in neuroscience and the Bayesian brain hypothesis, where we're explicitly reasoning about these things called prediction errors.

So it's not really anything new or additional.

It's kind of, as I say, just a different perspective on what it is to be doing via theme minimization.

It's an important one.

It shows up in implementations every now and again.

um and it's it itself has been given um the ability to to do action selection which is very important but it's it's not it's not a constituent like core idea to active inference itself it's really just a different perspective so that is all of part one

Very nice.

I'll just mention before I forget, Andrew has, and where are they, Andrew, your slides?

So I've put together these comprehensive sort of notes and so on, where you've got your, what are the key ideas in the chapter, what's core, what's not, and then I have the same sort of thing for the sections.

But Andrew, you've got your slides, which are even more.

So this is quite detailed, but I like your slides because they compress a lot of information in a very tight way, which is helpful, I think.

Are they in the code?

I always forget where they are.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah yeah no worries um i've kind of pushed daniel to put them somewhere more obvious and he's still not doing it uh so so if you go to figures um okay yeah uh which was just a couple above where you're currently at um so we've moved on yeah yeah so so if you go to figures and then you actually scroll all the way to the bottom like actually after

Um, these, yeah, they're tucked away there.

And then also on the, the initial landing page.

Daniel's put a link to what he calls supplemental materials, and that will just take you directly to the slides as well.

But, yeah, we're going to try to put those somewhere.

Yeah.

Supplemental.

so yeah hopefully we could get those in a more obvious spot and the big thing is that you know they're because they're not complete um you know I think it's fine to just repeatedly share that they're sort of in progress right um but yeah the the the key idea is that uh one not everyone has the textbook and so this is like in addition to the coda this is attempting to

kind of put together a lot of information from the textbook without directly reproducing the textbook and kind of giving trying to reduce some of the redundancy because for those who have been following through the chapters you've actually seen like we even have one-to-one direct repetitions of some of the equations from chapter to chapter because of how tightly they're linked like it is warranted that there's some kind of repetition going on from chapter to chapter

So it's just intended to focus on particular concepts.

Some of the earlier slides will go into even more basic sort of things that we're getting into that even the textbook doesn't touch on.

The textbook kind of assumes that people might be taking more of an engineering direction.

something like an equivalent to undergraduate coursework in statistics or otherwise.

So in some of the earlier slides, I say like, well, what is a continuous distribution?

And what is a probability density function?

And all these other sorts of things that we rely upon.

through the textbook that don't necessarily get spelled out for you, and what are some more intuitive ways of thinking about these sorts of things, especially for those who are not coming from an engineering background but hopefully want to get the most they can out of the book.

And then you get, you know, we talked about how gradient descent itself is such an involved process, and yet it really gets kind of summarized within two pages in the textbook.

So having a slide dedicated to that, you know,

I make some references to the earlier 2022 textbook as well to sort of show some of the continuity between that, which was not focused on engineers, versus this textbook, too.

So, yeah, hopefully it provides any kind of additional value to those who are wanting to get the most out of this textbook, whether they own it or not.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I really appreciate this because we've got at the moment 20 slides here, maybe one or two slides on average per chapter.

If you wanted a first point of contact with the material other than the book, obviously my notes and so on, there's a lot of that.

There's still less in the actual book, but this is quite a nice way to maybe not mistake the forest for the trees.

This is a nice...

synoptic overall kind of feel for what the what the concepts are and where they come from i mean it's a bit hilarious saying that given how dense each slide is you know you've done a very good job andrew of uh i think walking that tightrope but do uh do take a look at andrew's slides they are a nice um initial global view about what we're talking about

And then hopefully you can sort of titrate between there and maybe my notes as to what level of abstraction you want.

And that is specifically, as you say, for people who maybe don't have the book.

Obviously, the book is always, you know, that's the final port of call.

But for those who don't have the book, hopefully you can get the same kind of benefit or at least a similar level of benefit from those who do.

so that is the end of part one we're going to be moving into part two which is explicitly about how we put action into this story and that really is going to be active inference right so chapters

well for the first chapter of part two generalized filtering for perception we're not going to immediately jump into what it means to be doing action we're still going to be within the perceptions of story but it's going to introduce this fundamental algorithm called generalized filtering which we can use to do perception but we can also use to do action okay and then chapter seven is active generalized filtering uh so really and then you know once we do that we can then tell the story about learning again

tension and hierarchical models again okay so we told the story of hidden states or hidden state inference in two we told the story of learning in three and then we told the story of approximations of this in four and hierarchical um approaches in five that same flavor is going to be recapitulated in two again okay but just with the story of action coming in so six seven eight or maybe seven eight nine

these are kind of the core chapters of the book so it's going to be really cool once we get to those i guess i'll open it up for questions for live questions if there are any um please do not hesitate maybe i'll stop sharing just now i'd love to if there aren't any live questions immediately or if people would rather put them in the coda that is certainly advisable um i'm trying to make an effort of going through the coda more um with more frequency than i have before so

Yes, if there are questions, now would be an excellent time.

Carrie, I see your actual hand up.


SPEAKER_01:
My real hand, my real face in real time.

I was really struck by a comment you were making in reference to chapter three and learning in terms of the stubborn agent and the open-minded agent.

And those are my framing of things.

um and it was those three prior likelihood posterior you know um graphs and um because this um this question around um what are we attending to in our environment was sort of alluded to in your description and i i just wanted to maybe

give a little bit more space to talk about it, because I think it's a really interesting element of active inference that I wanna, you know, investigate a little bit

more thoroughly, especially with the idea of the stubborn agent being fixed on that, like what happens when you get stuck in thinking what you already know versus how do you create conditions that someone might be able to take something in

to um to do more broad learning and it sounds like or at least what i was hearing for the first time in a new way um was that it had something to do with that likelihood function where you're more precisely observing certain things um do you know are you still looking for the the graph no i found it i just i wanted to the graph is in chapter two uh i'll actually just name it so it's ticket 2.11 this one here yeah


SPEAKER_02:
yeah so anyway i don't i don't have a specific question i just wanted to to sort of dog ear how cool this is to me nice yeah well i i completely agree and i i spent a little bit of time as as i did in chapter in the the review for chapter two hopping on about why this is a cool thing because we've actually seen in chapter five with predictive coding this story has been told again

And it's been told, we've elaborated the idea, well, we've investigated the idea more precisely about, okay, well, what should I attend to?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Because the whole point of chapter five with the study of prediction errors is there's prediction errors all over the place.

You know, there's prediction errors here, prediction errors there, whatever.

But only some of them are worth paying attention to, typically.

And that's where in that chapter, in chapter five, we motivate this idea of precision weighted prediction errors being the important thing, not just the prediction errors themselves.

So that's a more sophisticated notion about, because I think from your question, what you're gesturing to is there is this question about what we should attend to in some sense.

And there's various ways of attacking that.

At the coarsest level, if we just sort of say, all right, I've got prior beliefs about what I think I'm going to observe, I have a likelihood mapping.

The dance or the interplay between those two things affect how I'm updating my beliefs in terms of precision and such like.

That's one way that's the question about how I'm attending and what I'm attending to affects my belief updates.

but in a in a similar vein it's not quite the same idea but in a similar vein with chapter five we then additionally layer on top this notion that there are certain kinds of prediction errors that are that are worth more than others okay and it's the precise ones that we want to talk about so there's a there's an example i like uh fog don't know if i'll be able to find it in time but

A motivating example is that, you know, let's say you're a car in some sort of foggy environment.

You're perceiving things.

Okay, maybe this is a nice one here.

You can obviously observe, by means of your likelihood model and prior belief, you can update your belief about what you're observing in the fog.

But it would be better to look at clearings in the fog than to just look at anywhere, because those clearings give you very precise information.

So you've got some prior belief about what may be in the fog.

But if you can attend to areas in the fog that are going to give you precise feedback, that's going to be better than attending to areas in the fog that are not going to give you as precise feedback.

So that's where this notion of precision weighting comes in to add to the story about this question of stubbornness of the agent or not.

So Andrew, is there anything you'd like to share on that front?

Because I know you've

you may have some additional context there being a social science guy.


SPEAKER_01:
And before you jump in, Andrew, just real quick, is the likelihood function, what's the point of view of the likelihood function?

Is that likelihood function for the stubborn agent based on the fact he's like, is those two likelihood functions, the same environment perceived differently based on your priors?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, yeah.

So the idea is that you could have exactly the same likelihood.

In this case, we don't.

And where the only difference is the precision of the prior belief, and that would affect the belief update.

OK, so you could hold the likelihoods function, the likelihood mapping equal in both cases and vary the prior precision.

Or you could hold the prior to be the same and vary the likelihood function.

And you could see this same relationship here.

So is that what you're asking in terms of maybe you've got two agents and they have the same likelihood mapping, but they have different prior beliefs?

That's certainly possible.

That's very, very possible.


SPEAKER_04:
This is one of the best figures.

I think this figure is one of the most illustrative in the textbook that we've seen thus far, as much as I appreciate the descending the contours, et cetera, whenever we look at gradient descent and all that.

But I think for building an intuition, yeah.

So with this figure, it's just like the main idea is we have two rows of plots.

They show the same things, but the top row is for one particular agent in a particular situation.

And then the bottom row is for a different agent.

So both of these agents could be in the same environment and even observing the same exact things.

But the one in the top row had a higher precision on its prior, meaning it has a much sharper and potentially more confident view of its own prior beliefs.

Whereas in the bottom row, it's the opposite situation that the agent has a much sharper, more precise belief and confidence in its likelihood.

So what's that mean?

It means that the prior beliefs that you sort of bring to the table

Are are going to be sort of a bias, right?

They're going to be a sort of bias of, like, before I even see any sensory information before I even take any observations into account.

What do I think the hidden state is such as, you know, in this example, it's like the hidden state.

It has to do with food availability where the observations are light intensity.

Right?

So it's likelihood, the likelihood on the other hand, as opposed to the prior, the likelihood is what relates hidden states and observations, right?

So that's sort of the way that you translate

the world and what you observe into your beliefs and vice versa when we invert the model.

What kind of observations should you expect based on your prior beliefs?

So if you have an agent who has very precise priors and a much less precise likelihood, they're going to rely much more on their beliefs that they already bring in advance.

Uh, to to the situation, and this is such an interesting thing as far as, like, cognitive phenomena and thinking about how not just that, like, this sort of micro scale of neurons, but how potentially, you know, entire organisms, including people.

operate whenever someone has such a strong prior belief, it can sort of dominate their ability to interpret the world around them because they're going to down weight the observations that they're actually taking in.

And those, those, those strong, precise priors that they bring to the table.

Yeah.

Are going to to skew how they take things.

And so so.

That relates to your original question regarding, like, what we actually attend to, because if you have very high, these sort of the.

In computational psychiatry, the phrase hyper-precise priors has been brought up.

I think the hyper is just sort of trying to make the point that the prior beliefs are so extreme, sort of exacerbated, that they can lead to all sorts of interesting, potentially unfortunate misinterpretations of sensory information.

So someone who doesn't trust

The observations they receive, so if it has to do with 2 people communicating with 1 another, if you have very, you know, a very strong prior belief that you don't like this other person, or there's something else going on there that that you're really going to rely on your own prior beliefs about this other person you're attending to.

rather than actually listening to what they say, the kinds of things you can actually observe from them, then you're not going to update your beliefs very much about them.

You're going to keep your beliefs centered around the priors that you bring in.

You can think of notions of things like stereotyping and prejudice start to play a role here.

And then also we can think of things like

The reverse situation is where someone has a very precise likelihood and very imprecise priors.

And in that case, you're going to be very reactive to the environment around you.

You're going to be very focused on the observations you bring in, and you're going to be rapidly updating your beliefs, depending on how

much those observations change.

Your prior beliefs can actually add a sense of stability, right?

Like if something weird happens in your environment, you might say, oh, I don't know if I trust that observation I received.

I can rely on my prior beliefs to kind of keep me grounded here.

If you have very

Imprecise priors than that saying that, you know, oh, I, I have no grounding.

I'm hyper reactive to the environment around me in some ways in some of the psychiatric literature that's been related to tentatively some of the sorts of things we see in autism.

Actually, it's a, it's related to, you know, the idea of almost like, hyperactive, sensory, excuse me, hyperactive.

processing of sensory stimuli, such that your prior beliefs that would kind of make you more grounded in the situation.

We're not just purely talking about how someone consciously thinks.

We're also talking about the way that their brain specifically is, you know, kind of interacting with this information, what

that's where the predictive coding comes in, right?

That's where the sorts of things that we're seeing later in these later chapters that we've seen so far, they start grounding us a little bit more and starts relating more to neurobiology.

But yeah, to be so strongly reactive to sensory information in the sense of like having this kind of hyperactive likelihood that dominates your priors, yeah, it can be very disorienting for someone.

It's just being very reactive.

I don't want to overspeak because I'm sure that some of what I've said may or may not have been totally clear, but it's worth reflecting on that figure and the idea of what is it about precision in the priors versus the likelihood, right?

And as we get into later chapters, we'll look at

how we can have precisions on other things too such as decision making you know what happens whenever someone has very imprecise sort of deliberate uh uh well

the technical phrase will be policy inference, but basically what happens when you have low precision on your ability to make decisions.

It would be like someone who is able to come up with decisions they could make, but they might not trust their own ability to follow through on those decisions, right?

So those would be people who have something like low confidence

in their own decision making.

And that's the kind of thing that we might start seeing exhibited in cases of like depression and other kinds of depressive

symptoms, or at least we'll call behaviors, right?

Like someone who's still able to think through, they're still able to observe different things, but they might not be able to have a clearer sense of agency in a situation.

So they have very low precision on their ability to make decisions.

So yeah, we'll find precision sort of all over the place in future.

And it's something very interesting to model for sure, because it has all kinds of repercussions


SPEAKER_00:
uh for for the kinds of varieties of behaviors that we see in people uh in organisms otherwise um yeah yeah no it's it's all pervasive that's for sure um gian cuomo did you have a i hope that's how i pronounce your name did you have a question i saw your hand up before i yeah just very briefly it's it's it's it's i don't want to drive it far from here but again say you have very strong priors so you have very concentrated so your prayers have uh you know you're

are very pointy, you're very, you're, now, this is, is there, what kind of, what kind of architecture do you, so I can imagine an agent who is so very opinionated, who has a, because, you know, I'm generalizing maybe too much, but I'm thinking somebody who has too much, he's been, he's, I think about the human being receiving education, a very rigid education, for example, who, and so in a way he's,

is very front-loaded in terms of his opinions about the set of matters and therefore he assigned high probabilities to a very narrow set of values if you will i'm sorry and now two you know as one grows old over time i'm sorry i hope the metaphor holds uh you you know you can become sometimes wiser because you accumulate knowledge you accumulate experience you have

You know, you build in this sophisticated, layered mental and mnemonic database of other people, other relations, their feelings over time.

You've observed actions and reactions, consequences to actions.

You observed moral conundrums unfold and you become

You know, you actually, you see them and actually, so you're bringing all this in now.

This, what, what, what kind of architecture, how can, how will, how do these active inference models expand to provide, uh, a, let's say a mental temple or a gallery, uh, of say, for example, memory.

So how can the age, because I can see the agent on his own.

He has a likelihood, so he has a certain experience of how a certain observation is tied to a certain theoretical value or a certain value, and then he has an opinion about that value.

And I cannot see an inherent mechanism there for him to say, whoa, wait a moment.

My priors are a little bit too loaded.

I'm a bit too rigid.

I'm a little bit too...

Biased I have to change my priors now this and so where do you in what directions?

what kind of interactions and I guess I get circularity what kind of feedback mechanisms other than I mean this kind of these the kind of Hierarchies that I have to think about the ones that we looked at in predictive coding for example when you have maybe several agents that are working at different speeds and then they

they talk to each other or they question each other and they say hey one agent may observe the others and say hey look there is a you know there is a great majority of my peers that are actually different that have actually different priors why don't i change them to match them for example yeah yeah this so this question came up in the first of the review sessions as well this is a an enormous question and it is actually one of the open


SPEAKER_02:
Well, there's a way in which it's a very trivial question.

And there's a way in which it's a very, very interesting and deep question.

The way that it's a trivial question, I will answer first, which is that yes, at the end of sort of chapter five, we saw this idea of hierarchical predictive coding, where the idea is that each layer is in some sense, minimizing local variational free energy, predictions down and you get updates up, okay.

And what you can then do is you can interpret each layer as having preferences that are in this message passing loop that equilibrate with each other.

So that would be a sort of account of how it is that some local agent-like thing

One layer in this hierarchy can attenuate its preferences over time.

That would be number one.

That's a kind of very simple way of talking about things.

Another way is where you generalize this whole thing.

You want to talk about the agent as a whole interacting with other agents.

So if I go here as as many as one, I know we're coming up to time everyone, but I just want to.

For us.

You might want to tell the story about how interacting agents attenuate their preferences with respect to one another.

So there's very little work on this at the moment that I'm aware of.

But there's this idea of federated inference and belief sharing.

I'm struggling here to

to communicate how it is that this can be done, because it's very, very early days yet.

But this is a question.

And the more general question that I think lurks behind your question is, where do my priors come from?

Where do my prior beliefs come from?

Of course, as engineers,

we're trying to solve a particular problem we're in a very privileged position where we can just say okay well you know i want i want the thermostat to be at a certain temperature this temperature here that's your prior very nice okay but in a lot of problems a lot of situations it's very unclear what the prior should be um and so that question about how it is that we can actually specify priors or how it is that we can recognize when our prior is a bad prior that's a very hard question i tend to think

that it is precisely in these notions of hierarchy, hierarchical predictive coding, and more generally compositional notions about how agents interface with one another, that this question will be best addressed.

So I think if you were interested in that question, it would be useful to really delve more into the history of predictive coding and this idea of hierarchical predictive coding.

So I hope that is somewhat intelligible, or maybe you already understood all of that.

Those are my thoughts, at least.

Do add to the coda as well, these questions.

I think I'll do that because it's very good for other people to see these questions and maybe myself and Andrew and Daniel answering them alongside.

So maybe if there's one more question, we can take that live and then we'll have to sign off.

We're probably going to do another week of review.

OK, so another week of review for part one.

If you do want that, please tell us that you would like that.

If you don't want that, please also tell us it does.

The previous session, the previous group were very much in favor of another week of review.

But it's up to you guys.

It's up to us basically.

So I think as things stand, we're going to next week is going to be yet more review.

Hopefully we can have some more questions and even some additions to the code.

That would be nice.

Andrew.


SPEAKER_04:
As a final point, there was an interesting question asked in the chat regarding what we were talking about with precisions on likelihood and priors.

Does this have any relationship with some of these cognitive phenomena?

I'll be honest, I've not seen these terms used too often.

what are called the halo, horn, and golem effects.

I mean, I've seen many different sorts of terminologies from different areas of psychology, of sociology, etc.

It's interesting how often we see in discussions of prejudices, of cognitive bias, of interpretation bias, we have this

this like sort of plethora of different kinds of terms and terminologies that play out.

But it's interesting from a standpoint of active inference is that we might be able to relate many of these different kinds of phenomena and potentially even integrate them

whenever we're able to have some kind of like common like premises for thinking about these sorts of things, perhaps priors and likelihoods and thinking about things like beliefs as a way to do that.

But it was a really good question.

Yeah.

So the Gollum effect, which was an interesting one.

Yeah.

Yeah.

yeah when we we lower our expectation it's kind of this does get into uh well we've probably already seen this phrase in the textbook um but this idea of self-evidencing um that's something about active inference one of the premises is that we kind of minimize our uncertainty and that's not just active inference it's more the the bayesian brain hypothesis and predictive processing and all the rest more generally we minimize our uncertainty

And so part of how we can minimize our uncertainty is not just to change our minds by learning new things about the world, taking in observations and updating our beliefs.

Another thing which we'll see much more of in part two of the textbook is, well, we can also act on the world, right?

Like if I'm very hungry and I don't want to be hungry, like,

If I just sit here and think like, well, I'm hungry, that must mean I'm going to be hungry all the time.

I'm not going to do anything about it, right?

That's just perception.

That's not engaging in action.

That's not getting up to go find myself some food and then eating it, right?

That's action.

That's decision-making.

That's actually doing something in the world.

So with this like Gollum effect sort of thing of like, oh, or the halo effect or the horn effect, it's that we can take in some amount of information about another person.

And then that impact, so that's likelihood, right?

We're taking in a sensory observation about another person, interpreting it as some belief about that person.

But then from there, once we think we have a pretty good belief about that person, what they're about, or what our beliefs about them are,

we could increase the precision on that.

It's like, well, I didn't have a very strong prior about them because I didn't know anything about them.

But now that I do, I'm going to increase that precision.

Again, I'm saying this colloquially.

I'm not saying that we're consciously thinking I'm going to increase my precision, right?

But it might just be that that's how you approach the world.

That's your model of the world.

once i learn at least some sufficient amount of information about someone i've now established a prior about it and i feel pretty good about it confident about it so there's a high precision on it uh in terms of the math and then um you know that that can overshadow

any future observations you receive from the person like oh this person uh must be very you know i i saw them uh you know do something nice they that i watched them give a donation to to a non-profit or something they must be a very good person they must be you know uh interested in philanthropy and other things right and all these other things that tie into other prior beliefs that you have about other people or about how the world works too they can all get related

But then once that prior belief becomes really, really sharp, then what might happen is you observe something not so good about that person.

Oh, they, I don't know, they drop trash on the ground.

You can see I'm really trying to reach for everyday examples here, but they litter or they, oh, they don't seem like they care too much about their family.

They tend to ignore phone calls, like these other things.

But if you have that very strong prior belief already established that they're a good person, you might ignore

future observations about them, and you might not update your prior beliefs any sooner.

And I think that's what that halo effect is, right?

We receive some minimal amount of information about someone.

They seem really good.

It might even skew our judgment and decision-making towards them where we just assume they're good all the time.

What's really a mathematical way of saying that is that we've

We initially had a likelihood that let us establish a prior belief about this person we just met.

And then after that, our precision on that prior belief is so strong that we're no longer able to update our beliefs about that person going forward quite as much.

And then with the Gollum effect, that's especially interesting one, because, yeah, if you if you witness someone make a mistake on the job once or twice when they're new at it, if you quickly assume if you update your prior belief and say, oh, they must not be good at this job.

And then you change your own decision making towards them where you repeatedly, I don't know, put them in positions to, you know, to you say like, oh, they're always, you know, they're not very good at this job.

They're probably never going to be good at this job, which is a rather extreme thought to have.

But that kind of thing can start to form.

You never let them do things that would help them to improve at the job.

You give them other kinds of tasks instead.

You go and tell other people behind closed doors, oh, we shouldn't have, this person's not very good at those particular tasks, so don't have them do that, right?

You're starting to make decisions that are realizing that belief you have, that they're not so good at the job, right?

And so they never get a chance to improve.

They don't get to keep working on those tasks.

You don't talk to them as if sharing further knowledge or information with them is actually going to be helpful because you just assume that they're going to be bad at it in the first place.

These are all the sorts of things that come out of this sort of like what happens when we have prior beliefs about someone that gets shorn from actually taking in new observations and updating our beliefs about them through a likelihood.

Yeah, they're all super interesting dynamics.

It's worth, I think,

Frazier shared a book by Jacob Howey.

Yeah, really good reading that's a little less on the equation-heavy side and much more on the thinking through these things in a more social way or thinking about humans and how they operate.

So yeah, it's all just really fascinating.

I'm happy to

talk to anyone about these sorts of things as well going forward.

Another really good one is The Experience Machine by Andy Clark.

Andy Clark's very big in this sort of space as well.

So yeah, it's good stuff.

And then for those who are more interested in social phenomena, like how do we apply these things to like where it's getting closer and closer.

And then from my standpoint, some of the work I do, I think of like, well, how do people interact with others in these sorts of ways?

And how does that reflect back on one's own emotional inference?

How does that relate to one's own understanding of the

the world and how does that relate to things like trust?

How does it allow for trusting in one's own self and their own decision making in relation to others?

And then, you know, that's where that happens.


SPEAKER_02:
Where interoception comes in, right?

Where perhaps interoception, because there's this whole kind of story about, you know, we're predicting the environment, but also we're trying to predict ourselves in some way.

So, you know, what am I doing right now?

You know, I'm trivially, where's my heartbeat?

Things like this.

So, you know,


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, absolutely.

Depending on where we draw the line around that, that sort of Markov blanket.

I mean, if you think of it as like, oh, not, you know, think of an infant who's like just born.

Like, not only do they have to navigate what we typically think of as an environment where it's like, OK, we have the ground around them.

We have the room around them.

We have other people around them.

But we also have our own bodies.

We have to learn how to use our bodies.

There's no assumption here that a child understands every single potential joint position they can make with their arm.

There's a lot of experimentation, randomly moving and throwing things and all the rest.

So learning about one's body and reading one's own body, which relates to notions of interoception and proprioception, proprioception being more on the side of motor control.

And I've had a nice conversation some time ago with Carrie about neuroception and perception of things like pain.

So, I mean, all of those things can be viewed as part of a broader set of inference and learning processes.

Yeah, so what happens whenever you interact with someone, but you are interacting

currently experiencing pain or you're experiencing other kinds of things in your body that make it, you know, interacting with others, you know, there are things going on within you that are distracting or have a higher precision on them to where your brain is attending to that more that can range between someone with, you know, some kind of previous trauma or

One of my specialties is sort of post-traumatic stress disorder, especially post-traumatic stress disorder in the sense of experiencing a traumatic event.

So this isn't CPTSD, but later in life, like you have one way of viewing the world and then you have some kind of intense event that strongly changes your view of the world after.

Like how does your generative model of the world, how you operate in it,

How does that change before and after that intense event and what kind of things end up getting modulated and how do we view that in terms of how precisions get modulated?

and all the rest, and how does that relate to things like neurotransmitters, like noradrenaline?

So it starts having implications for both pharmacological treatment, but then also with the things we're talking about and interacting with others for mental health treatment in the more general sense of therapy.

Like, how should we talk to someone?

Should we talk to someone who's been through an intensive trauma and then after that say, oh, no, you're fine?


SPEAKER_02:
everything's going to be safe you just had your mind changed from this like it's much more complex than that right like people being able to exercise there you go i'm gonna say the whole question is very much about okay well you know is the is the problem at the level of the setting of parameters and therefore we just need to tweak some of that and then the inference is going to follow right are the parameters fine and the info you know so there's this issue of the hierarchy

that we need to be mindful of when we're modeling inactive inference.

We can't just say, well, I got a model that's doing inference, and that's it.

There's this whole issue about how you set up the whole hierarchy from learning to inference, or even model construction to learning to inference.

That's the stack that we need to be appreciative of when we're doing the fundamentals.

i just wanted to we are we are basically at time um for those who wanted to ask questions but didn't uh get the chance please do put them in the coda andrew and myself and daniel are going to be very attentive to that i'm hopefully going to put together uh well danger daniel and myself are going to be more active with respect to the code implementations and some of the animations and things like that so next week i believe we'll come back and we'll do another round of review hopefully maybe with some

specific reference to particular examples, maybe in the code, where we can really sort of get our hands dirty, maybe just show how some of these things work and things like that.

So that's the plan going forward.

If you guys want to change it, it's up to us.

We can do what we want.

But thank you very much for everyone here.

So I'll stop the YouTube recording now.

All right.

Goodbye, YouTube people.
