SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference live stream.

This is Active Inference live stream 7.2.

It is November 3rd, 2020.

Welcome to Team Calm everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active, at email, our public Keybase team, or on YouTube.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And also for video etiquette on live stream, remember to mute if it's noisy, raise your hands so we can hear from everyone in the stack and use respectful speech.

Today in ACT-InfStream 7.2, we are going to go through our introductions and have some warm-up questions, and then we'll get into the discussion of 7.2.

We'll talk about the paper Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems, Ramstad et al., 2019.

And we'll go over the goals and the abstract and the roadmap.

Then we'll talk about some big ideas and questions in ecology.

And then we'll go through the figures.

I remember last time we mentioned figure six, and so we've gone the figures in reverse order.

So we'll start with six and we'll just go down from there.

And also for the rest of 2020, we will be discussing papers eight, nine, 10 and 11, which we'll go through in a second.

And just check out our Twitter or message us if you have any questions.

So what are papers eight, nine, 10 and 11 and the dates?

Paper 8, Scaling Active Inference, on November 10th and 17th.

All discussions are at 7.30 to 9 PST, Pacific Standard Time, in the morning.

Paper 9 is Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood.

Paper 10 is a Variational Approach to Scripts.

And Paper 11 is Sophisticated Active Inference, which, as we were just talking about before the stream, will also have some cool accessory content.

Let's go to our intros and warmups.

So for this part, just introduce yourself and your location.

You can say hello and give a short introduction and then pass to someone who hasn't spoken yet.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm in Davis, California, and I'll pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi guys.

I'm Shannon.

I'm usually in Merced, California, but I'm in South Dakota for the pandemic and I'm going to pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, everyone.

My name is Ivan.

I'm from Moscow, Russia.

And I pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Sasha, and I'm in California.

And I'll pass it to Markus.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Markus.

I am in Linköping, which is a small town in Sweden a couple of hours outside of Stockholm.

um and i'll give a brief introduction to myself because i'm new here so um my i did my phd in medical imaging and my research is mainly focusing on cardiovascular mri so quite different from fap and active inference which has become sort of a hobby for me the last couple of years

And I find these live streams very good to explain these concepts.

And I'm looking forward to the discussion today.

So I'm going to pass over to Cameron.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, I'm Cameron.

I'm in Zurich.

I was here for the first time last week.

I just started a PhD in philosophy in Zurich.

And I pass it on to Alex.


SPEAKER_07:
Hello, everyone.

I'm Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia.

I'm a researcher in System Management School, and I pass it to Maxwell.


SPEAKER_08:
You will use it, Maxwell.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, thank you.

Hello, everyone.

My name is Maxwell Ramstad.

I'm a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University, and I'm zooming in from just outside Montreal in the suburbs.

And I'm a first author on this paper, so very excited to discuss it with you.

Has everyone spoken yet?

I lost track.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, great.

Thanks for all the introductions.

Let's go to the warm-up questions, and here it'd be cool to hear from everyone, and you can just answer as narrowly or as broadly as you like, and go ahead and raise your hand if you'd like to speak here.

The first question is, what is your niche, or what could it be?

So I'll just start with my local niche right now.

I'm looking at the video screens.

I'm trying to balance getting the information from people's face versus the slides.

What's another person's just niche right now around them?

Or a related question is.

what skills help us find affordances in a changing world?

So our niche definitely presents us with uncertainty, multiple scales, perhaps, of uncertainty.

What's behind me in the door?

What happens in the deep future?

So how do we find affordances or how do organisms find affordances in that kind of a context?


SPEAKER_03:
I liked your mention of your niche as the computer screen and looking at people's faces.

I feel like for every different...

communication program, like if it's Zoom or Jitsi, we can organize our digital environment in different ways.

So we can like see different people's faces or see different aspects of the screen to allow for as much nonverbal communication as we want or need to make that particular communication effective.


SPEAKER_06:
Cameron?

For the first question,

Going back to a niche I constructed for myself about a year ago when I was coaching tennis, would often work in the late afternoon to late in the evening.

And I noticed how my diet changed to make sure I had high enough sugar level so that I could give really energetic lessons to the kids in the late afternoon, and then sort of tone it down in terms of an energy level for the adults, and then have a massive kind of slump as soon as I got home so I could sleep properly for the next kind of round of coaching.

So I noticed how my kind of diet set up my energy levels just

for that kind of lifestyle.

And as soon as I stopped coaching tennis, it was away with the biscuits and chocolate.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, that kind of just reminds me of like looking forward to dinner.

You're not exactly sure what it's going to be, but it's going to be a physiological thing.

It's going to reduce your uncertainty about food.

Anyways, what is one thing that you are curious about or you want to explore in today's discussion?

So that could be something that you wanted to figure out from the paper or something that the paper kind of resonated with you or just something from the side from the rest of your life that came into context today.

when thinking about this paper so i'll start one thing that kind of motivated me in the slides was just exploring how the variational ecology is linked to big questions in so-called i guess traditional ecology non

fep non-active inference ecology how do we make that connection because if that connection can be made then the expansion of the theory from just a few equations to something that's in use in a lot of applied situations would be a lot more easy

Any other random thoughts or that's totally chill.

We can just go onto the paper and people can raise their thoughts as they see fit.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I'd be, I'd be curious to hear, uh, like everyone else on this, like, what did you hope to get from this?

Uh, cause as the author, I can respond to some of these questions.


SPEAKER_00:
So let's go Cameron and then Shannon muted.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_06:
At the very end, Maxwell, you write about shared intentionality and I wondered how you think about the debate between shared intentionality and theories of mind and that kind of very mentalistic idea of interactions.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I had that sort of same topic of shared intentionality.

I was also wondering in our

universities like seminar yesterday we were talking about collective memory and I wonder whether this like variational ecology can tell us anything about what we choose to remember or what we end up remembering as a culture or as a society about our culture's past it might not it might be that might be a little abstract for what we're talking about currently but

since it's not necessarily behavior or it's a behavior that we have to verbalize and speak out loud.


SPEAKER_07:
Those are great questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, I agree.

On the part about remembering, it's like there's this multi-level remembering process.

How much data do we retain from yesterday, from two seconds ago, from 200 years ago, from 2 million years ago?

And then there's always different perspectives on just the...

facts or the events of whatever did or didn't occur and all this narrative weaving that occurs.

So how we model and remodel, how we update our models of those multi-scale memory processes, some of them are extended, some are internal, that's everything.

So I think it's really interesting question.

I hope we'll return to that.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's a kind of great point to link it all together that

individuals that are interacting can spur more, I guess, memories or common experiences by revealing more or less about their current niche.

And so, yeah, just really thinking about how individuals should or should not interact when trying to build common ground and how much of their niche they should be sharing in that communication.

A lot of fun things with that in the virtual space that we can reveal to each other.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I think that hopefully sets the stage to talk about some of the specifics of the paper and also big ideas in ecology and also things that are happening all around us.

So the paper is Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems from 2019.

And we reviewed the goal of the paper last week, but the shorthand kind of equation form is that variational neuroethology, VNE, which is about organisms and their neurobiology,

primarily can be kind of jointed together with vanc the variational approach to niche construction and then that summation that continuation of explanation from kind of the neurobiology into the extended niche is called variational ecology and then the non

Active inference phrasing would be something like how do you make a multi scale ecology framework that builds on ecology evolution and development and also adds in insight from physics mathematics and complexity.

We also talked about the roadmap last week and sort of formulaic in that it introduces the two separate ideas in section two and three and then add them together.

to result in a synthesis framework represented here and with a connector added between the active orange connector to the purple.

So to kind of just start the discussion, I wanted to begin with some big questions in ecology and

Some other people may have done ecology in a specific formal or informal way, but there's so much to it.

And it's just interesting to connect it to the questions that motivated that field before this kind of synthesis of even ecology, evolution and development, which is its own pyramid of

you know ideas that connected and people who bridged evolution and ecology and all these kinds of things so let's just look at the big questions in ecology and think about the context that this synthesis is happening in and then think about all the cases where ecology is applied so conservation and policy planning and stuff and then think about how a mapping between fep and active inference broadly and ecology could allow for a lot of translational and applied use

So here's one kind of interesting historical coincidence.

It's a 1983 paper by Richard Lewontin called The Organism as the Subject and Object of Evolution.

So this is kind of before the whole physics in biology approach was becoming mainstreamed, but he was coming from a very integrationist perspective.

And he wrote,

Before Darwin, theories of historical change were all transformational.

That is, systems were seen as undergoing change in time because each element in the system underwent an individual transformation during its life history.

So like the muscle cells became different or something.

Lamarck's theory of evolution was transformational in regarding species as changing because each individual organism underwent the same change.

Through inner will and striving, an organism would change its nature and that change would be transmitted to offspring.

So that's what people often call Lamarckian evolution.

Now here's where the historical coincidence is.

In contrast, Darwin proposed a variational principle.

Now it turns out that this is a different variational principle than the variational principle from physics that we're going to be discussing.

But I thought it was really interesting that Lewontin and Darwin used the same idea.

And so what's the idea?

Individual members of the ensemble differ from each other in some properties and that the system evolves by changes in the proportion of different types.

There's a sorting out process, dot dot dot, and so variation among objects is transformed into temporal variation.

A dynamic process arises in time as the consequence of static variation in space.

There's no historical process other than the evolution of living organisms that has this variational form at least as far as we know.

So that's actually going a long ways towards this sort of what is Schrodinger's question about what is life?

Just an interesting way that variational has interwoven from the history of biology from Darwin, from Lewontin, and now finding itself with a formal definition, ironically, with the same name related to variational principles.

So anyways, sorry for the little bit of a...

uh history size let's get to the ecology questions and if anyone has thoughts on that previous link they can kind of address it here

These are some questions drawn from a 1999 paper by Sir Robert May called Unanswered Questions in Ecology.

So we can figure that they're probably still unanswered.

But let's just look at some of these and if anyone wants to reflect on it, how do they see it playing out or how do they think or wonder that active inference could play into it?

I'll put up the first two.

what determines population density and what determines the spatial structure of population these are actually like the first two that may brings up so what what could an answer to this look like uh or where do you think the fep and ecology could intersect here

I'll just list them all.

Also, how can we study stability and complexity in ecological communities?

And what is the proper scale of analysis for ecological studies in space and time?

So what might be an approach or what might be a mapping that we could draw here?

one thought is the proper scale of analysis for ecological studies is kind of related to our discussion about what time scales ergodic systems or the ergodic hypothesis exists at because there might be some time scales or spatial scales that don't make sense to study like if you're studying the lion hunting the gazelle the centimeter squared time scale or spatial scale in the one second might not capture some important dynamics of the system but then if you study it at too broad a level it might be

not able to be studied for another way, just happening too fast underlying.

So just one thought there.

Anyone want to, yeah, Shannon, go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So I don't study ecology, but I know we've learned some about like predator prey models.

So population density is determined by, you know, the amount of resources in the environment and that's the prey's,

depleted then the predators depleted because they don't have enough food so the prey can come back and you have this structure over time and the same kind of thing happens even with with trees and these beetles that eat trees so you'll see like forests even over a much longer time scale having um like trees that die out and then they grow back eventually and the beetle population will also follow that predator prey structure and die out and come back


SPEAKER_00:
yes so there's these rhythms and some slower ones some are across species some are within a species

They're all related to measurements, so at the very least, we're going to be able to use different mathematical frameworks to analyze our measurement, just like we use different statistical tests.

But the deeper question is whether the FEP or whether the active inference framework describes what these ecological communities are doing or what is actually occurring versus to what extent it's a really convenient model fitting approach.

All right, the second, next slide.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, go ahead.

What would the difference in implication be?

I mean, I think the proper philosophy of science attitude to have with regards to any scientific model whatsoever is that truth has nothing to do with what science is doing.

I mean, this might be slightly controversial, but I think science has to do with model comparison effectively.

I mean, all of science has moved into this kind of,

kind of game, I think, where what we're doing is, so first of all, data is never presented in a naked way, right?

So, you know, your neuroimaging data, for example, will be organized as a kind of a heat map of the brain, for example, like data is always presented as a model of data.

And basically what we're doing is,

confronting different theoretical and formal models to find which explains away the variance in our data the best.

So from that point of view, we needn't read the free energy principle as making any literal claim about anything, just the same way that any other scientific model is just going to be kind of a, it's a useful description

So I'm putting on my Mel Andrews hat today and being an anti-realist.

Or, I mean, a non-realist, right?

Like, it's just...

It's not like Newton's laws became false after they were shown to be a special case of relativistic dynamics.

These are just successively better models that successively and iteratively explain away the variance in our data better.

But I don't know if it's appropriate to ask the question, are these merely models or actually the way that the world works?


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, from what- I mean, that's the quote, right?

All models are wrong, but some are useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

Yep.

And then the what is useful must always be unpacked to whom and who else is influenced by it.

And then what is their value structure and all these types of second order effects.

And I agree that if nothing else, it's a useful multi-scale framework, just like a multi-level regressor model or the Gaussian distribution.

I mean, linear modeling is used for some computational benefits.

So

yeah it's unfortunate when it does constrain the uh phenotypic distributions in the world but perhaps with flexible tools we could actually accommodate for very very high dimensional preference systems or things like that rather than using like a excel spreadsheet that takes an average and then aggregates that into the next level of the aggregator so how could we go and look at variation across multiple levels of the system and yeah good interesting things there

Let's look at a few more just classic ecology questions before we go to the figures.

So this is from a 2013 paper in Journal of Ecology called Identification of 100 Fundamental Ecological Questions.

So those are just the little small ones.

I'm just going to list all 20 of them that I just grabbed the first 20.

Um, so people can, can, uh, think just, you know, pick a random number, spin something, roll, roll three die, whatever it is.

But these were just the questions that this large set of authors basically, uh,

used some polling and discussion methodology to converge on these 100 questions and so they definitely thought about which ones to put at the beginning and they definitely thought about which ones to include so i just think these are kind of what ecologists broadly may find to be some of the biggest questions so that means that if somebody can make a connection where something that was previously modeled in an incomplete or in a really heterogeneous framework

If there's a way to model it in a more unified way, then that's something that addresses a fundamental question in ecology.

And so that's one of the ways that we can apply theory and then think about what are the downstream applications, like look at their number one question.

What are the evolutionary consequences of species becoming less connected through fragmentation or more connected through globalization?

So that's roads being built that break migration corridors.

That's also barnacles being brought around by global fishing fleets.

And so different species and different ecosystems are connected in new ways.

Their Markov blankets, their ergodic levels of analysis, these are all changing.

And so how is that going to shape phenotypic and behavioral and genetic diversity?

That's conservation ecology.

So if that can be re-understood or mapped into active inference framework,

it's again at the very least a super useful way to think about multi-scale systems because it includes that bottom up and top down element which a lot of these questions implicitly include but often through very constrained ways like specific types of partial differential equations or specific types of simulations that aren't really grounded in this type of methodology

and then um yeah i just think that's kind of an interesting thing so i thought it was wise worth taking the time to at least look through some of these and anyone can raise their hand if they want to jump in on one of these one through 20 but like it's just useful to think about these because these are the questions that people want to see answered in ecology shannon i mean number five is exactly what we're addressing if we're asking what can multi-scale uh free energy tell us about


SPEAKER_03:
these different levels of selection and also different levels of behavior or different levels of insert phenomena you're interested in here.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, what are the relative contributions of different levels of selection, gene, individual group, the life history evolution, and the resulting population dynamics?

Yep, definitely something that's super interesting to think about and does a variational principle that links these levels of analysis.

Like if you have a multi-level regression model,

You don't say that one level has causal priority over the other level.

It's just a different way that variance was partitioned.

And that reminds me of Evelyn Fox Keller's metaphor of the two people who are pumping water together.

And that's the nature and nurture so-called.

And that's how you can really do a partitioning of labor only for certain tasks, but not for kind of shared tasks like her water pumping example.

so maybe the partitioning is a statistical post hoc and some traits will partition highly onto heritability or some traits partition highly onto some other uh unidimensional axes but then in a fuller variational framework we would have a more nuanced way to talk about how those parts are related

Yep, and then another question that is definitely related to the whole area is 16.

How do organisms make movement decisions in relation to dispersal, migration, foraging, or mate search?

So definitely a lot of work on everything from the ocular motor epistemic foraging, the movement of the eyes towards informative areas of the visual space to focus on, to search behavior, and that could be in an abstract computational space,

So many of the optimization algorithms we know are named after animals because they're kind of bio-inspired.

Ant colony optimization, cuckoo search, all these kinds of things are related to ecologically observed strategies.

So maybe if we had a way to frame those different strategies in nature, we could do bio-discovery and then we could implement a lot of cool ways to who knows what, you know, optimize things, make swarms of robots that are useful, who knows what could happen.


SPEAKER_02:
Number 11, also, what are the evolutionary and ecological mechanisms that govern species range margins?

That reminds me of this concept in ecology of the fundamental versus realized niche.

And so I think that has a lot of nice parallels to kind of how humans behave, but also thinking about cognition and how we

choose to think about the world and what sort of niches that model is tailored to.


SPEAKER_00:
What is the fundamental versus the realized niche?


SPEAKER_02:
Full disclosure, I also do not study ecology, but I'm teaching an intro to bio class to freshmen.

And so I'm learning about this as I go as well.

It's kind of fun.

But the fundamental is the...

environment, the combination of abiotic factors that allow an organism to survive.

So anywhere where you could live.

And then the realized niche is where you actually do live based on your interactions with other species and other biotic factors that influence your niche.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you know if this overlaps with Carola Stotz's concepts of the developmental versus the selective niche?

So Stotz basically argues that effectively you can think of the niche as the set of selection pressures to which organisms are subject but also as the set of reliably inherited resources that are necessary for the reconstitution of the life cycle in every generation and that in ideally they coincide but they don't necessarily so that you know your developmental niche

ideally prepares you for the pressures that you'll be undergoing in your selective niche.

But for various evolutionary reasons or other, you might be tuned to the wrong environment, for example, and then die off.

But it does seem to overlap with the distinction that you're mentioning here.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow, very interesting.

And the changes in different things can lead to the...

with a realized niche where things actually exist, if the population hits a critical point, then it can just extinct locally or even regionally.

And that's like a non-recoverable state.

And so it can change in a very, like the niche can be modified rapidly.

And so that definitely relates to it.

Let's actually do one more slide on niche and affordances.

And then this is before we just get to the figure.

So if anyone has any more like general thoughts, now we're bridging the gap.

We're seeing how the regular ecology brings over to this new way of thinking about it.

So niche and affordance are linked.

And that's kind of cool that we just were talking about that because there's the niche example here is the different birds.

So Flamingo is digging the deepest into the dirt or under the water to get food.

The birds on the right are going more shallowly.

And so their beaks are different.

Their behavior is different.

Everything is different about their behavior.

biology and they may or may not be able to have a general versus specialty like maybe the flamingo can also get the shallow but not vice versa something like that so that's a sort of physical niche concept but our niche includes objects includes other people and trees and bike paths and digital experiences as well so

what happens now that technology is part of the human informational and ecological niche maybe bringing in what was just being discussed about the fundamental and the realized as well as the selective and the developmental niche concept so how could active inference be used to to understand and model and design in these situations

So I guess start there is for politics or for information systems, especially with digital, there is certainly a vast number of degrees of freedom in the design.

And the realized info niche that we're in is just like literally whichever one we're in, however it ends up, whoever's behind the scenes doing whatever, that's the realized one we're gonna get.

But what is the fundamental info niche?

What is the actual bigger habitable space

And which parts of that habitable space might have some features or some benefits that we don't realize through our current existence in that realization.


SPEAKER_01:
Conceptually, I would want to distinguish between the physical environment and the niche.

So the way that we're defining it, at least the niche is the set of affordances to which organisms are sensitive.

So that doesn't overlap exactly with the physical environment.

So, I mean, two species can share the same physical environment but not occupy the same niche because they're not sensitive to the same things.

So, you know, like something may be like a prey item for one and just be like, you know, part of the background for another species.

So I think that's how you get around that.

I was confronted by Kim Sterling when we gave a talk in Australia, I think in 2017 or 18 about this.

And I think this helps to dissolve that issue.

There isn't like one ecological niche.

There's one physical environment that we all share.

And then relative to essentially the skills and the concerns that we embody, the world will appear very differently.

And so we live in different niches, even if the physical environment overlaps.

Okay, Ivan?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thank you.

If we return that now we share one virtual niche,

We do it by our brain work.

And before the internet, we can speech with each other just physically present near or by telephone.

But now we can do it.

We can choose what type of communication.

We can choose a type of communication.


SPEAKER_00:
we construct different ways to create niches itself yes thanks for sharing that and and it's uh i i hear you maxwell on the niche concept definitely an idea that ecologists have debated over as much as um

species but the idea of the shared informational resource let's go with that certainly there are things that are becoming knowledge resources that are not only non-evenly shared across the globe but also are related to new kinds of informational connections that haven't occurred in any individual sensory niche

hearing languages that one wouldn't have heard access to perspectives and the high throughput nature of media.

So these are all things that I think change our match or mismatch or our fitness between our evolutionary priors on biofeedback or on safety or on the veracity of language.

These kinds of things are being connected and being played out in new ways.

so i would think how can active inference be used to understand and design these situations well we can define the remote team and we can also think of it as almost a reduced case and an unknown mismatch case with our own like quote natural ecology but first our ecology is so flexible and humans have displayed so many lifestyles that this is really one of many there's no reference wild type that's one thing

And then the second thing is when you take an animal into a laboratory, you know that it's not going to be getting the same microbiome or the sun or the temperature variability or the prey or the predator or whatever it is, but you forego that degree of freedom and naturalism for an element of controllability.

And so in ecology, they do a lot of mesoscale experiments

Well, they'll set up like 200 fish tanks and add exactly three salmon and exactly 11 algae and set up these tanks.

And they can demonstrate things like dynamic oscillatory systems or like an instability point with the ratios of different initial conditions of two different species or the role of different nutrients.

And then the critique, just like it is with animal behavior in the laboratory, is like, well, that's not exactly the natural ecosystem.

And so it's just an interesting topic how in ecology there's this continuum from super long scale systems like cosmology that you're never going to be able to intervene in or make experiments about like tectonic plate level understandings of biodiversity ranging to very local understandings that are often very controlled.

But then those are often subject to the same kinds of holistic criticisms that so many other frameworks are.

And so to turn again to active inference, there's a way to build positively on this and just think, great, there's this mismatch between levels, or at least apparently, why don't we kind of think from the top down and set out a really big scaffold for multi-level systems, and then we'll figure out how to map different levels and scales of analysis within this.

Just like people learned how to use multi-level regression, this is going to be like a variational tool at that kind of category or of that kind of type.

All right.

Figure six.

So here, Maxwell, on figure six, I'll let you take a first pass.

But the next slide, if you just you let me know if you want the box to come up.

But let's just focus on this image and maybe start off just like what does it convey or what is it there for?

But go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, just let me pull up the figure myself.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

It's called a particular partition.

It's a pun.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

As a pun.

Yeah, just to explain the pun.


SPEAKER_01:
I know, I just want it in front of me while I explain.

Well, so basically this figure explains how...

Um, you add, I mean, I, I would, I would prefer to explain things in terms of the figure, figure three, um, cause this is the slightly more technically complicated version of the figure three.

Like it, it.

Figure six basically tells you how you effectively take a bunch of states and add them to the superordinate scale.

But I think it's slightly easier to explain using figure three.

So what we basically do is we're going to take a bunch of states that comprise our system and then partition those states into Markov blankets.

And then from there,

reconstruct the system at the superordinate scale on the basis of these Markov blankets.

So basically in new work, especially in the particular physics monograph, we speak of this in terms of two operators that we use, G and R.

G is a grouping operator effectively and it allows us to construct Markov blankets from the base states That we're considering and then our takes these Markov blankets and then reduces their dimensionality So, I mean effectively we're going to be dropping some of the states to construct the states at the scale above so we start with a bunch of states and

And these are all the states that are of interest to us in the system.

So these can be literally any states whatsoever.

These techniques have been used recently to partition fMRI data.

So when you're dealing with fMRI data, each state is a voxel, so a 3D pixel effectively.

And so what we do from there

is you have all of your states and you have this continuous time series data typically and um so what you do is you construct an adjacency matrix um so an adjacency matrix is essentially you're plotting all of your states by all of your states such as the diagonal is basically like you know your degree of self coupling and what you do is you populate this matrix with uh coefficients that express how tightly uh this state and that state are coupled

And then so from this adjacency matrix, what you do is you take the Jacobian and the Hessian of these adjacency matrices.

So the Jacobian and the Hessian are basically the same matrix, but rather than having the coupling coefficient in each entry, what you have is the partial derivatives.

of each entry.

So effectively this is a very technical and complicated way of saying what we're looking at is the relative rates of change of every variable with respect to every other variable.

The reason we're doing this is that a zero in these matrices that contain the partial derivatives means that effectively there is no relative change, meaning that you can vary one of the variables and the other one doesn't change.

So this is a way of testing for conditional independence.

is the short story.

So basically, using these mathematical techniques, what you do is you read off the conditional independencies from this coupling matrix, this adjacency matrix.

And from there, you're able to rebuild the – well, you're able to construct Markov blankets in terms of the states that are independent of each other, conditioned on other states.

I mean, to recap, we started with a bunch of states that just compose the system that we're interested in explaining at one scale.

We put these states through a grouping operator that chunks it into Markov blanketed particles based on the conditional dependencies.

And so this takes us from the bottom of the figure to the top left.

So what we're left with after applying the grouping operator is a bunch of Markov blankets effectively.

Markov blanketed particles So then in order to get to the next scale what we do is we reduce the dimensionality of this partitioned set of states So effectively what we're doing is we're dropping the internal states and the fast stable modes of interaction

every scale in order to construct the states at the level above and this gets us basically from the It's the it's the other half of the image basically moving from these these partitioned states

back to a new set of states at the superordinate scale.

So conceptually what we're saying is that states at a superordinate scale are literally constituted by the slow metastable modes of interaction between states at the level below.

So just conceptually this means that you take say an organ like the heart, well the heart itself is constituted by the slower modes of interaction among heart cells.

So, for example, the main compartments of the heart, for example, are literally constituted by the modes of interaction between the cells that are components of those compartments.

Yeah, so then the reduction operator, we're dropping the internal states because they're effective.

All of the information that you need to know about the internal states is already summarized in the blanket.

So you drop the internal states and you drop the fast stable modes of oscillation and that gets you from the partitioned system back to a set of states at the next scale.

So hopefully that explains what's going on.

But again, that might sound very technical, but the idea, I think, is pretty simple.

And it's just that we're constructing superordinate layers of the system from the slow modes of interaction of components at the subordinate scale.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice explanation, Maxwell.

Really, thanks a lot for that.

Pleasure.

Yeah, super helpful.

So let's go over that because I think it's really critical.

And I think for some people, it's like, wait, weren't they just talking about ecology?

So what just happened there?

How did we go from the big questions in ecology to this grouping operator loop that was just described?

And so the main pivot, I think, has to do with multi-scale systems and how we're going to be modeling across different scales.

And so what the question is, again, thinking about understanding and modeling these dynamics of multi-scale systems.

And there's an unprincipled way, and this is a principled, not the only principled way, but a principled way to do this multi-scale integration.

So an unprincipled way would be, for example, you use method A to go from the fast dynamics to the next level.

So you have a heart cell simulator, proprietary program, heart cell sim four.

And then you make just another software pipeline that connects the outcome of that simulation to a model of the whole heart physiology.

And then you kind of run the results from these two different models back and forth.

So maybe it works, maybe it's functional.

So no one's saying it isn't.

It's just that the way that those two pieces were joined together was a bit a priori.

It was a little bit just chosen.

And it would be better if there was a way that we could, for example, take measurements across levels and use information that they provide to constitute our better understanding of the whole system.

So not just throw away the model that went, information that doesn't fit into each little bottleneck of information, but how can we have this full

variational in the um like constituting variance across multiple time scale as well as variational from that physics side which brings along all these really positive benefits related to computability attractability and relationship with bayesian statistics and 40 factor graphs and all these kind of cool areas it ends on bridging so if there's a hinge with multi-scale systems having a useful description then we're in the category of the physics models like spin graphs and game of life

and then also at higher levels, at the very least the tools for dealing with the kinds of things that those kinds of simulations like the Game of Life were invented to describe.

So that's sort of the main key point.

And so this is what Maxwell has run through and represented here.

is describing just like you could use model selection techniques to figure out which multi-level statistical regression model or which multiple ANOVA was the most appropriate or whether to include an interaction term or not, or a multi-scale model from a Bayesian framework, whichever modeling framework you're working within, hopefully there's a principled way to go about doing model selection and doing model comparison.


SPEAKER_01:
If I can just interject, Carl Friston calls this the particular partition.

There's a play on words here.

There's a double entendre.

By particular partition, he means partitioning the system into particles, which are the internal states of a system plus the Markov blanket.

But he also means it's a particular partition, as in there are other ways of doing this.

There's not necessarily one unique partition.

way of cutting things up.

And so the partition itself is named to reflect that fact.

I thought it was kind of fun to bring up.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Now, let me connect that point right there about one particular choice relating to dimensional reduction techniques and where degrees of freedom come into play for the experimenter.

so in real data sets you can do techniques like principal component analysis and you can do things like linear discriminant analysis which looks basically for group separation as an additive combination of principal components so it tries to explain the most variation with these orthogonal axes through the data that's principal components analysis now there's some data sets where the first principal component explains 80 and the next one explains five percent of the variance and has a long tail

Now, whether you need the first principal component and you're just going to take only the first one, or whether you take 99% of the variance being explained by 500 principal components where the explainability of principal component 74 on your Netflix consumption doesn't really map to like a real world understandable trait.

It still could reduce your uncertainty about a machine learning model, but it doesn't like map onto something that's actual about the group anymore and maybe misaligned with all these other things.

Those kinds of analyses are always up to the experimenter.

to decide how many dimensions they want to reduce to.

Do you want to reduce down to a two-dimensional space just upon the data points in the principal component one, principal component two, just remap onto the two dimensions that explain the most variance linearly?

Or do you want to map into a 500-dimension space?

That's where a lot of the freedom comes into play.

So just like there's a particular principal component analysis is presented in a paper, but principal component analysis is a general technique,

a particular system will have a particular decomposition statistically in this way, and that will also reflect degrees of experimental freedom in modeling it and in the statistics.

But the framework, just like the ANOVA framework, goes a little bit beyond and isn't necessarily about any specific system.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, one thing to point out is that there's a kind of recursivity at play where, I mean,

what you can actually see what is the best way to partition the system just kind of recursively in that

Like what you can do is take your system and then write alternative generative models of how you think the system is actually behaving.

And then you can use free energy as a metric to see which out of these alternative models of the system structure is the one that best explains its behavior.

So there's a meta Bayesian kind of aspect to this where like we're not only just like modeling

the system as if it were an active inference agent, but we can use generative models to assess which out of the possible ways of cutting up the states, of carving up the system, is the most appropriate.

And again, it's using the same metrics, so model evidence.

It's always model evidence.

I had a call with Carl yesterday, and he was saying, well, you know, whatever the question, the answer is always multiple evidence.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me connect that to one more niche idea.

So we talked about the skilled intentionality framework and how that's like part of the niche is the affordances.

And that can reflect a lot of aspects that are learned or that are cultural.

But the niche can also include Mercury.

that's influencing you and you can't taste it or detect it, but it's changing your phenotype or something like that.

So again, maybe some niche concepts are more affordance oriented, like the ecological psychology niche is more oriented towards action, unsurprisingly.

However, for many ecologists, when you talk about the niche, that means like how much light is hitting the ground, what temperature is it at night?

So that is also reflected by the realized versus the fundamental niche, because especially when you're talking about those abiotic factors,

you're sometimes talking about, oh yeah, rocks that you can knock over.

But a lot of times, again, people will just think of rocks as being in the physical niche.

So things can influence and not be reflected by sensory states.

And then all we have is the model.

So you have the model of decision-making.

It doesn't know that it's being slowly influenced

drifting off into a non-adaptive state space because of the cup that has led into it.

All it is experiencing slash reducing its uncertainty is about is its generative model of its niche.

And that's more on the ecological psychology side.

And that can even be extended to like a molecular level, like chemicals that can't be tasted.

They can still influence you.

So it's not only about how the action is enabled in the world, but that is the primacy when you're coming from an organism or a system of interest perspective.

And that's where you make this initial, like, what are the measurements to make?

Like Maxwell started off with, you start with states.

Those are measurements.

You could say, we could measure this.

We could measure this thing over here.

We could do it over here.

But you got to start with at least the idea that measurements are going to be made, or at least that there are certain distributions or types of measurements that could be made.

One other thing was the grouping operator that you mentioned that kind of reminded me of click detection of conditional independencies.

And so the other way of saying that is click detection of the conditional dependencies, because in order to find out which ones are zeros, you got to find out which ones are non-zero.

And then when you think about there's this representation ability to transform between the matrix and the network, like through the adjacency matrix or more advanced related matrices, then you can do click detection on a matrix.

So matrix is going to be able to make a network that has the exact same data in it, whether it's just one zero, like edges or not edges, or whether it's a weighted edge or a different type of edge.

there's such an equivalence between matrices and networks that click detection on a social network or something like that is going to be also detectable on the matrix form.

So that's something to keep in mind when we're talking about like a matrix coming in here, but then there's like maybe a network of interactions coming out another side.

Okay, any thoughts or questions?

That was definitely worth explaining.

Maybe we could now return to six, or we could also go to four.

There's a few questions from previous discussions.


SPEAKER_01:
I really wouldn't necessarily go to six, honestly.

It's like the most technical slide in our papers.

Sounds good.

So, I mean, unless the really nitty-gritty –

Gritty, gritty, gritty detail is of interest.

I would suggest that we not.

And I think figure three captures everything conceptually.

The figure six really just tells you how you add states to every particular thing.

So it's just running through the same thing, but like, okay, we're taking this state and now what do we do with it?

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll do 7.3 late night maybe if we need to.

But for now, I think let's just return to figure four.

which we've actually seen in previous weeks.

And I just wrote down a few questions.

One was, I believe, Alejandro's question from several weeks ago about what are some differences between simulating systems, like those that can at least apparently engage in deep counterfactuals, and morphological systems.

And so the question arose like, okay, but is the cell really doing a counterfactual analysis of alternate cell shapes?

It could be.

in a way that the brain may be doing some type of modeling of what behavioral states could be and then so that's the previous question that we're definitely going to return to hear new perspectives on from anyone who wants to raise their hand and then the second set of questions is cool where does evolution fit into all of this

And so a little bit more broadly, how does this Bayesian perspective play into evolution, ecology, development, and learning?

Because this is a morphogenesis problem.

It's a Devo problem.

And we know that Eco and Evo are going to come into play with Devo.

So how do we think about all these levels and how does Figure 4 make its appearance in this paper?

What is it relevant?

What does it show?

So any...


SPEAKER_01:
Well, figure four is just about how morphogenesis and, in general, higher order pattern formation happens under the variational framework.

So, I mean, we've discussed this in previous episodes, but

The idea is always essentially the same.

So what is it to share a generative model?

Well, in the context of active inference, to share a generative model means that you share the same beliefs about the kinds of sensory consequences that follow the effects of states in the world, and in particular, the effects of my own actions in the world.

So the idea is that if we share a generative model, we expect to perceive the world in the same way as a consequence of the same kinds of things.

pursuing on that idea, if we have the same generative model, then if I just do my thing and you just do your thing, we're eventually going to end up zeroing in on the same overall pattern because we share the same expectations about the kinds of things that we should expect, conditions on the same kinds of states.

So if you have a system that's equipped with state-dependent observation profiles, so for example, if I'm a heart cell, I should expect to sense other heart cells and to register blood flow and whatever.

Whereas if I'm a brain cell, then I really shouldn't be registering blood or other heart cells at all.

So if you have these kinds of state-dependent observation distributions, then you can start to see how sharing a generative model would allow for a bunch of components to zero in on, well, first of all, on a target configuration, and second of all, kind of

settle into a mutually coherent pattern of inference about what is my role in these higher order patterns that I'm part of.

Yeah, and so the idea there, I guess is the, so this is the vertical stack idea that we discussed last week.

The variational ecology is a horizontal and a vertical story, a vertical and a horizontal story.

It's a vertical story in that you have nested systems of systems of systems of systems, which is what I tend to emphasize in a lot of my work, but at every, basically in between every two scales, there's a niche construction story.

where the body at large is a niche for the organs, the organs at large are a niche for the cells, and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

I'm going to address the evolution side and then return to this idea that Maxwell was just talking about, about shared generative models, because that was also very helpful.

So how does evolution play into this?

Well, let's imagine this morphogenesis creature that we're watching.

It turns out that there's a lot of parameters in this model that are detailed in the paper, but it's not like all parameter combinations lead to this solution on the bottom right.

Only specific priors and specific mapping relationships between sensory and action states will result in this exact kind of light bulb shaped creature.

You can imagine there's some arrangement that might result in a circle.

There's some arrangement, the state space is large and it might not fix upon a stable point or it might do it very rapidly.

What cuts through all of these models?

What does model selection?

Evolution.

If it turns out that the wind is blowing from the north to the south in this image and that this shape, it has worked in the past and it left more offspring that believed that that shape was the morphogenesis position to approach, you'll just see that around.

It doesn't mean it's the only solution.

It just means it is what has existed.

So this is sort of an ab initio or a computational simulation of an artificial situation, obviously.

But in the realized world where creatures are evolving, then you find that only the organisms that have the phenotypes that adequately reflect regularities of their niche are going to be left carrying forward.

and so it's kind of like wow how did the ants know to drag back this fly from 30 meters in the desert it's like it's all they do it's all they've been doing if they couldn't do it they'd be doing something else or they wouldn't exist it's not like you'd see an ant just struggling and failing to do it that would be a very short-lived strategy so you there's wacky stuff that happens again when the niche is transiently misaligned with evolutionary

priors or when an evolutionary prior tends towards just like accept everything into the nest you know pull in threads or something like that but i think that's really important to keep in mind that evolution often does model selection for us to actually find the solutions that work bottom right and the expectation action relationships top left that relate in morphogenesis top right through the extracellular target signal being the coordinating mechanism in this morphogenesis example on the bottom that's development

mediated what appears to be by this basically monotonic decrease in free energy representing the utility of modeling this system in converting to or converging towards a developmental attractor using a free energy framework


SPEAKER_01:
Well, notice that it spikes initially, which is interesting.

So all the agents are kind of trying to figure out what their position is, and then they settle into like a mutually consistent group inference.

And you know, this work has been recapitulated across several scales.

Ensor Palacios and colleagues have a cool paper where they do this across three scales.

So they have like a micro, a meso, and a macro scale, all premised on the same free energy functional.

And you get these nice layers of like organelles within organs within an organism.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And let me also go back to one thing you said about the shared generative model.

So you talked about like the neurons sort of being in their niche, you know, wrapped in a specific type of glia or receiving certain types of communication at different developmental time periods from different inputs.

There's almost this, not a complete replacement that you can do of having a shared generative model as you mentioned between the cells, but it's like they're part of a shared generative model at a higher level, like through the neurons own expectations and its own niche.

it subsumes and it becomes a functional part of a larger generative model brains know things that neurons don't and so that is very naturally accommodated in a multi-scale framework because at the level of analyzing just the two cells you'd find that they act as if they had a shared generative model and so it would make sense oh at the level of the social interaction it's like two people are having shared generative models like they both know how the movie is going to play out or they both know whose turn it is to speak

But then at a higher level, and that's all happening at the same time, it's also like being part of a shared generative model that is the higher level, whether that's thought of as collective computation or collective cognition or distributed intelligence, whatever framework it ends up playing out as.

the brain knows things that the neuron doesn't.

And so the social group is having dynamics that constrain and facilitate the individual level in a way that specifically will evade the computation or the understanding of the individual.

So I think that's kind of an interesting consequence of this.

And yeah, good.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, to address a question that was asked initially about shared intentionality, I mean,

So we have this paper now out in entropy where we basically argue that the free energy principle provides a formal semantics.

And by that we mean that

What it is really to act on a generative model is to have an intentional relation with some features of an environment that you're inferring constantly.

That's effectively what having a generative model allows you to do.

It allows you to go from your sensory data and from your architecture of priors and likelihoods to an estimation of what most likely caused

your sensory data and you know intentionality kind of seems to come pre-packaged with that as in like you know if intentionality means being appropriately receptive or to you know features of an environment that stimulate you well then having a generative model just means being intentional in that sense

And sharing a generative model means that you're participating in a form of shared intentionality, so a shared way of systematically relating your observations and embodied priors to patterns of behavior and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

One other thought, and this was something that our friend Blue was talking about at our event a couple weeks ago, was this multi-scale agency concept.

So the individual agency concept, a relational edge agency, then the small group, and then the community.

And so we can't necessarily directly experience, but what can you tell somebody to participate in at the local level that does engender this higher order adaptive process to play out?

And so I think it's this space between

having a shared generative model and being a shared generative model like we're going to have shared norms so that we're going to take cognitive diversity and help that map our search space for the critical problems that influence us all so we'll have the best search and we'll figure out the outcomes that are going to be reflecting this kind of a distribution that we want to converge toward

That's the kind of well specified harnessing of differences within the niche, because you said Maxwell agents that see the world in the same way.

So I know that you didn't mean that from the overlapping because literally no one's, you know, generative visual model is going to be the exact same.

But

there's this question of how much seeing the same way versus basically the variation within the niche in the exact same way of course not but it's a it's a goldilocks situation because if everyone had exactly the same predictive model then we would never see literally differences in opinions or ideas and so when thinking about the heterodox or the novel or the informative the adaptive that space is really about the mapping of the individual you know uh

action perception loops in a sense onto this collective level.

And there's individual states that can be healthy in one context and unhealthy or considered unhealthy in another context.

And so it's just I think it's just the beginning of thinking about multi scale systems from this way.

But then, as we know, people's concept about themselves and their social world changes their behavior and in ways that are really subtle, kind of what is water.

So just very interesting stuff.

cool any other thoughts on this figure so just to go through the figures in reverse order we had six which will again it's a late night spooky special for another time five any thoughts on five also looks like there's a lot of uh equations on there not needing to unpack now


SPEAKER_01:
four, talked about, three, and then two.

I mean, yeah, five and six, for those of you who really want to drill into the, I mean, we could have like a 7.3 or something at some point, ideally with a few of the more like technical people to really unpack that.

Because five and six, like really unpack the math

uh in some detail but i i don't know how useful it is for like a kind of high level conceptual discussion like we're having right now so perfect yep totally agree and sounds good about that


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Well, those were the figures.

Does anyone else want to return to any slide or want to bring up any other thoughts or questions like what was something that was interesting that they heard about or something that they didn't expect for the discussion to introduce or another direction that they would like to see it go towards?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, early on there were some remarks about theory of mind and so on.

Yeah, so we have a whole paper on this that came out.

Actually, it came out in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, so we're very proud of that.

It's called Thinking Through Other Minds, and yeah, it's basically like a – well, it was a Target article, and there were like 27 or 28 peer commentaries, and we wrote a response.

And so if you're interested in how this fits in with theory of mind and, you know, the debates between simulation theory and theory theory and all that, well, we have like a paper length.

treatment of that.

I think the kind of in a nutshell response is that you can have your cake and eat it too using the variational framework.

I mean you might have noticed that this is sort of our argumentative strategy is often to say well there seems to be this split in the literature and actually both sides of the split can be made sense of.

and done justice to by appealing to this active inference framework.

And here as well, I mean, we kind of strike a balance between these kind of explicit theory-theory mind-reading accounts and these more implicit kind of simulation theory embodied resonance kind of approaches.

Again, by appealing to our multi-scale story, right?

So, I mean, you know, you have more explicit and more implicit forms of inference about others.

And the more explicit they become, the more, like, the more properly you're heading into theory of mind territory.

But, I mean, that could also be a topic for discussion in a later podcast.

But there's a whole paper-length treatment, though, was my point, if it's of interest to anyone.

Super cool.

I'll check it out.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yeah, I think that it will be really good for the next two months, last two months of 2020.

That's eight weeks.

So we'll have four papers, the ones that we laid out.

We'll cover a few.

A few old stomping grounds and a few new areas as well.

For eight, we'll be going into math a lot more.

And I think in some other social domains, maybe with the Scripps paper.

And yeah, I'm just like looking forward to these conversations, making our queue of papers for 2021.

having special events if there's anyone who wants to arrange for like a special interview or a session modeling like a mod like a simulation approach these could all be kind of fun types of discussions to have because it's fun to bring in all these different angles on it hear from the medical and hear from the practitioners


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you so much again for the really nice treatment that this podcast gives to our work.

My gratitude is overflowing.

I hope you continue.

Good.


SPEAKER_00:
These really unpack and they help a lot.

And this is what the game is about, just understanding and learning, turning it over, hearing in different ways.

So thanks for participating.

I guess this is 7.2, but next time in 8, 9, 10, 11, for the rest of 2020, we'll finish out strong with more learning and more exploring areas that are new to everyone.

So send us any comments or questions that you have that we could unpack live.

The follow-up form is in the calendar invite.

So if anyone wants to provide any feedback there, that'd be cool.

And just stay in touch.

This has been a great team comp.

So thanks so much, everyone, for participating.


SPEAKER_01:
Very cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Take care.

Yep.

Peace.

Thanks a lot.