## l7r0ISlr-Hc

all right welcome to
act inf livestream number 50.0 it is october 17th 2022 and we are starting the series on
interoception as modeling allostasis as control welcome to the active inference institute we're a
participatory online institute that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference
this is recorded in an archive live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve
our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following good video
etiquette for live streams today in 50.0 we're starting this series discussing the paper
interoception as modeling allostasis as control the authors are eli sinesh jordan thuryalt dana brooks
john wilhelm van de mint lisa feldman barrett and karen s quigley it is a paper published in the
journal biological psychology in january of 2022 and this is just an introduction and context video
as dean here and i work through this paper and discuss some related topics we're going to go over
some big questions basic aims and abstract roadmap of the paper then go into the paper touch on a few
key points and images and themes and then primarily look forward to discussing it with any authors or
anyone else who'd like to join in the coming weeks all right so i'm daniel i'm a researcher in california
and the paper was selected by decentralized upvote it was uh fun to read and it brings some new topics
into our regime of attention so i'm looking forward to this and i'll pass to dean thanks tally i'm dean
i'm here in calgary i think what's interesting about any paper that um pulls two seemingly discrete
things and puts them proximal and gets them entangling um and then pulls them apart again and
tries to look at sort of what happens when things get combined is always something that i'm always
interested in that in fact it was the title of this and the fact that they were bringing allostasis and
interoception together and what what does that mean was the reason why i spent a little bit of time
on this and really am quite interested in hearing what the authors have to say now that they put this
idea to to uh work all right how would you describe the big question
well i mean i think the focus here is on on what happens and what we can say about control
requirements necessary to carry out physiological tasks varying degrees of complexity um
i'm i've never been really sure how the the specificity of different outcomes and behaviors
looks in aggregate but i think one of the things that we can say is if there's a predictive component
and there's a feedback component and they're focusing on two particular types of that um
it's interesting perhaps what kind of generalities we can walk away with um never you know sort of not
getting lost in the weeds of well this happened here and then that happened there but just on that general
level what what sorts of things when those two things are put together um should we say
we say has a certain pattern or commonality nice i agree i would put it in the category of asking how
a given system independent or modality independent phenomena like allostasis which is anticipatory
changes in physiology connects with a domain or a use case like interoception and it does seem like a lot
of the models that we've explored have been visual or conceptual or symbolic and the interoceptive
modality has popped up again and again in discussions and so this is a cool opportunity to look at some
formalisms for interoception
interoception
okay here's the paper uh as described earlier just a few of the highlights that were written by the
authors on the publication page interoception enables the brain to anticipate the body's upcoming
metabolic needs interoception provides performance metrics for viscera motor regulation we connect control
theory with decision making and motor control of the body we model allostatic control as optimal control
with the time varying reference signal they talk about some limitations of previous models and some
unique aspects of what their model does and the way that they formulate the apic model anything to add
no i think their answer is straightforward
okay on claim so dean and i were uh looking into
thinking of ourselves in terms of claims adjusters appraisers examiners and investigators
as we pulled out a whole handful of really important and salient
within the argument of this relatively long and technically scaffolded paper
and pulling out a bunch of claims that are written that connect the dots and
set some of the relevant uh interpretations for the formalisms
states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states
of this but i will say this there there is a i think a parallel trying to be drawn here between
predictive predictive uh processing no i'm not saying that predictive processing but
processing as a as a predictive device and feelings and control and feedback and so i think
there are a lot of claims that can be made but that's a really really nuanced and also a very very
complex uh space to play in and so i can understand why um there's lots and lots of claims
um again whether or not or how far those claims can hold before they break down will be an interesting
thing to talk to with the authors yeah well said it's a very intertwined area maybe that's what
you're pointing towards when you say it's complex braiding yeah i have a lot of hair so it's it's
tricky for me all right abstract okay i'll read the first three the brain regulates the body by
anticipating its needs and attempting to meet them before they arise a process called allostasis
allostasis requires a model of the changing sensory conditions within the body a process
called interoception in this paper we examine how interoception may provide performance feedback for
allostasis we suggest studying allostasis in terms of control theory reviewing control theory's
applications to related issues in physiology motor control and decision making we synthesize these by
relating them to the important properties of allostatic regulation as a control problem we then
sketch a novel formalism for how the brain might perform allostatic control of the viscera by analogy
to skeletal motor control including a mathematical view on how interoception acts as a performance feedback
for allostasis finally we suggest ways to test implications of our hypothesis
okay on to the roadmap the paper starts with introduction the functions of the brain in the body
and then introduces some of the key pillars or foundations of their synthesis and interpretation
which is interoception control theory as an approach for unifying physiology motor control decision making
and allostasis as a trajectory tracking stochastic optimal control the fifth section is a discussion
and then there's an appendix b and c and in their words four sections in this paper connect interoception to
allostasis section two establishes how interoception enables the brain to estimate the physiological efficiency of the body in the present moment
which is precisely what it needs to know to evaluate and refine action section three introduces control theory
section four applies the principles of control theory to derive a novel format model of how the brain might estimate the
desirability of physiological trajectories and make prospective regulatory decisions
the key words finally section five synthesizes the previous three sections to explore the direct implications
of the proposed formalism appendix a provides a glossary of terms but this is moved up and it's no longer an appendix
so there's no appendix a appendix b1 provides mathematical details related to section three and appendix c1 provides mathematical details
related to section four
the keywords were interoception allostasis and predictive processing we're going to talk a lot about interoception
and allostasis somewhat in this dot zero but certainly in the coming discussions and for predictive processing
a good recent stream is live stream number 43 with maria
the word for predictive processing
okay also just for reference we'll pause on these just long enough for you to screenshot them if you want
there's a nomenclature table with the definition of many words so here's the first nomenclature terms
1 through 25
and then here's the second half of the nomenclature 26 to 49
sorted alphabetically
anything to add on the nomenclature other than to say that
it's good that they provided it and it'll be used in the coming sections
well i think it's interesting that you pointed out that the um they pulled they pulled the definitions forward
and then they look at the formalisms and so i think from the standpoint of what they what they want to
message around this this braiding um requires us to at least get a common sense around what things mean
before we start trying to pull apart what they equal
so yeah i kind of what i like that
well said
all right section one introduction the functions of the brain in the body
okay
there's an evocative beginning to this paper
um playing a simple game of dodgeball then requires your brain to continually coordinate the systems of your body
and this
motif of dodgeball is going to be
returning again
and on the left is a hugging face
implementation of a stable diffusion algorithm
the prompt of the image was dodgeball playful ants active inference free energy principle
and while we were making the slides we were engaged in active inference with some of these image generating
affordances and allowing that to
do what
well i think it's really interesting that this what the what the generator said
this would be the result of a coordinated
um what's the word i'm looking for
entanglement of these of these prompts
but it doesn't talk anything about what what strategy each one of those
um silhouettes is now employing
and i think that
there is an implied sense that there's a strategy going on
is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known
they just inferred. All right. Next keyword, you can go for it. People can read the definition
here, but just give your own take. What is interoception? Well, I think at the end of the
day, there's a certain amount of signaling going on that we become aware of. Sometimes young people
or all people might sort of categorize them all under the umbrella of feelings. And I've
grabbed this from Tots on Target, just because I've always worked in that kind of space of
how do we keep this as simple as we can. And so when you get these signals, these sensory
signals originating from within the body, these are the feelings you get. And whether or not
you connect them to the world outside of your skin or your margins, sometimes you do, sometimes
you don't, you just wake up with a tummy ache, right? So what does that mean about today?
Nice. I would say a little narrowly, interoception is referring to some observation and inference on
hidden states with a referent that's in tarot inside of the body, as opposed to ex-tarot outside
of the body. But there's probably also a lot of like blurring and what is the retina really doing?
Is it doing inference on itself? And where is it actually doing inference on the outside world structure?
All right. Interoceptive internal models, you added some images. So what are they?
Yeah, so I'll just read this real quick. So psychologists refer to the internal model,
including interoception by many terms. And I think it, I think that's important because there hasn't
always been agreement about clearly defining what an internal model is. Things like unconscious
inference seems to fit under this umbrella, embodied simulation, concepts and categories,
controlled hallucination, which was new to me, because I don't know what that even means.
And regardless of what it's called, the brain is hypothesized to construct a dynamic model of its
body in the world. In this paper, we use the terms prediction, simulation and concept. And so
for somebody with sort of my deep research background in terms of abduction, the signal, the
interpretant, the object, what is that model? How do we, how do we avoid getting into another
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
up in the room but my temperature might also be going up because i ate a bad shrimp and it's
sometimes difficult to figure out whether or not it's because the heat gone up or whether my body's
responding with an inflammatory gesture yeah that's a nice point like sometimes called a difference
making cause or a difference that makes a difference does a viral infection cause the
body temperature to rise and or to what extent can that be decomposed into factors from the virus
versus this the dynamics changing of the immune system so interesting image on the left knows
i can i can't tell whether the image on the left by the image on the left what's what speed the image
on the right is actually moving down the road and that's kind of why i wanted the ambiguity there
for an interoceptive model because you know damasio talks a lot about what what can we really
describe and proceed price precise terms and what remains somewhat ambiguous and the authors in this
paper talk a little bit about that as well yeah when the referent is external it's objective then
there's the opportunity for multiple external perspectives to align not even saying that's better
but just the opportunity to whereas if the embodied behavior of your physiological set point for some
physiological regulation is changed it doesn't have the same opportunity for external alignment again for
better and for worse and almost always with difficulty communicating or sometimes measuring in laboratory settings as well and and quote controlling
so speaking with uh authors on this and why they study this modality will be interesting
all right as for the computational or system independent phenomena that they're going to be trying to
integrate with allis uh with interoception is allostasis they define this term as allostasis is to anticipate
changing needs evaluate priorities and prepare the organism to satisfy them before they lead to errors
a process called allostasis so let's just say that you have an allostatic model of the temperature in the room
and the core body temperature doesn't change so then can one look back and say it didn't change because
it was expected to change and somebody will just say well how do you know it worked then because it didn't
raise the body temperature
i focused on the part that the fact that they describe it as a three-part process
so me being always talking about what's the minimum here what's the minimum here we need in order to be able to
to do this i find that really that really quite interesting why three not four or five or breaking
it out into into smaller slices that's again another one of those questions i'd like to be able to talk
to the authors about all right active inference
they wrote before diving into formal modeling details below which we're going to get to later in the paper
it might be helpful to compare and contrast the approach here
with the prominent modeling framework active inference and we're going to return to some of these details and i'm sure
have a lot of discussion on it
But you made a really interesting point in our preparation about how they're not treating their model as downstream or a corollary of any commitment to a particular physics, which is how we often hear about free energy principle and Bayesian mechanics.
But rather they're treating the model as a first order construction.
Anything you want to add on that? Because I thought that was really like helped me frame what the paper was about.
Yeah, that's straightforward. I think that the fourth bullet, unlike most active interest models in the literature, the material below considers an indefinite time or infinite horizon control setting is interesting because that makes it really, really clear between what they're talking about and what we often see in a lot of the representations, which is T0, T1.
T1, T1, T1, whatever, in terms of being able to figure out what is going on sequentially.
All right, cool.
This section in the introduction talks about some issues with other models.
They talk about how existing models of interoception have either formulated allostasis as a prospective decision-making problem without considering how these decisions are enacted, which has a bunch of different interpretations, but maybe, for example, requiring the enumeration of policies and then the selection from policies, or as a motor control problem without considering where motor commands come from.
Another issue they have another issue they have.
They have a set of points.
They have a set point with a set point with a fixed set point and an empirical tolerance for error, as well as maybe some points of no return and so on.
But seeing all those outcomes as the realization of a dynamical system that actually doesn't pursue a set point, but rather pursues a slope on a graph that we'll explore.
And that zone of maximum controllability and reduction of surprisal around the zone of maximum controllability over evolutionary time will come to be associated with this kind of a survival variable.
And some other points.
And some other points.

Anything else?
Well, it's relationship, relationship, relationship.
And then they say this paper aims to fill this gap.
I think relationship doesn't necessarily imply that things have to get closed in terms of whatever the gap is by filling something in.
I think the fact that they talk about targeting, I think about the fact that they see relationship as playing kind of the key role in what they think is happening here means that maybe the gap continues.
I mean, they're putting stuff in here for us to consider and contemplate, but I'm not sure if we're actually filling a gap or if we're just sort of understanding what's in this space.
Right.
Section two.
So at the beginning of section two, the top paragraphs, interception, modeling the body, estimating its efficiency.
And then the below the fold section 2.5, the summary.
So both of these pre and post two, two dot zero, two dot two contains a lot of structural information about the key points in this paper.
Anything to add on this specific slide to, or we'll just go into the sections.
I just put a quick star down at the very bottom there.
People might want to have a read on that because I think that's, I'm not saying that that's controversial, but I do think it's interesting.
Yeah.
So what does it mean to move into a non-reward centric understanding of physiology or reinterpreting reward?
Okay.
Section 2.1 introduces a distinction that is going to be key in the rest of the paper, which is the difference between two types of viscero sensory variables, interoceptive.
Those which represent quantities of resources, regulated resources, and those which represents rates at which processes act, controlled processes.
Regulated resources are kept stable, relatively stable over time.
Examples include blood glucose and core body temperature.
So of note is they don't have to be a depletable resource.
The regulated resource is kind of like the bounded variable in a physiologist, in a homeostasis context.
It's not necessarily a depletable like metabolite.
A regulated resource like blood glucose or core body temperature represents a physical quantity or a substance like glucose.
Its quantity cannot change instantaneously.
So I think it will be interesting to ask like what different regulated resources of different modalities are.
And then controlled processes are the rates at which physiological processes operate.
So in that case would be like the kind of input output relationships of blood glucose.
Okay.
Yeah, we just talked about that.
We talked about that recently is what's the difference between gripper and gripped and can both exist at once.
Nice.
2.2.
Back to the dodgeball example.
The heart rate and blood pressure must increase during aerobic exercise as noted in the dodgeball example.
So there has to be some physiological adaptation in order to start exercising and continue exercising.
So upon resting conditions, the baroreceptor, that's pressure receptor, heart rate reflex would normally counter any rise in blood pressure by slowing the heartbeat.
However, with exertion, your blood pressure and heart rate both must increase to support the needed increase in blood flow required by your exercising muscles.
And so then there's a discussion of how this kind of modulation of reflex allows for shifting of an entire function relating a change in blood pressure to a change in your heart rate.
So this is describing like a dynamical systems approach and physiological model for how the causal or correlational structure of different physiological variables can be modeled pretty generally, but it's going to get more specific.
Yeah, a little bit of co-variation there and physiology and away we go.
Okay, 2.2. Predicting and modeling the ranges of regulated and controlled processes.
This is describing some of the parameters of the curve, the threshold and saturation points, which partly define curves that are derived from functions, which physiologists commonly use to model the connection between perturbations and regulatory responses, usually naming them response curves or transfer functions.
And then the term capacity curves will be used to emphasize the fact that while such curves can shift over time, in any one instance, they represent the current range of limited regulatory resources available to an organism.
So one could imagine like a financial capacity curve to maintain some market at some point, like kind of like the depth, but by analogy.
And then this idea of modeling how a system responds to perturbations doesn't necessarily require modeling the internal model of that system.
But as you build a better generative model of the system being perturbed, then the better experiments and the further you can have kind of perturbability of the system that allows you to approach a system without a strong hypothesis about its structure.
The capacity curve in figure one has a mathematical form.
And then figure one is shown alongside with equation one.
The parameters are defined.
The function Y is taking in U, mu, K, big R, big B, and combining those into an equation.
The figure one on the X axis is showing the blood pressure.
And then the Y axis is showing the baseline activation percentage of the reflex modulating this physiological variable.
So at 100, which is the target blood pressure or sort of what would be called the homeostatic set point because it seems to be an attractor.
At that point, the baseline activation of the baroreflex is happening.
When the blood pressure increases, then the baroreflex activates up to 2X, thresholding at 2X activation of baseline.
And then as the blood pressure decreases, the baroreflex, again with this sigmoid symmetry, decreases.
That's a dynamical model of regulation of blood pressure.
Equations 2, 3, and 4.
Outline the form of a generative model, a procedure for probabilistically predicting observed variables in terms of unobserved variables.
The variables listed are unobserved variables, which are sampled from an a priori probability distribution not dependent on data.
So that's referring to using a generative model and how these equations constitute it.
The proposal here has an unusual feature.
The equations for X, the mean arterial blood pressure, and Y, the baroreflex activation as a percentage of baseline, so figure 1, X, and Y, are in terms of the quantile variable U.
The quantile variable uniformly represents the relationship between the blood pressure and the baroreflex activation,
irrespective of changes in the capacity curve's operating point mu and gain K.
The quantile depends only on the functional form of the capacity curve and not on the parameters.
So we'll unpack that a little more technically, but they point to that as a feature of their model.
Here again is figure 1, a little bigger with more space to discuss later.
And here's figure 2, which is the capacity curve from figure 1 in blue with a linearized response in orange around the operating point, the blue diamond marker.
So one can see this as the maximum positive slope of this sigmoid curve, and that under the specification that the reflex is going to be activated in a sigmoidal way.
Then, depending on whether one is in like a curving up part or a curving down part, or thinks about it as pursuing the maximum positive slope, then pursuing that point and being rewarded by movements towards maximum maneuverability and control would have the equivalent of pursuing a homeostatic model where this is like a fixed point attractor.
So it puts the bottom of the bowl in this orange line being maximized in slope rather than the blue diamond being reduced in its distance from 100.
So it's like a fixed point to 100.
Right?
I think we copied this section twice.
It was so unusual.
We copied it twice.
Yeah.
2.3.
Return to the dodgeball example.
And they're going to widen their scope beyond just the barrow, reflex, blood pressure to circumference.
2.
Circulating levels of oxygen, glucose, and carbon dioxide.
3.
Next, we focus on blood glucose as a regulated resource with glucagon as the controlled process enabling secretion of glucose into the blood, and insulin as the controlled process enabling removal of glucose from the blood.
So the barrow reflex was like a single volume knob or a triage nurse that can lower or raise the single response.
So if some physiological variable is high, it's like it can be like removed.
So if you're going to be a little bit more, it's going to be like buffered from two different sides in a slightly different way, but using a lot of the same formalisms and logic to introduce a slightly different and more complex physiological system.
Okay.
So the section discusses some findings that blood glucose levels are not actively defended at a biologically hard-coded set point any more than heart rate is.
Instead, glucagon and insulin, two hormones, activity balance each other's effects to bring the blood glucose to a point within its settling range, with glucose entering the blood after the person ingests food and glucose then crossing from the blood into other bodily tissues to support their function.
So the question is, is that the blood glucose?
Anything to add on this slide?
Not specifically.
I'll wait till we get to the end of section, the section two stuff.
So here is figure three.
They're writing figure three shows plots of the resulting functions of this equation applied to the insulin case, which can be interpreted as capacity curves.
Orange sigmoid is insulin.
The blue sigmoid is glucagon.
They have different hormone levels at different X axis, which is the level of glucose in the blood.
And so you kind of see familiar behavior when glucose is high, then insulin is at high secretion, which drives the absorption of glucose.
And when glucose gets low, in this case below 2.5 or 3 or so, then glucagon is secreted to elicit glucose to enter the blood.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
And so one can imagine that the glucose level will be oscillating in this space, but not exactly set at a set point with a residual being minimized.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
So here's section 2.4 is where they move from discussing this kind of a regulatory model into viable ranges and capacities could obviate a modular reward system.

And a bit more on this topic.
Anything to add?
No, let's get to 37.
All right.
The rewards of control.
So here I wanted to highlight two papers with some nice images by both papers involving Tobias Morville.
And these papers are cited in the paper under discussion, and they all show some pretty interesting features.
So just to highlight some of these graphs, here's movements within a glucose and temperature space.
So regulation of multiple physiological variables.
Here on the bottom left is the integration of interoception, homeostatic set point, and motor commands like related to foraging.
Here is some Bayesian visualizations with a prior posterior and likelihood, and about this two-way relationship of inference and a forward dynamical model, the tail of two densities.
And then last one, this is another body temperature glucose modeling approach that gets to that notion that we describe as going to the bottom of the bowl, where the shape of this napkin could be designed or evolved or selected so that the marble spends most of its time in a certain zone.
And this is like just one other way to think about these types of attractor systems rather than as like traces or so on.
Okay. Anything to add?
Well, I think section two basically confirms that if you're going to be doing any kind of predictive performance that has an element of continuity to it, that depends on sort of recognizable finite limits and also variability within whatever those limits are.
And I think that kind of speaks to the idea that there's in a sort of two-factor situation.
There's signaling that looks like this.
And they sort of pointed out a couple of examples of the barot reflex and the glucagon thing.
And they also are trying to avoid oversimplifying or over reducing like they, they tried to keep the complexity of those two examples retained in terms of what they were trying to hold up as something that allows us to start looking at these capacity curves.
All right. Section three control theory, the unifying lens for physiology, motor control and decision making.
And then one of their summaries of the chapter, this section introduces concepts from engineering control theory, then reviews its applications in the life sciences.
These include physiology, section 3.1, skeletal motor movement, section 3.2, and decision making section 3.3.
Section 3.4 will connect future interoceptive states to present movements, illuminating what makes allostatic regulation more energy efficient than homeostatic.
Regulation. The next section 4 will build off the account of control used in physiology to suggest how interoception supports allostasis.
Okay, here we're not going to read everything on the slide, but this is from section 3.1 control theory for physiology.
A reliable body built from unreliable parts. Anything to add on this?
Nope. People just want to read this.
Yep. I'll just call out for a controller to perform well.
It must contain some sort of copy or mirror of the plant's expected behavior, which is referred to as an internal model.
Control theorists call the driven system the plant and its desired trajectory the reference trajectory.
And there's some interesting discussion of this kind of thread of control theory.
Figure 4.
So figure 4 is a functional block diagram of a model based control system.
The plant in orange is the object or system whose motion or other behavior is controlled.
The controller purple sends signals, controls, solid block arrows.
The change how the plant moves and signals the expected outcome predictions, solid yellow arrow to the state estimator in yellow.
And so on. People can read the rest of it.
For these figures, Daniel, as we get further down in the slides, why don't I read and then you can run the cursor over the different parts of the model.
So people can kind of see and can real time with how the two things align.
Sounds good. We'll do that for the future ones.
And this is going to revoke or recall some of our earlier discussions in live stream 23 skillful performance and interaction ism and instruction ism and how to think about motor plants and so on.
Right.
Section 3.2, moving the body, the reference control hypothesis.
So the reference control hypothesis, the citations provided were to Feldman 2015 and Latosh 2021.
And the reference control hypothesis describes the skeletal motor system in terms of a hierarchy of controllers with higher level controllers in the brain prescribing reference trajectories to the lower level reflexes in the spinal cord.
These reflexes then compare the actual length of the muscle as signaled by afferent proprioceptor neurons to the reference length sent down by the brain and contracts the muscle to bring the two into agreement.
So here is the top part of the table of content of Feldman's 2015 book,
Referent control of action and perception and the paper of Latosh in physics of life review 2021 with some graphics around this type of approach.
You can start this slide on the real world.
Okay, well, I'll just point out a couple things the authors say because they do not want to be accused of sort of overfitting here.
Structure motor control experiments only limited overlap with the actual structure of motor control.
So only limited overlap.
Experiment on reaching behaviors involves an experimenter prescribing the reaching task to the participants.
Participants brain does not function specifically to follow instructions from an experimenter, but rather to regulate their own body.
The actual organization of the central nervous system, of course, better with an inside out view of motor function movement of the body by either some out of some
So Mattel motor pathways serve regulation of the body.
of the body.
For example, in the game of Dr. Paul, you if you unexpectedly step on a hard or sharp rock or object, usually don't purposely impale yourself who I stepped on it.
So I just wanted to go through my foot now because I might my focus is still on stabilizing my posture rather you recoil in pain.
You feel that interoceptively and the unplanned disturbance of any tissue damage requires you to make a decision about what to do next.
Excuse yourself to nurse your foot or play through the pain.
I think the fact that they're trying to limit what they are saying is the extent to which the control piece of this can be said to apply is a good thing,
because I think there's a couple of areas around.
So what is in this relationship between a command system or a control system and a demand system?
Where do things like like when your body is starting to suffer from mild hypothermia and you know, people know that that your brain stops functioning correctly?
How do you differentiate between, for example, I'm getting a slurpee headache and you put the slurpee down and stop drinking it?
Because you know that that's the effect versus you have your limbs, which aren't, you know, frostbitten at this point, or at least hopefully not frostbitten, continue to move so that you don't stop you, you avoid stopping moving altogether, which is which essentially is death.
So here we've got to wonder whether or not, without getting into the argument of because it's pretty obvious if your brain is dead, you're dead.
But if your hands are dead and you are still alive, that clear distinction between a command center consequence and a demand center consequence.
What does that mean in terms of, okay, so there's things that happen that you do automatically in order to keep yourself alive in some of the most critical situations.
And it's not like your, your, your, your, your hand has the brain.
And yet it may, in just simply moving around beyond a reflexive thing, be able to keep you alive long enough until somebody comes to your rescue as a, as a, for example.
So I don't know if that's confusing or not, but I think that there's a reconciliation, but that goes on between command and demand and maybe some of control is the ability to give up command at times in order for a new, a new response to take over and keep you alive.
And you may not necessarily know how to do that from a command center.
So we'll have to talk to the authors about that.
Cause these are questions that I have, and I got a bit of a physiological background.
So I wonder about these extreme situations.
All right.
Section three, three, making decisions, constructing future reference trajectories.
They use the word demands.
So we'll talk about it later.
Yep.
More quotes from three, three, for those who want a screenshot.
Talking about ergodicity, which is also raised in the appendix B, which we're not going to focus on.
Okay.
You can read figure five and I'll use the mouse.
Go for it.
So a functional block diagram for an experiment, experimental psychologist, task oriented view of motor control.
The diagram shows a formal logic structure here at a conceptual level.
The boxes and arrows do not map onto the anatomy of the brain or nervous system.
In contrast to figure four, this diagram differentiates between skeletal motor brain and peripheral stretch reflex controllers.
And between sensory state estimators, brain and peripheral sense organs, sensory surfaces, sensory surfaces.
The diagram shows an engineering perspective.
Important to note that.
The problem is on a psychology experiment in which the experiment prescribes a task for behavior to participants.
So there's an externality and a participant's brain then access control system to achieve the behavior, the prescribed behavior systems that maintain the body.
Therefore serve systems that move the body, which in turn serve a prescribed behavior.
So again, focus on the prescriptive, the externality, the information coming in.
All right.
Functional block diagram.
Yeah.
Next one.
Functional block diagram for a control theoretic view of allostasis.
In contrast to figure five, this diagram shows a closed loop control system designed for autonomous regulation of the body.
An experimenter's desired task behavior is replaced with or by the allostatic capacity estimator, which sends predictions of capacity curves, which we've already looked at, to the interoceptive state estimator and receives prediction errors with which to update its estimates.
The updated estimates are issued as a reference signal to the visceral motor controller.
This diagram shows a formal logical structure, a conceptual level.
The hypothesis depicted is constrained by the inferred anatomical structures in Barrett 2017, but the boxes and arrows do not map, I'll repeat, do not map one to one onto the anatomy of the brain or nervous system.
All right.
Great.
So just to highlight the difference here.
The left is almost like an instructional list arrangement.
And this is how the experimental psychologist thinks about this task, which is like, we write down the instructions, the pseudocode for the task.
Keep your heart rate within this range.
Keep your heart rate within this range.
And then there's some decision making with the skeletal motor system, whether capable of conscious action and stretching or more subconscious.
And then acting through physiology in the body or in the external world, that interoceptive state estimator comes into alignment with the desired implementation of the skeletal motor decision.
And then, in contrast, the role of the task instructions, so to speak, is substituted in this control theoretic view with the allostatic capacity estimator as the imperative.
And that feeds on through a very similar set on the right side.
So, here we actually have the viscero motor decision controller in contrast to a skeletal motor decision controller because this is more focused on, like, choose the left button or the right button.
And figure six is focused more on the kind of barrel reflex control theory view, but that also generalizes beyond.
Okay, I think that's just another view.
Section four, allostasis as trajectory tracking stochastic optimal control.
This section will describe our formal model of allostatic decision making, the allostatic path integral control, APIC model.
APIC has a simple idea at its core.
Just as perceptual concepts serve as internal models of the body's sensory surfaces,
action concepts also serve as internal models of potential behaviors and their predicted outcomes.
Section 4.1 derives an SOC objective function from the mathematical form by which section 2 represented capacity curves.
Then section 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 are described fleshing out this APIC model.

No, let's go there.
All right, 4.1. Transforming capacity curves into objective functions.
Since any given capacity curve, such as the one in figure one above, reaches a maximum value on the vertical axis,
it can be divided by its maximum y-value to normalize it to range between 0 and 1.
Once normalized in this way, it can be interpreted as a cumulative distribution function from probability theory.
This is precisely, in fact, precisely what Srinivasan, Laughlin, and Dubs did to interpret the firing of retinal neurons and flies as a form of predictive coding.
See there, figure one.
The derivative of a CDF, cumulative distribution function, yields a probability density function, PDF.
So, the derivative of a CDF gives a PDF.
This is the more familiar way of representing a probability distribution where the height on the vertical axis corresponds to likelihood in the PDF.
But for a PDF derived from a capacity curve, it represents relative responsiveness to perturbation.
We will call such distribution a reference distribution.
So, this is a transformation of statistical distributions between the PDF, which is the probability density function, and CDF, cumulative distribution function.
It might be very familiar to some, it might be totally new to some, so that's all good.
Hopefully, this is useful still to consider the relationship between the two.
So, here on the left of these three images, the PDF, which is the more familiar way of representing a probability distribution,
we would say, this is a uniform distribution.
There's a 1 in 6 chance of getting each outcome from a 6-sided die.
Or, in the Gaussian bell curve situation, which both of these two, middle and right images show,
the PDF of the bell curve is the bell curve.
So, the PDF is the most familiar one.
The uniform distribution is like a flat line in the PDF.
The bell curve is like a bell curve in the PDF.
So, the maximum and minimum values, if only asymptotically,
then you can make a cumulative distribution function, which starts basically as low as the function can go,
the support for that distribution, and it just accumulates cumulatively.
So, it's like useful to answer the question, what is the probability of getting a 4 or 3 or 2 or 1?
That is 2 thirds.
Or, what is the probability of getting a z-score of below 2?
Like two standard deviations positive, what fraction of the curve is below that z-score on the PDF,
and that is addressable by quickly just looking up a point on this CDF.
It turns out that that relationship between the PDF and the CDF,
which is more familiar to, again, like rolling a die,
or evaluating like height in a classroom,
can be used on the capacity curve discussed earlier
to move to a distribution which, when maximized, is in this spot of maximum control.
So, here the CDF from figure 2 gets the derivative,
and then it becomes the PDF with this sort of negative curve shape.
And that's kind of what was being hinted at with this orange line being maximized.
Orange line being maximized is the high point on this bell curve-like,
but it's not a classical bell curve, but it is a mountain.
It's one peak that you can know which side you're on,
and therefore pretty easily optimized towards.
For analytical convenience, we take the practice from Todorov, 2006, of using a log density,
the logarithm of a PDF, as an objective function rather than the PDF itself.
The operating point then continues to appear as local maximum,
while the gain determines the cost of movement away from the operating point and the value of movement towards it.
Figure 8 shows the objective function, log density, corresponding to the original Barrow reflex capacity curve.
Figure 9 further clarifies the relationship between the various forms of capacity curve by showing all three alongside each other.
So this is a really nice figure.
On the top left of the figure is the figure one with the reflex that gets dialed up or dialed down to regulate blood pressure.
That's when interpreted as a CDF can result in a PDF.
And that is a single peak that you can maximize instead of trying to calculate a residual.
The shape of this curve becomes slightly nicer to optimize computationally
when you make it so that it's like a smoother bowl rather than this kind of like inverted funnel shape.
It just, we can go into more detail why. I think that'll be cool.
Why does this log step matter or does it matter?
But suffice to say that this is the big move that lets you turn the sigmoid juggling act into the mountain climb.
Table 1 summarizes some key...
Table 1 summarizes some key notations.
We do not claim our graphical model accurately captures the anatomy of the brain.
It captures reference-based sensory motor control across a hierarchy of time scales, a single feature shared with the brain.
Variables in a table.
Equations 5 and 6 about the instantaneous capture rate.
We'll discuss it in the .1.2.

Section 4.2 also will be nice to discuss.
It is optimal foraging theory suggests a functional form for allostatic control.
Do you want to add anything upfront about optimal foraging?
No, other than I want to talk with the authors about what does that even mean?
That'll be great.
All right.
Equation 8.
Global capture rate.
Section 4.3.
Feed forward control with generative action concepts.
So here's some more formalisms.
And this is within not the experimental psychologist framework, but rather the control theoretic framework with allostatic capacity estimator on the left.
Section 4.3.
Equation 10.
Equation 11.
More variables.
Stochastic optimal control.
SoC.
Which was mentioned earlier.

Figure 10.
This one will be nice to discuss.
A hierarchical generative model capturing multiple timescales and reference distributions at each level.
Without addressing empirical questions about neural hierarchies, here we employ a model with L equal 4 models to match figure 6.
It defines what some of these nodes mean.
But the y-axis is increasing timescale.
So perhaps slower things higher up.
And then on the right is the passage of time.
So what does this make you think about?
Or what is like a way we can approach the interpretation of this?
Well, I'm not trying to be a smart apple, but I do find it interesting that L4 gives you quite a bit of information.
I mean, there's maybe, and they talk about the fact that there's more than four levels, but they want to focus on those four.
I mean, where my brain goes is, okay, so we've got the water, we've got the yeast, we've got the hops, and we've got the grains.
And that can create quite the product.
So we can go past that you can add juice or whatever, but you got the four basic ingredients.
So now moving through time, what does that enable?
So again, it'd be nice for them to pull that apart, because I think even in this, there's enough there to figure a lot of stuff out.
All right, 4.4 feedback control with generative action concepts.
Still, there is equation 13, equation 14.
Equation 14, and then a nice quote.

So it's pretty interesting how different lower bounds, variational lower bounds, negative free energies exist.
Like there's expected free energy, and then there's free energy of the expected future, and there's all of these variants.
And then each of those energies can be decomposed differently.
Like equation 2.6 in the textbook.
So it's interesting to see how, first off, how did they converge to this kind of a bound?
And from why should it have such resonance with free energy principle?
And what does that mean?
And then how can different partitionings of these energy bounds help us think about systems that survive?
I'll just add here, Daniel, that we're going to get to these things.
But up into this point in the paper, I guess I had a bit of familiarity, and I didn't really struggle with the sort of the lockstep way that they were going through this.
But as soon as we got to equations 13, and the jump to equation 15 and 16, somebody, somebody brighter than me is going to have to be able to explain that jump in real simple terms.
Because even though I've read it a number of times, I'm still not exactly sure how it works.
So again, the authors will really want to bring their softest gloves because I need my handheld.
Yeah, agreed.
Section 4.4 still, here's equation 15.
Section 4.4, here's equation 16.
Substituting the augmented objective, fancy j, equation 14, and the analytical expression for the optimal feedback controller alone, equation 15, into the Bellman equation, equation 12, would yield equation 16.
Let's learn what it is.
Yep.
Now the intractable recursive term in the equation is, etc.
Finding a way to replace this term will yield a more computationally tractable problem.
The information divergence term in fancy j provides just such a way since it can be written as precisely the difference between the intractable hard maximum under q star sub phi, and the more tractable smooth maximum under the preplanned action concept.
In symbols, equation 17.
Pretty interesting.
Okay.
Equation 17 through 21.
Then the final section.
Section 5, discussion.
Section 5, maybe you can help me today.
So, were 13 through 17, and then 18, 19, and 20, a way of being able to put together some of the scale free formalisms with the scale specific or scale friendly details and particulars?
When you read this, is that what you saw them trying to clarify?
That's a great question.
As you talk about global, and I think they have to be able to spell that out, and I think they did.
But again, I'm, it was all of a sudden, things went off into the ditch for me.
Here's what I would venture.
In the early section, there's a contrasting of homeostasis with allostasis.
Right.
And about how reward systems are no longer required under certain distributed models of brain neuroanatomy and a function.
So, I believe that the following formalisms substitute the augmented objective into an optimality and optimization framework, like the Bellman equation, which is often used for reward maximization.
Okay.
So, I'm rewarded by getting to the top of the mountain.
Okay.
So, I'm going to evaluate paths based upon how much reward they accrue.
Okay.
And then curiosity or so on will be valuable to the extent over the time horizon that I considered.
It facilitates reward in terms of elevation.
Okay.
Whereas, we here are seeing the move towards that like optimal maneuverability maximization with the PDF-CDF relationship.
Like instead of trying to reduce divergence to the midpoint of the CDF, you maximize your responsiveness in terms of maximizing the log PDF.
Okay.
So, I think that's the augmented reward function, which is tractable.
And then some work remains to specify that function and how it behaves, perhaps.
Okay.
Then section five, discussion.
Interoception stabilizes action and constructs allostatic references.
People can look at the quotes.
Anything to summarize here?
No.
All right.
5.1.
Viewing the brain as an allostatic optimal controller.
The allostatic path integral control API C model in section four implies a number of specific hypotheses beyond those generic to stochastic optimum control.
There's some discussion of shared modeling choices with active inference models.
Perhaps enough for API C to be considered an active inference model of sorts.
And then a few other features that are shared with active inference models in the strict sense, if one even exists, and also related modeling efforts.
Anything to add?
No.
No.
No.
They spelled it out pretty clearly here.
You just want to read through this.
All right.
5.1.
Provide some predictions and some contrasts with the API C model.
5.2.
The body and the brain through the lens of control theory.
Figure six.
Show how viscera sense data ascend in effect to become exafferent interoceptive prediction errors.
Do you want to explain briefly what exafferent means?
Because people might, they do explain that in the glossary, but it's, it's basically an apparent signal on an apparent signal.
There's a bit of recursion there.
Do you want to add anything to that?
Um, I see the distinction just to highlight what afferent is.
Afferent is conducting or conducted inwards or towards something for the nerves, the central nervous system for blood vessels, the organs supplied.
Right.
And, um, how would you distinguish exafferent?
Just, it's just that it's that sort of cumulative.
It's not, it's not sort of the, the, the initial is what I took away from that.
The accumulation of those afferent signals.
Interesting.
I might go wrong.
That's what I took away from it.
5.3. Interoception and capacity curves.
Theories of peripheral predictive coding.
Reason that a neuron's most metabolically cheap responses should represent the predictable stimuli, whereas expensive responses are reserved for the most surprising stimuli.
Some predictions and suggestions from Barrett 2017 and findings of Dworkin 2013.
Certain peripheral interoceptors in humans reduce their afferent firing rate to zero under a constant stimulus.
So that's kind of interesting.
Like if no change, don't tell me about it.
Right.
And that should be cheap under a model where something is changing less often than not.
And there's some more hypotheses.
We have hypothesized that increases in such responsiveness, which is the imperative in this APIC model, could function as rewards, positively reinforcing behavioral trajectories, while decreases in responsiveness could function as costs, negatively reinforcing behavioral trajectories.
So keeping options open over the infinite time horizon becomes equivalent to keeping the business floating or keeping physiology bounded.
Yeah.
Continuity.
Continuity.
Instead of just maximizing amount of USD or calories.
Right.
But rather having reduced or bounded surprisal about a range and a trajectory and a strategy, not in this model as stated here, to generate that.
5.3 interoception and capacity curves.
More.
5.4 conclusions.
Finally, we return to the amateur dodgeball player.
The amateur.
Yeah.
And some summarizations of the APIC model.
And suggestions about its compatibility with the referent control hypothesis and some of its tractability.
That's the discussion.
That's the discussion.
Then, Appendix B, ergodicity, which we've talked about before, but it's kind of a cool topic.
So just to skip through these appendices, just discussing them with the authors, we hope.
Then, some more equations.
In equation B, formulating perception and control ergodically leads to the free energy principle.
FEP.
More of Appendix B.
Appendix C.
APIC model derivation details.
Equations.
C.1.2.
Full derivation of optimal value function and transition dynamics.
More equations.
The path integral form for the value desirability function gives its name to the technique of path integral control.
And so, on a kind of closing note, we wondered how this connects to the Bayesian mechanics and to the path formulation, the rightmost of the three phases of Bayesian mechanics.
And about how coming potentially from quite a different starting point and with different approaches and constraints, some similar features might have arisen and been highlighted in APIC that are also highlighted and relevant for Bayesian mechanics in the path formulization.
And maybe there's like a kind of unmapped Venn diagram there and some similarities and differences.
The proximity to the last live stream, whether by accident or by intent, makes the way that you look at this paper interesting, I'll just say.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Agreed.
Well, anything you want to close with?
I think the idea of being able to look at modeling, internal modeling and sort of the coordination of that either, again, kind of as a minimum two, either as a risk management or risk minimizing exercise, therefore limiting strategy, or as an option generating or an expanding strategy.
It would be something really interesting to talk to the authors about because again, I can't really figure out whether or not the APIC model works in both domains until I get past the jump between Formalism 13 and all the way up to 17, 18, 19, or 20.
But I mean, with an explanation of that, and a gentle prod, it'd be interesting to find out how that works when those things seem to be, we as physiological entities are able to juggle both the risk management and the option generating or option expanding.
So I am really actually quite excited about that from a, here's what I'm feeling.
How should I read that in terms of what I can, how far out I can make my next bet from an allostatic perspective.
I think that's really exciting.
I think that's really exciting.
If you, if, if, like I said, if I can get a better sense of how that jump works in their model.
Yeah, definitely interested in that infinite time horizon and that mentality of like, what's the best physiological decision over the infinite horizon?
Right.
Right.
Right.
That's a great question.
And yeah, the eternal now, the presence.
And then also just a little bit more mundanely, like what kind of data are relevant for this type of model?
Is it data that already exists for people?
Is it something where you can extrapolate a lot from a sparse data set?
Or do you need a bunch of replication to get good statistical confidence on the model parameter and extract findings that are like non-trivial?
And where's this technology or approach being used or where could it be used?
There's like a lot of things that'll be interesting to talk about.
Well, thank you for all the preparation and help on this one, Dean, and see you in the dot one and beyond.
All right, my friend.
Take care.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.


Bye.

## tGd-mgSdbio

Hello everyone.
We're in Active Inference livestream number 50.1 on October 20th, 2022.
We're discussing the paper Interoception as Modeling Allostasis as Control.
Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.
We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will be following video etiquette for livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about how to get involved with different learning groups and projects like the livestreams and otherwise.
We're here in livestream number 50.1 with our second discussion of the paper Interoception as Modeling Allostasis as Control.
Previously, we had number 50.0 where Dean and I provided some background and context.
And now we're really appreciative that we'll have some authors joining for the .1 and .2 to unpack and explore some ideas.
And today it'll be great to hear from multiple authors, see a little presentation, and dive into the middle of things, the thick of things as we do in the .1.
And so we'll begin with introductions, then we will have a presentation, and then discussion.
So we'll begin with introductions with non-authors first, and they can feel free to introduce, say hi, and anything that they're excited to explore today.
So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California, and I'm looking forward to understanding some of the formalisms in the model, and how they connect to active inference and Bayesian mechanics.
And I'll pass to Dave.
Hi, I'm Dave.
I'm a discourse curator, a student of Yak Pongset and Mark Solms.
I live in the mile-high academic city of Baguio, 200 kilometers north of Manila.
Dean.
Thanks, Dave.
I'm Dean, I'm in Calgary.
What's interesting to me is that on a metaphorical level, this started out me in an open field, and I got into a forest, and that forest got denser and denser.
And by the time I got to Section 4 of this paper, I started reading it over and over again, which is a fantastic sign, because if I have to read something many, many times to really get my head around it, that's good.
Because I don't question things unless I don't get them.
And that doesn't mean that it wasn't spelled out correctly.
It just means that you got my attention.
So I'm not sure which author to pass it to first.
Maybe Eli, if you'd like to say hi.
Hello, everyone.
I am Eli.
I'm the first author on this paper.
So a bit before the livestream started, Jordan was mentioning that this work comes out of what we were sort of studying together in our lab at an energetics working group, brain energetics reading group before the pandemic really hit us.
And so when I was confined, you know, I effectively started reading and rereading, you know, everything that we had gone through and trying to come up with some way to think about allostasis.
Because in our group and in our previous publications as a group, the interdisciplinary affective science lab, we've referenced allostasis a lot.
And every time I would ask, you know, how can we give a mathematical or computational characterization of allostasis?
I would basically be told, well, you know, we thought Peter Sterling had one.
And then I would go look at Peter Sterling and he's the originator of the concept of allostasis, by the way.
So there's numerous works by him on the subject, probably the longest form, let's say, non expert treatment would probably be his book.
What is hell?
Peter Sterling is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known
And yet, on the other hand, if you ask him, well, how is this done?
He would effectively say, this is done by reinforcement learning via the dopaminergic
systems in the brain.
Now the dopaminergic systems in the brain don't track a shifting signal over time.
They just maximize reward.
And so actually, in my view, at least as a computationalist, they were more homeostatic
than allostatic.
And from that contradiction and what followed on from it really came this whole paper.
But to reemphasize, I would say, and before we jump into slides, material inside the paper,
I think it's really worth emphasizing, just based on watching the 50.0 livestream, that
our group are more, let's say, biologists and physiologists in orientation than physicists.
So Bayesian, the paper on Bayesian mechanics came out while we were writing this.
And I don't think we really managed to integrate the two sets of material yet together, or together
yet.
That's not to say they can't or shouldn't be integrated.
So to speak.
We don't always have the physics and dynamical systems expertise of someone like Thomas Parr
or Maxwell Ramstead, let alone Carl Tristan.
On the other hand, we have very concrete notions of what biology and physiology we need to
fit to fit to.
Awesome.
And really, the bulk of this paper, you know, the reason it's not just a short section for,
with some math, is because we have to fit to the physiology and anatomy that we know about.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Jordan, feel free to intro, and then Eli, off to you for some presentation.
For sure.
So, I'm a postdoc in the lab here.
So I think maybe I'll just give some context of where we're both working to and how we've
got here.
So, for me, I've had a bit of a weird path to get to this point in that I did my PhD in
social psychology and moral psychology.
It's been sort of trans, got really, really interested in predictive processing perspectives
and active inference, and then really wanted to dig into that and find someone who's working
on it around here in Boston.
So I'm working with Lisa Feldman Barrett and Karen Quigley, who co-direct the Interdisciplinary
Affective Sciences Lab here.
And like you guys saying, the perspective that we have is really more of a biologically grounded
one or more of one that's based in physiology and neuroscience.
So Lisa and Karen will joke that Lisa sort of handles everything from the neck up and Karen
handles everything from the neck down.
So together they form a whole person.
And what I was really lucky to do was I stumbled into an existing collaboration that had been
going on for about a decade here, which we call the Psychology Engineering Neuroscience
Group or the Penn Group.
Where there's been an ongoing collaboration with professors in the electrical engineering
department.
Probably most importantly, Dana Brooks has really helped run it a lot.
But Dennis Odogmas and Jennifer Dee have both also been like really, really involved in this.
And so what they would do is they'd meet every week and they would sort of pour through active
inference papers, predictive processing papers, information theory.
They'd sort of catch all of us neuroscientists up to speed on understanding engineering.
And we try to bring them up to speed on a sort of biological understanding of neuroscience too.
So what we've been really interested in doing is thinking about some of the abstractions
that had come up in the active inference literature and thinking about how to ground those biological
processes and how to really make this tractable at an empirical biological level.
And so the interest that I've had in brain energetics has been a way to apply some of that traction
onto my original interest, which is sort of moral and social norms.
So I've done a bit of work on thinking about how we can think about energetic costs of information
processing as a way of how individuals exercise control over a social environment by conforming
to expectations within it.
And then at the same time, I've been interested in going to the other end and thinking about
some of the details of brain metabolism and brain glucose metabolism that are associated
with the bold fMRI signal so that we can really dig down deeper into the metabolism that's
underlying the neuroimaging literature.
But in the process of basically performing this or forming this energetics reading group,
where you've been digging into all of those topics to try to understand the brain biology,
Eli and I really ended up working together in this paper to try to apply some of that energetics
and biological work.
Again, with a ton of help from Karen and Lisa, who really know the details of the neuroscience
and the actual physiology.
I think Karen, especially, Eli, would probably say has been really, really, really critical
for understanding these physiological systems.
But basically, yeah, how we can have some of the parameters and assumptions of these active
inference models grounded in real biological terms so that we can start to look to the
empirical literature, the biological literature, and sort of gain some more inspiration from
that rather than just living entirely at an abstract level.
Cool.
And with that, I'll hand it over to Eli.
Excellent.
Excellent.
All right.
I've unshared.
Feel free to go for it.
Thanks for that context.
And just of note, this paper does bring in some topics that we haven't discussed on any
of the preceding 50 papers, many of which were also motivators of what you set out to explore.
So I'll just crop in, resize, and so on.
And Eli, please go for it.
All right.
So before I really get into the material of the paper, I think it might be useful to follow
on from what Jordan said in order to additionally motivate sort of our turn towards biology and
physiology here, which is that most of the time inactive inference modeling, note that I
say modeling or in active inference physics, so to speak, you need a term in your expected free energy or in your joint density.
That is, sorry, the generative joint density, not the recognition one, which you would call often.
I've heard it called the prior preferences, essentially a probability density over sensory outcomes that describes what.
It's hard to avoid anthropomorphic language here, but oh well, what you want to observe.
Now, in real biological systems that, you know, as we sort of can hear from Peter Sterling or numerous other authors that cannot be fixed.
The that is, you know, prior preferences can't be fixed.
It's I do I prefer different observations when I'm about to go to sleep versus when I am waking up.
And the assumption that usually gets baked into.
Principles like say the free energy principle.
Is that.
Actually, let me moderate that a little bit based on conversations with some free energy principle folks.
If you have a non path based, a state based formulation of the free energy principle, then you will typically assume something called ergodicity.
And you'll note that we have an appendix about ergodicity.
I saw that you discussed it last week in the point zero episode.
Thank you for catching on to that.
And thank you to anyone in the audience and the listenership who caught on to that.
And the ergodicity assumption essentially allows you to exchange uncertainty about time or over time for uncertainty in the moment.
So you can just say there's a Gaussian prior preference density.
It has this much precision or this much variance, depending on which which way you prefer to put your division sign.
And then it's the same for all time.
Now, if you're doing a path based formulation, then you lose the tie between the free energy principle and conventional physiological notions of homeostasis.
Because now, after all, can't the set point be anything or everything?
You need to know something about physiology, anatomy to tie it back.
And so that's really the motivation we're coming from in this paper is what if you have to acquire or learn prior preferences throughout development?
How little can you bake in?
How little is this?


























And so we start by sort of reviewing in the paper and in these slides, the sort of perspectives
that we study from, study the nervous system, study the brain. One of them is predictive
processing. I think that's probably going to be the important one for this audience.
And in predictive processing, we talk about the perceptual systems of the brain, really,
the sensory systems as performing approximate Bayesian inference. So then you'll have top-down
prediction signals, bottom-up prediction error signals, and there's this notion of active inference,
which says that we essentially treat motor outputs as parameters to the recognition model
in one of the earliest formulations, before there was any expected free energy.
But ultimately, it still says in any new or recent formulation, we have some notion of prediction
error between densities. And this is an information theoretic quantity. So really, we're talking about
a divergence or an entropy or a cross-entropy. We want to minimize that. And we're not only going to
minimize that by changing the top-down predictions that flow through, say, the sensory cortex, we're also
going to change these extra parameters that correspond to motor predictions, motor commands,
motor references, depending on the terminology you want to use to refer to them.
So then in our lab, where we are sort of biologists of emotion, we often study interoception.
And that's really, it's given a fairly vague definition on the slide here, because there's a lot of debate
among neuroanatomists about sort of where interoception ends and exteroception begins, which exact
modalities should be classified which way or another. But really, interoception is still a set of, or category
of sensory modalities. And when I say sensory modalities, I am mentioning that specifically because
the literature on interoception is the literature on interoceptive active inference, then tends to take
what we might call the earliest form of active inference. It takes the road of the earliest form of active
inference saying, I have a generative density, I have a recognition density. Action becomes effectively a
parameter to fit the recognition density to the generative density. And there isn't really a notion of
an internal generative model that is separate, that separates belief and desire.
So in a lot of the literature on interoceptive active inference,
you'll find references to having very precise priors, or even, you know, innate priors about interoceptive parameters.
And you'll see this notion that you use active inference in the interoceptive domain more than you use it in
the somatic domain, because you're trying to fit your internal physiology to a notion of
a priori set points that are determined by evolution.
Do you think you could give an example of that, Eli? Of what sort of set points people might think
are innate? Yeah, so, let's see, I've seen carbon dioxide levels in the blood mentioned, glucose levels,
core body temperature is really the one that I tend to go back to, because it really does remain constant
most of the time. It can vary, but really that's an in extremis type of situation.
So if you think about core body temperature, there's a circuit in, I believe, Jordan, correct me if I'm wrong,
but this is the NTS again, isn't it? The nucleus tractus solitarius? Yeah, okay.
Essentially, in the brainstem, there's a circuit that codes the
typical set point for core body temperature. And from an active inference perspective, you could say
that is a fixed likelihood. It can't be parameter, re-parameterized by some prediction flowing from
higher up. Or rather, most of the time, it is not re-parameterized. So that flows down as a prediction,
and then every temperature sensor in the body can compare actual temperature to desired temperature,
calculate a precision-weighted prediction error between them, send those errors back up,
and then the brain can say, aha, I need to find a way to minimize these errors. And doing so will
effectively keep you in an environment where you can maintain your core body temperature around,
you know, I think it's 98.6 Fahrenheit is the stereotype. It varies for individuals.
Now, the reason my next slide was about allostasis is because while there are bodily parameters,
the parameters, like core temperature, that usually behave according to a set point,
really, physiologically, most parameters do not have a set point.
They move. The regulated levels move all the time. So that includes heart rate,
blood pressure, blood sugar, blood oxygen levels, various hormone levels in the endocrine systems,
inflammation levels shift over time. And I mentioned inflammation because, you know, from the body's
perspective, there is, you know, inflammation is not something with a set point of zero.
Inflammation is sometimes appropriate. And actually, if you want to think, you know,
what is the situation in which adapting all of these core parameters is physiologically adaptive,
then I think heavy exercise and sickness are probably the two largest examples.
So for heavy exercise, we could talk about, say, arousal levels. And that refers to the balance
of cooperative activity in the branches of the autonomic nervous system.
But essentially, if you're going to go for a run, say, from a predator, or after some food,
you're going to go for a run, say, you know, in your good old fashioned, you know, evo-psych ancestral environment,
you're going to need to decrease the activity in some organ systems, increase the activity in other organ systems,
and adjust physiological parameters to be regulated to the new levels.
So this is a pretty well observed fact of physiology.
You know, informally, Peter Sterling, I would say, having invented allostasis as an observation that gets made,
he then editorializes a little bit about it and says it should replace homeostasis as a mode of regulation.
So rather than having set points, you should be comparing to something like a set trajectory.
And in the ideal case, when you're theorizing, you should assume that there is no global set point of any parameter.
And of course, as we mentioned before, in extremis, this is true.
If you get ill, your body does actually override that circuit in the brainstem to raise the core temperature.
That's why you'll get chills.
You're at the same temperature, but the regulated level has been shifted up.
There's also an interesting point to make, if you go back for one second,
you're glad to just that in the way that the sort of language of science evolves here too.
And it's worth pointing out because some people might be listening and might be thinking,
you know, well, homeostasis doesn't have to include set points either.
You can have sort of hierarchical notion of homeostasis.
You can have, you know, sort of multiple levels of control involved in that.
And some people have made the same criticism of allostasis as an ocean.
So there's a paper by Carpenter.
Oh, yeah.
There's some, yeah, there's some, there's a paper we cite by Carpenter that does exactly this, right?
And so it's, but the problem is, is that even if that's like, that's technically true and people
who really know what they're doing and are using a concept of homeostasis in that way
might already understand that you don't necessarily need set points.
But the reality is, is that the way homeostasis tends to get used in the way that it tends to be
understood is it's come to have some of this association with set points or with the simple
thermostat model, as opposed to something broader that includes multiple levels of control.
And so some people who might be, some people might be curmudgeony and want to say that homeostasis
already includes all of these notions.
So we should just reclaim the term homeostasis for that.
I think we're more of the perspective that we're willing to just give that up and it might be time
to just start using a different term to remind people of those other associations.
So we're, we're ceding ground a little bit when we're using the term allostasis to just
not have to fight with people about what homeostasis really means.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani
Yes.
So Jordan is completely correct there, but I would actually even recommend that, you know,
everyone listening, if you can go find the paper, homeostasis, a plea for a unified approach
by RHS Carpenter. It's in our citations, and you should be able to type the name into Google Scholar.
Go look at it, because it'll really explain where our paper is coming from.
As a short summary of what's relevant, what Carpenter says in his paper is that back in the
good old days, they taught control theory and controls engineering to physiologists, and that included
research physiologists and also clinicians. And by back in the day, he really means back in like the
1940s to the 1960s, before another new approach took over.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani
And he says, hey, if you're an educated, mathematically mature and fluent controls engineer,
then you don't need, you know, then these awkward names are all really just different ways of cutting
the same cake. You know, it's all a control system. It's a hierarchical control system. This is very
evident, he says in the anatomy and physiology that you'll look at. He's even writing for a physiology
education journal. And then he effectively starts complaining that, you know, everyone's sort of
strawman homeostasis down to this thermostat model. And he has to complain like this in 2004, because
indeed, everyone really has sort of associated the word homeostasis with this thermostat model,
global set points, things like body temperature rather than blood glucose.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani
And as a result, there's, as a result, much of the actual control theory got simplified away.
Dr. Justin Marchegiani
So even as someone who is housed in a computer science department took a class on reinforcement learning
and can work the equations of optimal control theory,
Dr. Justin Marchegiani
I was not introduced to the concept of a reference signal as a time varying function
until Carpenter. And that was actually pretty revelatory for me, that rather than having an error
function, whose, you know, minimum, whose global minimum is fixed for all time, you can have an error
function that measures the difference between your actual trajectory and a desired trajectory.
You can do trajectory tracking control when you have the mathematics.
So we could say, for our paper, for our purposes, if homeostasis refers to this thermostat
thermostat style point tracking control, then allostasis refers to trajectory tracking control.
So moving on a little bit and getting back on the main track, from our perspectives,
informed by physiology and anatomy, and a little bit of evo-devo,
Dr. Justin Marchegiani
Interoception and allostasis have both pretty well demonstrated themselves to be
really central to how the nervous system is actually structured, and seemingly largely concerned with
the metabolism and efficient functioning of the viscera. So for anyone who wants, you know,
citations for this, I think it's, Jordan, it would be Barrett and who, 2015.
Oh, Barrett and Simmons, 2015.
Yes, Barrett and Simmons, 2015.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience paper, yeah.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, Interoceptive Predictions in the Brain.
There's a more recent review written by Karen Quigley, our other senior author on interoception, came out in 2021.
And so you can really go check for yourself, and I would advise it, just how central interoception
and visceral regulation are empirically to the nervous system. You could possibly design a nervous
system for a robot that worked differently, but the ones that evolved are ubiquitously
centered on keeping the internal milia of the body efficient.
So, yes, Dan Tickles?
Dean. Dean.
Yeah, do you mind if I have a quick question here?
Of course.
Yeah.
Because the two authors here maybe can just confirm that my parachute is packed properly.
That's what I'm basically wanting to be comfortable with.
So, just stepping back for a second, in that slide that you just had up there,
the warp and the weft here, the kind of the weave that you guys were working on on this paper,
was the allostasis and the interoception. Those were your focal points, right?
And then you've spent quite a bit in sort of prepping us for the difference between the discrete
time aspect of what you're looking at and the global capture rate, because you say,
we can't get fixed. And this is what I'm saying, I want to make sure my my chute is packed properly.
And then you're talking about biology and physiology. So just on that, on that great big,
am I going to go splat or am I going to be able to land this relatively softly? Can you,
can you maybe just tell me whether or not that is in fact, is it a comparison? Is it an intersection?
Are these things running in parallel? How much of this is risk management versus how much of this
is strategic? I would think of it more as an intersection. Okay. And when we're specifically
referring to quantities like the global capture rate, those are intended to be strategic rather
than risk management or epistemic value. Okay. So specifically there, there's a whole book on this,
let's say, Vigor, the Neuroeconomics of Movement Control by Reza Shadmir. And it chronicles in very
long form extensively the empirical evidence that real organisms will time average their reward rate.
So in order to move from an episodic setting to a continual control set, you know, to a continual
lifelong setting, you need some notion of indefinite time control. Obviously you're not going to live
until T, you know, T reaches infinity, but in the limit, you do need to have a coherent control problem,
at least for modeling purposes, because you can't fix the end of say a bird's life in the lab on a laptop.
And there's two ways conventionally to do that. One is this notion of quote unquote, the global capture
rate. So the time average, the sum of all benefits minus the sum of all costs divided by the total amount
of time. And the other is exponential discounting. Now for engineering purposes, exponential discounting
makes the math and the computations much more tractable. And so in the early 2000s, they essentially
found that the real, you know, real brains like basal ganglia, you know, and dopaminergic firing
are best fitted by time averaging. And then on the computational side, everyone ignored that and
did exponential discounting. And so really, when we talk about something like a global capture rate,
we're just saying, we're going with the biological evidence, and writing down a model that accounts
best for the empirical findings. You know, if you want to quote unquote, try this at home,
you are perfectly welcome to go ahead and switch to exponential discounting. It's fine. Or the machine
learning community is starting to come out with papers on time averaging, you know, lately, the past
couple of years.
Can I ask one more quick question then?
Of course. Yeah.
Dr. Michael B. Thank you for that for that explanation. So if we're if we're raising the
question around tractability that assumes that there's some sort of slipperiness or some fluidity
piece to this, this thing that we're looking at, what, what is that? What is that thing? That's fluid,
that's slippery, that's causing us to not normally be able to model? Is that a feature? Or is that a flaw?
Dr. Michael B. I would say the slipperiness is the slipperiness is the slip between map and territory.
Okay.
Dr. Michael B. So when talking about real brains,
we know that we observe time averaging in the territory.
Dr. Michael B. What we don't know how to do is write an algorithm
that provably produces correct time averaging and works in practice in engineering.
Dr. Michael B. Okay.
Dr. Michael B. So let's even say rather than map and territory, because a scientist has a map as well,
let's say the slippage is between empirical science and engineering.
Dr. Michael B. And when we write out our model, we are really trying to address the empirical science,
and we don't mind if engineers, you know, want to make their little slippage and use something that
just makes the algorithmics easier. That's fine. You know, and in fact, that is what the deep active
inference community does. Okay. So heading back a little more towards active inference, when we read
all of this stuff, this is sort of a bit of a Bible for our lab, Sterling and Laughlin.
So Simon Laughlin was involved in some of the earliest publications on predictive coding
in the fly retina. Peter Sterling is the originator of the concept of allostasis.
And what we actually notice, as mentioned a bit earlier, is this sort of slippage, another slippage
or contradiction. So they say, when you get a reward, some dopamine is released. This invokes a reinforcement
learning principle algorithm, you know, let's be careful with neural circuits that we're not
studying in detail for the moment. That is, let's be careful how strong a statement we make about their
function. And then most of the empirical evidence they review in the book is about the energy efficiency
of sensory firing. So we're really trying to say, we want to move from something grounded in minimizing
a prediction error, variational inference, to something grounded, ideally with an optimality principle in
control. So then there are some arguments for neuroscientists, which are more or less intended to convince
the Ewing neuroscientists that people studying interoception and people studying motor neuroscience
to need to work together on studying the viscera. You can't study the viscera and ignore the motor branch of
the visceral nervous system and the functions of that motor branch.
Now, regarding, you know, our statement of you can't just minimize prediction error,
one might ask, what about active inference? And there we have to start being careful with the term active
inference, because, you know, as I have had it personally explained to me at length, there are at least the
two different kinds of active inference. There's this very old, I think it was Adams 2013, you know,
motor active inference, predictions, not commands active inference in the motor, you know, in the motor system.
And then there's this notion of decision active inference, where you have an expected free energy,
explicit prior preferences, and so on and so on. And if you talk to the active inference community,
you know, read the papers that they can write for their own community.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: I would particularly recommend, you know, the International Workshop on Active Inference,
which I believe is going to be a conference next year. They have three years of very good papers,
where many authors sketch out the explicit connections between active inference, control as inference,
optimal control, etc. So really, when we bang on saying, you know, don't use active inference to reduce motor
function to sensory function, we're talking to some psychologists and philosophers who have been,
let's say, quite enthusiastic about predictive processing, but a bit eliminativist about some of the
mathematical constructs that are actually used in active inference.
So then, for our psychologist audience, we have once again the argument that we are basically
showing that you can and should do a fully probabilistic notion of optimal control
in order to sort out what is going on with allostatic regulation. And we're going to take some inspiration from
motor neuroanatomy and doing it.
Mark Benthien, M.D.:
So, looking at a simple model system, and this is getting into figures from the paper,
we have our baroreflex afferent response curve. You have a carotid baroreceptor. It's in the carotid
artery in the neck. It measures blood pressure, projects to a circuit in the NTS, in the brainstem.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And we bring this up here because the baroreceptor is often used as a model
interoceptor. When I talked to Karen and asked for model systems of interoception, she actually said,
you know, well, let's think about the baroreceptor first. And again, with contradiction,
what we actually find looking at the anatomy is that the baroreceptor, the carotid baroreceptor
is the sensory branch of a low-level control circuit. So the NTS will then have
not, I believe the middle inflection point is coded in the NTS here and doesn't really change much.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: But what does happen is that you can get top-down commands flowing into the NTS
and then changing the gain of this circuit. So the slope of the curve. And if you widen that slope
so that the curve is shallower, then you're preserving responsiveness.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: You're widening the approximately linear portion of the curve
while allowing for the blood pressure to rise and fall.
And so again, we see for the interoception people that you really need to think about,
you know, what is the role of this interoceptor in control of the body and of the viscera.
You can't just look at it and say, it's a sensor. Well, okay, it's a sensor. Where does it project to?
Mark Benthien, M.D.: Interoceptive cortex. No, no, not necessarily. Like, you know, the error,
the prediction error signals that reach interoceptive cortex to say, you know,
I can't pump enough blood or something like that might actually have already been processed by
what I believe in the motor active inference literature is called a reflex arc.
So there might already be a reflex controller that has operated on that signal by the time
it reaches the higher portions of the brain.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: So in our paper, we set out some vocabulary for people to use if they want to,
don't have to. Capacity curve in particular, we're going to tie it to the notion of a cumulative
distribution function later on. There's some physiology terminology for people who want to learn it.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And then we note the same thing that Carpenter does.
Carpenter and a number of other papers, which is that this is a massively hierarchical control system.
Lots of regulated substances, let's say, or regulated variables are going to have multiple controllers
influencing them. So for instance, blood nutrient levels, not just glucose, but I believe like salt,
fat, water are regulated by pairs of hormones. Sometimes there will be multiple pairs of hormones
per nutrient that has to be in the blood. And this isn't a convex fade off. So that's not antagonistic
competitive regulation. They can appear to compete sometimes, but actually it's cooperative regulation
based on the fact that, so to speak, chemical species can't encode negative numbers the way a digital
signal can. So when you do things with chemical signals, having these pairs turns out to be the way to
monitor and control the dynamic range with the greatest sensitivity.
Mark Benthien, M.D.:
So then using this example of glucagon and insulin, we can see that sort of normal glycemia
is really more of a range. And it's a range where you're going to have approximately linear response
of insulin activity.
Mark Benthien, M.D.:
And you're going to have saturated out or really you're going to have thresholded out
glucagon activity. So at a normal level of blood sugar, glucagon does not have to
retrieve additional blood sugar from the intestines or the liver. It doesn't have to call for burning fat
reserves. You essentially, you've eaten enough for the day, you're fine. Insulin is responsive
in a highly responsive mode where it can give a linear response to a linear change
in order to compensate for noise.
Mark Benthien, M.D.:
So now we can actually get towards, you know, and now that we have a controls way to think about
physiology, we can get more towards these notions of active inference.
Mark Benthien, M.D.:
And here we're going to go back to some of the sources
on that gave us motor active inference. One way to think about motor active inference is
the brain sends a prediction, the reflex arc in the spinal cord attempts to minimize prediction error
by comparing the prediction with the value read off of a proprioceptor.
So again, one way to think about that is having a few extra ways to minimize
prediction error, really entropy.
Mark Benthien, M.D.:
Another way to think about that is to think of having a very elementary control system
at the reflex arc level.
And then the brain prescribes the reference length, that is the reference signal for that controller,
and it just tries to minimize the difference between what it gets off a proprioceptor,
what it reads, the actual muscle length and tension,
Mark Benthien, M.D.: and the reference signal.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And this is actually a very, I'd almost call it a fun circuit to study,
because of just how well documented it is that there's something very much like,
I would almost say like a precision weighted PID controller in there.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: You know, if you're a math person, then a muscle is kind of like a spring.
A spring can be, you know, the dynamics for a spring,
metal spring, stretch it and crunch it, you know, can be linearized around certain points.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And you, so you can just about write down an LTI PID controller for a muscle,
for an individual muscle spindle.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And you'll get two parameters coming down from the brain,
one of which says the reference length,
and the other of which says, you know, what's the sensitivity or gain against perturbation
Mark Benthien, M.D.: that you should exercise.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And this is actually how your voluntary movements are engaged.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: So really,
all of this stuff about references that we're talking about here
is just putting forward to the hypothesis that maybe visceromotor control works on the same
computational and anatomical principles as voluntary somatomotor control.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: Of course, instead of the commands coming down from, say,
somatomotor cortex, they might be coming from ganglia in the autonomic nervous system.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: With the higher level central nervous system,
basically just prescribing rough levels of activity, activation or deactivation for the two
different sides of the autonomic nervous system.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: Which then, again, in this opponent fashion, semi-opponent,
fully cooperative fashion,
allow us to avoid encoding digital negative numbers and thereby give you very finely balanced control
over the internal milieu.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: So we eventually get to our figure, which essentially says,
if I know what resource supplies, metabolic resource supplies,
nutrients, oxygen, carbon dioxide, that sort of thing,
Mark Benthien, M.D.: I'm going to have in the future, then my goal is going to be,
let's not say to maximize uncertainty, nor to minimize uncertainty, but really to maximize resilience or freedom.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: To stay in the linear portion of a cumulative distribution function,
where you can be responsive to any remaining or upcoming perturbation.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And so we draw here that you can have this capacity estimator,
close the loop, and start directing motor actions via active inference,
in order to follow this preference for resilience against perturbation of the internal milia,
which is then tied to interoceptive state estimation, your other state estimators, your actual sensory
services, surfaces, and this whole wiring diagram.
Mark Benthien, M.D.: And maybe one thing just to add to, right, just to underscore a point is that
what I think, if you go back one slide here,
and so how this relates to the sort of adaptive range of the settling point too, and what I think
is really interesting about this, right, is that you're not defining, like when we started out talking
about how you might traditionally think about set points for homeostasis in like a very traditional
thermostat model, right? What you're talking about here is that there's actually, if the overall goal of
the brain, if the brain is essentially there to help regulate and adapt the sort of entire biological
system of the body to circumstances outside of it that are constantly going to be changing different
challenges that it's going to have to be responsive to, then you don't necessarily have a set point,
but you have a range where the physiology can be most adaptable to those perturbations and challenges,
right? And so even just, I think to simplify, to the sort of, I think that that idea is really at the
core of what we're trying to talk about, right? That you essentially want to have a range where the
physiology can be adaptive. And you would imagine that if the physiology is, if some of these parameters
are pushed way, way, way far outside of the center of that sigmoid, then you're going to have a problem
in that they will not be able to adapt to changes. You're not going to be able to be at that linear
point of maximum adaptability. If you're down here near the threshold and you get, you know,
some random white noise that pushes you over that threshold, obviously there isn't a discrete
catastrophic failure, but also obviously you can no longer mount a proportional response.
Yeah. Your body is made of, you know, physical instruments which have a limited range of responsiveness.
Yeah. And so our notion of allostasis is to say, when you can widen the range of responsiveness
rather than narrowing it, or rather widen the range of responsiveness when possible,
while narrowing the set of states or the distribution of states that you actually fall into.
Yeah. Yeah. And so you look like doing somewhat opposite things.
And so would it be the case too, right? That you could have, there's different ways that you can
have these systems become sort of maladaptive. And that if that's, if that linear, if that sigmoid
becomes steeper and steeper and steeper, where you basically have, it's just a very, very narrow range
where you can actually have an adaptive response, that can be one potential problem. Another potential
problem can be when the sort of baseline level, like you're saying, is pushed far outside of that
threshold. Then also you're going to require a lot more work and a lot more controls or a lot more
control of that system needed to really push it far outside of that range to actually adapt.
Or to push it back really.
Or to push it back again. Yeah. Which could cause other problems downstream as well. Right. But, but the
point is just that you, the sort of range that you want the system to settle into is a range where
it can be adaptive to changes and prepare for, for fluctuating sorts of circumstances. Right.
Yeah. So I think a good intuition to leave with, since we are drawing towards the end of the hour,
is that if you were to try to minimize interoceptive uncertainty, then what you might do is just stay
home all the time. Your heart rate will never vary too much up and down. And we're living in the modern
world where you don't have to run away from tigers. So, you know, why deal with the uncertainty of going
out and exercising or the perturbation of going out and exercising. And what our notion of allostasis here
might tell you in reply is to say, when you go out and exercise, the curve gets wider. And so the
adaptive range where you can mount a proportional response gets wider. So go out and exercise because
it actually increases your resilience to physiologic, to future physiological challenge.
So it's still within the active inference set of intuitions, but we're really baking in this
assumption that you should preemptively prepare yourself against possible challenge rather than
effective, rather than acting to avoid possible challenge. We've moved the handling of challenge
into the body. Dean, go ahead. As you get to those extremes of those crisis moments, we talked
about a little bit about this in the dot zero. How does the interplay or the instructional proportion
change between something that's interactive and range seeking to range reentering? I'm curious if
that if the formalisms change as those extremes are reached, because as you said, things don't always
become irreversibly catastrophically set. So what could you like, based on what you guys have obviously
looked at, what's your sense about how that relationship between interaction and instruction
shifts as we get to those really hard limits? Jordan, you're often a little better on physiology than me.
Do you want to take this or? Oh, no. I'm not sure. I think you might have it.
Do you want to take this or? I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure.
I'm honestly not so great on physiology because I rely on Karen for it.
I would almost say that there's a map territory failure here
where we were trying to model, so to speak, normal function under normal function with that intuition
about resilience against challenge. Okay.
And there's several possible responses to an extreme circumstance. One is that some high up control
mechanism can start overriding these operating points, pushing them away from where they normally
are. And then that allows you to deal with extreme circumstances by no longer treating them as errors
at all. So say if you're sick, your core body temperature is modulated upwards. That puts you in a fever state.
This is expensive metabolically, and it feels bad compared to how you normally function, but it should cook the germs.
And then when the extreme state, you know, when that emergency is over, supposedly, hopefully, usually, you'll be able to go back to normal function.
There are, of course, exceptions such as, say, long COVID.
Okay. Right.
Just to make sure though, do you see a change in the amount of literally commands and the amount of back and forth as you approach those limits?
Or do you think they kind of just realize that they're getting closer and closer to a fall off point?
Yeah.
I think that's actually an open and empirical question.
Yeah.
So one of the reasons that we went as far as writing a full mathematical model in this paper
is because there often, there isn't that much empirical neurocomputational work on interoception at all.
So if you ask very basic questions like, is interoception predictively
encoded below the neck?
That's still an open question.
Okay.
It could be that peripheral interoceptors are just
transducing a stimulus signal,
and then it's only predictably encoded when it hits the brain.
We don't know yet.
Okay.
So we'd rather have some...
Briefly lost, Eli.
It could be the last one.


While Eli is rejoining.
Okay.
Very interesting.
I think that's a different path through the same material.
Dave, if your question is for Eli, we can wait a few seconds.
Not necessarily.
I have just a side comment.
You don't necessarily have to respond to this.
The discussion reminds me of two different fallacies.
One is the dark room fallacy.
You know, if you want to minimize it, it's a kind of a parody of active inference.
If you don't want to be surprised, then just stay in a dark room where nothing changes,
which has been dismissed pretty thoroughly by active inference activists.
Right.
Also, there was a fallacy, kind of a social Darwinist, tinged interpretation of the observation that
every species has a fixed number of heartbeats, and therefore valuable people, members of parliament,
and clergymen, should not work because you're eating up your lifetime.

Right.
Which, of course, isn't true because your heart beats more slowly, so it's stretched out more if you're in good shape.
Right.
But more relevant, the steepness of the reflex curve.
I sometimes feel that folks working in active inference cover maybe too much with the notion of precision.
That this is just one quantity.
And it looks like that slope in the blood pressure curve, but that might, is that something that would tend to be covered by the term precision?
And if so, should that be approached in a more differentiated way rather than just being a single number that applies in lots and lots of areas of control and perception?
That's interesting.
So normally the precision, right, is normally applied to the predictions.
So there's an idea of the precision of the predictions being applied.
And in this case, I think the idea is more of,
so it comes back to where the,
you might talk about prior preferences being targeted in active inference models.
And I think the slope, the response curve there is instead trying to target that use of prior preferences, right?
So it's trying to target specifically where is,
where is the system trying to be navigated?
It's been,
yeah, when people talk about prior preferences, they've talked about it sometimes in terms of
the system having a sort of strong prior,
strong, precise priors being encoded,
like a priori priors being encoded
to be targeted.
And in this case, I think it's,
we're trying to give an account of where some of those priors can come from and how the system
and how sort of opponent processes can, or opponent chemicals can help regulate the physiology.
And we're trying to get a more natural approach of where those can come about from.
So, but I think,
if it is replaced, I'm just trying to think, to talk aloud, to think through the question.
So, if it is replacing basically a prior preference,
and if normally that prior preference would be handled by a sort of precision account of it,
then to some extent, the steepness of that curve is trying to tackle,
is somewhat of a replacement of the precision, but...
But yeah, it's...
It's giving a different way of...
Yeah, maybe it is a replacement for the precision in that case.
Eli's back, so maybe I can try to answer your question.
Eli, do you want to complete your presentation?
Um, sure, but if...
Just to answer the question, if we're talking about the gain on one of these signoid curves,
then...
Yeah, that's sort of a replacement for the precision, but it's really thinking about...
It's thinking about it the other way around.
So, a variance quantifies your tolerance for error.
A precision or a gain quantifies response to error.
Yes.
So...
Yeah.
So, when you're talking about purely sensory,
these exteroceptive signals,
the ones that aren't prescribing references to you in any way,
then, of course, you know, you want to save the neural response, which is metabolically expensive,
for precise signals.
If you're talking about an internal, you know, physiological curve,
say, reaction to a change in blood pressure,
then you want to try and make the gain shallower.
You want to tolerate variance.
Sorry about getting...
My...
My home modem, I think, just restarted itself for Noah Paraphason.
We call that a sleep-wake cycle.
Yeah.
It did some sleep phase gradient updates.
But it's simpler, it's refreshed, it's ready for you to complete the presentation,
and then we'll return.
Very interesting, though.
So...
Okay.
See...
Share screen.
Here we are.
All right.
Continue.
Yeah.
So now we start getting into
really what scant visual material is available for Section 4,
which I think we'll have to go over in detail in a more Q&A format a little bit.
But...
So if we then want to talk about how do we integrate decision-active inference
into this allostatic view,
then we can say decision-making is this notion of optimal control.
Control subject to a set of expectations about the future.
So we'll have to write an objective function.
And then we'll have our wiring diagram back.
And we'll note that motor references issued top-down are now conditioned upon or subject to
predictions about the future.
So if we're going to get into what this objective function is actually made up out of,
is to first take the intuition that we start from neural circuits that can only do predictive
processing as we know it,
then one thing we can do with them is simulate some ensemble or population
of potential state trajectories or really state action trajectories
starting from some initial state.
Then given an objective function, we can estimate the time average
given our ensemble.
We can turn that into feedback control, getting the stability in control theory,
the closed loop stability derived from using feedback,
by then having a recognition model.
And then we can say, ah, I'm going to update my entire ensemble or population of simulations
by taking them from the recognition model,
which is conditional upon observed sensory outcomes.
And then having predictions from the recognition density,
which we're superscripting here with superscript parentheses two
in comparison to superscript parentheses one here.
We can then penalize a notion of distance.
So really we can penalize the quote unquote size of the update
in information theoretic terms.
And if you've seen a free energy or an expected free energy written out term by term before,
you should have seen one of these.
So it's a KL divergence.
But what that gives us is feedback stabilized control using probability models.
And that actually gets to more or less the end of the slides per se.
So as a few summary points,
our computational model gives us a useful notion of affordance competition.
Basically run a bunch of forward simulations,
pick the ones that are going to have good expected values over time averaging
to actually enact as motor references.
The sigmoidal curves,
after we've taken their derivatives to convert them to probability densities,
then taken the logarithm of those to convert to log densities,
which is much more typical for active inference,
like a log prior preference.
Those actually provide a notion of common currency.
Because now we've normalized,
you know,
all notion of probability mass to one.
So a density over one variable and a density over the other variable have the same units.
We don't need any more notion of a reward currency in this model.
We don't need any more.

We don't need any more.
We don't need any more.
Then there's some encouragement for the anatomists and physiologists to say,
hey,
let's go look at autonomic and visceromotor regulation
and see if we can understand it
in terms of these motor control circuits at the low level.
And that just brings us to,
you know,
some very overall conclusions.
Ideally,
our work should be placed in dialogue with,
you know,
active inference as control work by other authors.
And of course,
acknowledgements.
You can really see here how much work went into this on behalf of absolutely everyone in the team.
And references.
So I'll stop sharing and we can shift to a more interactive format.
Awesome.
Well,
thanks for sharing that.
And so where was that previously shared?
In what context?
Just in the context of our lab group.
All right.
Cool.
So the slides.
The college of engineering group.
You're talking.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So the slides are really made for this,
like biologist psychology with a few engineers group.
Cool.
Okay.
Well,
many,

many ways,
many paths to go.
Just to kind of highlight a few pieces.
Under this broad umbrella of physiology,
one important point you raised,
was how much homeostasis,
same stasis,
is in effect versus a mechanism of actually,
is that stabilization,
sometimes empirically of stasis,
and even homeostasis,
is that underlain by a drive to a set point,
as it has been simplified or understood as in that simple thermometer model.
And then to what extent do we bring in allostasis,
hormesis,
arousal,
and different physiological phenomena,
and consider these all part of just the dynamic and multimodal homeostatic engagement
of complex bodies versus discard the old and with the new,
and how much to lump and split physiology,
when even at the single cellular life form level,
they're engaging from a computational or control or information theoretic perspective
in processes that are analogous to some of these.
That's one point that we can explore.
Another area to explore is on that theme of what are these systems doing,
and how do we model it,
the map territory or the engineering basic research question.
We could talk about a given physiological process,
body temperature stabilization,
or the baroreceptor,
the glucose,
and so on.
Is there the minimization of a difference,
for example,
between preferred and observed?
Is there a maximization of reward,
according to some reward function?
Is there a maximization of precision?
Precision on what?
Is there a maximization of responsivity,
which corresponds in the sigmoidal curve family to the linearized region?
Are there cases where all four of these things are going to be happening indistinguishably?
Is there a case where some of these phenomena are occurring at the detriment of others?
Can we differentiate models and actually make unique predictions,
explanations,
and control systems
if we move our emphasis
from one of these lenses to another lens?
And how should we think about different physiological systems,
ranging from the implicit and very ancient mechanisms
to those which consciously may even feel like,
for example,
error minimization,
reward maximization,
precision maximization,
responsivity maximization?
So I'll pause there,
and either authors may make some remarks,
or anyone may raise a question or thought.
I wanted to ask you maybe just to direct within this,
because you talked at the end about
that this gets us away from
having to have a reward currency.
Oh, yeah.
And maybe I'd be interested if you can elaborate on that a little bit.
So just what would the typical role of reward currency would be,
and how does the framework that you're proposing change that?
Right?
Yeah.
So really, I'd back off and say,
you know,
what changes this is the active inference point of view.
Right?
So, quote unquote,
typically,
if you're doing something like,
if you're someone like Yael Neve or Sam Gershman,
then you think about reward as,
in a reinforcement learning terms,
as something that the brain has to maximize.
And then you would say,
all right,
well,
I want the uncertainty of my beliefs to be minimized
while I maximize reward.
So those are then two separate modular computations
that have almost opposite goals.
One of them is to minimize uncertainty right now,
and the other is to maximize reward over the long term.
And in comes,
you know,
active inference,
and really says,
no, no,
if you phrase this as a variational optimization problem,
then you can get a unified objective for this.
Where,
you know,
the common currency is,
so to speak,
evidently,
evidence,

really,
you know,
evidence that you're following the correct trajectory,
evidence that you're executing a behavior correctly,
and evidence varies,
you know,
in terms of,
I guess we would call them Nats or bits,
are the units in information theory.
So if you're using,
you know,
E as the basis of your logarithm,
then it's Nats.
If you're using a log2 base,
it's bits.
My dogs are getting picked up for their walks.
So.
Yes,
this is a very interesting,
complimentary perspective,
where we'll get reward maximization over time.
When we increase our precision.
Now,
everybody agrees on that.
And is it going to be the cart before the horse or the horse before the cart?
And which one's the horse and which one's the cart?
And framing the unified objective function in information theoretic terms as a surprisal bounding heuristic,
as has been done in Bayesian evidence,
and the lower bounds for a long time.
By framing surprise minimization bounding as the unified objective function and currency,
then there is the realized maintenance of homeostasis,
or however we want to call that,
without needing a traditionally structured maximization of reward as defined by a reward or time discounted reward function.
And it's also very interesting,
like we're not trying to accumulate body temperature.
We're not trying to accumulate glucose.
If we were playing a game where simply more points were better,
like some social and sub-social games,
then a unilateral optimization via maximization paradigm makes a lot of sense.
But for the kind of physiological infinite games that we play,
as you highlighted with the infinite horizon,
then it may make more sense to have a bounded responsivity
and an emphasis on controllability under inherited priors that those controllable ranges are the survivable ranges.
Otherwise, how could one have existed for generations
rather than try to stack up glucose?
Yeah, so I think it's always really interesting to go back and read Peter Sterling in this light,
because beyond just the formal physiological material,
there are these stories that he can tell of, for instance,
people living in long-term stressful situations,
and they develop what we would now call the diseases of civilization,
which Sterling sort of implies are the diseases of homeostasis,
living too much the same too much of the time.
And indeed, speaking of not wanting to stack up glucose,
this is an actual disease that happens to people that is called diabetes.
It is considered a pathology.
And so there's almost an interesting misfit between that intuitive notion of reward,
or at least let's sneer slightly and say that economic notion of reward,
which has to be a form of accumulable wealth in a common currency,
versus physiology in which too much of a good thing is actually a bad thing again.
Right.
Right.
And that actually comes back to if you,
there's a part of what this is contributing then, right,
in one way is a sort of shift in metaphor, right?
Or it's, I think that point about an economic conception of value and of reward is,
it's useful to have a counterpoint to that because as Eli is saying,
there is no upper limit to economic reward.
There's a benefit to accumulating it.
You think about sort of accumulating capital to spend it.
In this case, right, what we're focusing on is how to basically keep balanced and adaptable
so that future challenges can be actually encountered and dealt with.
And that sometimes means packing light,
not keeping so much glucose on hand so that you can like deal with the reward
or deal with changing circumstances and adapt to them.
But you can't, it's actually, it's maybe, yeah,
it's maybe been a pretty serious problem to have this completely abstracted notion of value
that is endlessly accumulatable and doesn't actually,
doesn't interface with any of the biological realities of what systems are actually doing, right?
There's, it's, it's, it's so, it's so abstract that it's,
it's, it's going to have a really hard time interfacing with biology.
Yeah.
Before we go to the question, let's say, let's sum that up by saying bank accounts are unbounded
and they're useful because they're unbounded.
You know, the, like an economist can conceive of trillions of dollars in assets in a way that my body cannot.
Bodies are bounded.
If you, you know, they are physically bounded.
They are made of a finite amount of matter at once.
If you try to put too much more into them, something bad will happen.
Actually, after sending us off on that channel of discussion,
I've got to duck off a little bit early,
but I'm going to try to be back for 50.2 next week.
And I'm really interested to see where this conversation goes.
So I'll catch up on the, the rehab.
Thank you.
All right.
Thanks.
If nobody minds, I'd like to ask Dave his question first,
just because I was about to, when I got kicked off.
Yep.
Go for it, Dave.
Or, um, is that one that I said?
Um, yeah, I know which one that was.
Um, if you have a new question is fine.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
That's probably better.
Um, yeah.
Just per, per to what we were speaking of just now, the, the diseases of civilization,
there is the rumor, and maybe this was just a fallacy or a misunderstanding that people
who managed to stay in London during the blitz under conditions that you would expect would
produce massive amount of psych, um, psychosomatic disease, hysteria, conversion syndromes, that
it didn't happen.
People were just preposterously sane because they didn't have time to be sick.
They didn't have time to be crazy.
Did that really happen?
Did the sense of mission override what otherwise would have been general stress syndrome causing
breakdowns?
Um, does someone know the detailed history of the London blitz in World War II?
Because I really don't.
It's, it's a perfect, uh, not English.
Not English.
Dot 1.5, um, journey for us to explore, but to, to speak to it generally, it's an interesting
question as well.
To what extent by comforting and regularizing we even work against that and let alone neglect
other trade-offs and incur externalities?
Um, Dean?
Dean Mitchell- Yeah, this has been fantastic.
I, so here's, here's my thing.
Um, and I, maybe in the, in the, in the dot two, we'll, we'll get into the, I mentioned at the end of the dot zero, I was, I was hoping you really had some really velvet gloves to walk me through the 4.4.
Because, and especially after the context you've been able to provide us today around the idea that, um, you know, engineers and psychologists came into a room.
Now, I don't know if that, once you got into that room, it became an intersection with red light, green light, and you guys kind of played a red Rover, come on over thing or weather.
And I'm so well,
Dean Mitchell- Well, here's the thing, because I actually did work with CFOs and engineers.
Dean Mitchell- And, and so what you discover is there's a bit of an isomorphist.
Dean Mitchell- I want to be able to diagram this out for you view that, that tends to be biased for engineers.
Dean Mitchell- And then there's the spatially enveloped view of the psychologist, right?
Dean Mitchell- Like they're in their phenomenological space.
Dean Mitchell- And what you've done is you've tried to say what, what, when those two worlds come together, I don't know if it's a collision.
Dean Mitchell- I don't know if it's a cooperation.
Dean Mitchell- It's a variety of things, right?
Dean Mitchell- It's complicated.
Dean Mitchell- We'll just leave it there.
Dean Mitchell- But my, my question is this.
Dean Mitchell- As I got to 4.4.
Dean Mitchell- It felt like if I was skiing, I went from a beautiful powder field to some sparsely
Dean Mitchell- Distance trees to tighter and tighter.
Dean Mitchell- And finally, I was like, I don't know how it can keep going because there doesn't seem to be any more gaps here.
Dean Mitchell- It's just getting too tight for me.
Dean Mitchell- And the reconciliation, like when you're skiing as a metaphor, is you're not looking at the trees.
Dean Mitchell- You're looking at the, at the non things, the non objects, it's a reconciliation.
Dean Mitchell- And when we're talking about dodgeball as your metaphor, or whether we're talking about.
Dean Mitchell- glucagon control these to me what you were describing up until that point.
Dean Mitchell- Was essentially you were saying.
Dean Mitchell- For us to know what's going on we're going to look at the risk management.
Dean Mitchell- We're going to look at the coordination we're going to look at those things that are essentially backwards facing.
Dean Mitchell- We can say that in order for the process to carry forward to continue.
Dean Mitchell- There has to be some addressing of those factors and then.
Dean Mitchell- There has to be the reconciliation just like when the engineers and the psychologists are proximal to one another it's an entanglement.
Dean Mitchell- And it's not a the engineers get to tell the psychologist what to do any more than the psychologist get to tell the engineers what to do right so.
Dean Mitchell- If if the behavioral piece if the idea of the biology and the physiology is if I do this now.
Dean Mitchell- In real terms.
Dean Mitchell- I have to look at that and you guys had an l4 different time frames.
Dean Mitchell- Right.
Dean Mitchell- I can manage that you spoke clearly to that I read that and it was clear to me I was I got it.
Dean Mitchell- I can coordinate that.
Dean Mitchell- And again, that was very, very clear and then I got to 4.4 and I simply lost the thread because what I was looking for was the reconciliation.
Dean Mitchell- I will align this next move with the range recapitulator.
Dean Mitchell- That's what I was expecting next.
Dean Mitchell- And then so I went okay so where is the strategy because that's there when when psychologists and engineers get into a room they don't just abandon.
Dean Mitchell- Their strategy it comes with them it follows them into that space and carries them to that question of I reconcile.
Dean Mitchell- An advantage and all of the above until I choose this choice while always keeping all the above.
Dean Mitchell- So you guys talked about that in other parts of it, you said we can't just abandon it.
Dean Mitchell- But I couldn't understand how the formalism reconciled it.
Dean Mitchell- So I'm sorry that's such a long winded question but but your paper.
Dean Mitchell- Oh, it's been six hours of my life going these guys have got to be much closer to answering this because I've never been able to answer it.
Dean Mitchell- But then I got lost.
Dean Mitchell- I just felt like oh man, what am I missing.
Dean Mitchell- Okay, so I'm going to disappoint you slightly and say, you know what you're missing is that.
Dean Mitchell- I think what's missing from our writing.
Dean Mitchell- Is really being clear that we're working under a very unusual set of constraints in how we formulated this model.
Dean Mitchell- So specifically, unlike, say, Sam Gershman or Yael Neve.
Dean Mitchell- Or unlike the literature on deep active inference in computers.
Dean Mitchell- We're assuming that you essentially don't need
Dean Mitchell- An extra set of computational ingredients for reinforcement learning.
Dean Mitchell- So we're saying, assuming that you can do only the computational operations known to be involved in predictive processing.
Dean Mitchell- What can you come up with that will handle a control problem.
Dean Mitchell- And the answer is this very specific thing with these nastily involved derivations called path integral control.
Dean Mitchell- And you'll notice that when I was going over those slides, I basically said, let's just say you can simulate,
Dean Mitchell- You know, possible futures, like possible episode length courses of, you know, courses of future activity.
Dean Mitchell- And you can evaluate them in terms of your objective function.
Dean Mitchell- And then you can update them by means of a recognition model or by integrating prediction errors and using predictive coding.
Dean Mitchell- Then how do we build a formalism out of just those?
Dean Mitchell- And the upside is that this does let us look at the controls literature and say, all right, this is actually optimal feedback stabilized control.
Dean Mitchell- We can look at some of the bounded rationality literature in cognitive science and neuroscience.
Dean Mitchell- And say, our objective function is a free energy.
Dean Mitchell- That is, if you have to penalize how much you change neural firing over time, or how much you change your mind and update your beliefs over time,
Dean Mitchell- Because you only have so much metabolic power in your head, then we include a penalty term for that.
Dean Mitchell- And we can say, this can all just be done by embodied simulation and referent configuration motor control.
Dean Mitchell- Does that mean this is how the brain actually does things?
Dean Mitchell- Of course not.
Dean Mitchell- You know, it does mean that if you want to do your modeling with, I think, Andy Clark tends to quote, you know, Quine and say, if you want to do,
Dean Mitchell- If you have a taste for desert landscapes, then we've given you a computational model
Dean Mitchell- that is basically just sand and rocks.
Dean Mitchell- And as such, yes, it's something of a hostile environment.
Dean Mitchell- You know, walk without rhythm, you won't attract the worm.
Dean Mitchell- In the plains of Act-Inf.
Dean Mitchell-
Dean Mitchell- Yeah, if you want to live behind the shield wall where we have
Dean Mitchell- TD estimated value functions, good for you.
Dean Mitchell- In the stretched sigmoid with broad variability, so stretched that it is flat and plain like,
but still highly controllable within large bounds. That's where we're oscillating.
Dean Mitchell- Yep.
Dean Mitchell- Very interesting. It'll be, I think, great in our lab to pick up a few points from-
Dean Mitchell- Am I the one cutting out again?
Dean Mitchell- I still see you.
Dean Mitchell- Yeah, Dan, you're back.
Dean Mitchell- All right.
Dean Mitchell- You flickered a bit.
Dean Mitchell- Okay.
Dean Mitchell- In the last minutes, we can talk about some ideas from earlier in the paper,
look at any of the figures, and then in the dot two, that'll be awesome to really approach the formalism
Dean Mitchell- And help Dean on that ski journey.
Dean Mitchell- What would be something to go to in these last minutes?
Dean Mitchell- Yes, Dean.
Dean Mitchell- And just, and Eli, maybe you'll be able to get a chance to elaborate with this bit more with Jordan in the next one.
Dean Mitchell- But I'm curious, you took pains at great lengths to say, look, this doesn't map directly onto all the complexities that we know exist.
Dean Mitchell- But what, because you said you started this in 2019, you had a bit of time on your hands,
Dean Mitchell- And Dan did kind of alluded to this at the beginning.
Dean Mitchell- Were there discoveries that you made that you didn't anticipate?
Dean Mitchell- Because you were very, also very respectful in who you acknowledged as sort of laying the groundwork here, you had a bit of stability to work off of.
Dean Mitchell- But did you find yourself
Dean Mitchell- being introduced to things that weren't there prior to you guys coalescing around this?
Dean Mitchell- And do you think it continues to evolve or does it just stay on a theoretical level?
Dean Mitchell- So actually, I'd say for me personally, the big unanticipated discovery was just how little we know
Dean Mitchell- about interoceptive neuroanatomy and neurophysiology.
Dean Mitchell- Wow.
Dean Mitchell- And I mean in the periphery.
Dean Mitchell- Right.
Dean Mitchell- So you know, our lab with Lisa and Karen, Lisa handles the stuff above the neck.
Dean Mitchell- And so we've got, you know, Barrett and Simmons 2015, there's a number of other good papers saying essentially,
Dean Mitchell- You look at the brain architecture and it looks like the, at least in cortex,
Dean Mitchell- You know, the interoceptive and visceromotor cortices are fairly central to the architecture.
Dean Mitchell- And then you ask, okay, so what kinds of signals are coming in from the periphery
Dean Mitchell- to then be subjected to predictive processing in cortex?
Dean Mitchell- And you basically get told, well, interoceptive signals, obviously.
Dean Mitchell- So there was that moment when I was working with Karen and realized, oh, okay, so
Dean Mitchell- So it looks like there's actually this close analogy that we could hypothesize between
Dean Mitchell- the known function of a somatomotor circuit for voluntary motor control
Dean Mitchell- and this way of handling baroreflex function.
Dean Mitchell- And it looks like for the baroreflex, you know, you can voluntarily change the gain
Dean Mitchell- or the tolerance, those being inverses of each other, changing the operating point,
Dean Mitchell- you know, voluntarily doesn't seem to happen, but it does seem to shift.
Dean Mitchell- And it does begin to look as though, ah, we can just, we can stop just saying,
Dean Mitchell- you know, there are interoceptive signals, we don't know anything about them.
Dean Mitchell- Right.
Dean Mitchell- And instead ask, how could we break down the autonomic
Dean Mitchell- nervous system and the interoceptive periphery into these, you know, control circuits
Dean Mitchell- where there's a reference that flows from above or is possibly built in as a prior
Dean Mitchell- and then a sensor and then a motor neuron or an effector?
Dean Mitchell- That again, total speculating.
Dean Mitchell- One could imagine that loop could be ultra local or even cellular electrical junctions.
Dean Mitchell- So as local as could be to close the motor control loop.
Dean Mitchell- And then there would be potentially a more meso scale purely within the periphery.
Dean Mitchell- Maybe some sort of motor coordination or vasoconstriction type actions that are being
inactive through local neural networks and other systems.
Dean Mitchell- And then when you gotta make the call to the central nervous system
Dean Mitchell- And engage at that level, it's the highest capacity of like intermodal memory,
Dean Mitchell- computation, all these other complex phenomena, which then can be seen to have their
Dean Mitchell- Rightful place, maybe even in a specific brain region.
Dean Mitchell- But the entire integrated dodgeball performance is not going to be located to a brain
region any more than it would be located to a fingertip because it all needs to be coordinated.
Dean Mitchell- And not every call can be local.
Dean Mitchell- And not every call can be global.
Dean Mitchell- So finding out how bodies as territories and our models as maps
Dean Mitchell- Wire things up is going to make models that are more interpretable,
Dean Mitchell- better aligned with empirical data, making more useful predictions and explanations.
Dean Mitchell- Yeah.
Dean Mitchell- It's a very interesting angle.
Dean Mitchell- And I would say just to piggyback a little,
you know, as a modeling paradigm, I think this is one of the real strengths of active inference
is that once you're dealing with these probability densities and log probability densities,
Dean Mitchell- You are able to start sketching out these hierarchical structures.
Dean Mitchell- And that doesn't mean that every hierarchical active inference model is
automatically a map of the nervous system, but it does mean that you have a language that is at
least minimally capable of expressing what we so abundantly find in the empirical evidence.
Dean Mitchell- Yeah.
Dean Mitchell- One part of the paper that was very interesting, we, in reading it, remarked how,
although most papers are written in words, this one was very word forward. Each section had a
preamble content summary sandwiching technique, as did the paper at a higher scale. The nomenclature was
upfront and clear. And then the relationship between the cumulative distributions and the classical PDF
type probability densities was made clear. But this exactly connects something that has a, in the generic case,
a guaranteed inflection point, interpretable thresholded values. This is why sigmoid functions
are used as activation functions in artificial neural networks with a optimizable Laplacian approximation, like
inverted quadratic form that is able to be used as a log probability. And so really, like, especially with figure nine,
the stepwise relationship, opens the door to like, hey, if you've seen a sigmoid somewhere,
now you can think about that as like a PDF, hiding a PDF bell curve. And then where you have seen a
Gaussian or bell curve or a Laplacian approximation, you can go the other direction and think about that
that in terms of a sigmoidal response action. And so they're rarely connected. So clearly, though, those with
familiarity, it's almost the water that they swim in. And those without familiarity wouldn't see the
connection. And the challenge and the opportunity is like to stick in the middle and stay in the
connection space to raise attention to some of these relationships, which again, otherwise,
you could have a whole subfield of physiology working on the sigmoid response curve and a whole
subfield of hierarchical predictive processing models working in the PDF space or log PDF space.
And it's just a derivative and log or an exponentiation and a derivation away from those two fields being
formally connected, not just as like a speculative review paper, someone could or should do this,
but like, it's done. We just didn't know.
Cool. So I think regarding the writing, I really have to hand credit to Lisa and Karen for a lot of things
where, you know, speaking of more speaking of dialectical processes, you know, we have a very
simple writing dialectic on these papers, which is junior author knows math, senior authors
did not specialize in math in their undergrad or master's degree or or even PhD, however good they
are with it now. And the result ends up being, you know, you're always told to go back and explain
every single step. And of course, Jordan, you know, who was here before was helping a lot with the
writing and the structuring and the signposting. And then I think the the actual insight that you can
take one of these sigmoids and turn it into a PDF, I think came after hammering our heads on
some of the embodied predictive processing literature a bunch of times.
Because it's really, it is one of those things that is literally embodied.
Dean?
Yeah, I just wanted to get this in. I, I, what attracted me to the paper in the first place was,
was the, the allostasis and the, and the interoception. What kept me going back to it was,
was, and we talked about this in the dot zero was wayfinder, that rule, perfect perspective swaps,
versus our way finder. When I first started reading this paper, I saw the metamorphosis from
identifying a way to find things. And now after having this conversation with you today, and Jordan,
and of course, the usual suspects, it's, it's clearer to me, that this paper is trying to play that role of
being wayfinder, perspective identifier, as opposed to, we found the way or this is, this is our way to
solve all the world's ills, which, of course, I don't think it was ever your intention. But when you
pull things that are seemingly quite far apart, like allostasis, and interoception,
I get excited. But I don't want to as you pointed out, pump the brakes, Dean, don't get too excited here.
I mean, we're doing the best we can. So on that level, my amygdala is still functioning correctly.
In our closing thoughts with a driving example, are we accumulating speed or minimizing the amount
of time? Or are speed limits even set as exteriorized norms and stigmatic marks on the niche, such that
a variety of cars, from a sports car to an 18-wheeler, can be within a zone of optimal controllability,
taking into account the presence of crosswalks and so on. And so alongside, as we think about what we
want to explore in the DOT 2, alongside diving into formalisms, trying to do some excavation and
interoception on how and where the economic optimization as maximization is implicitly used,
and where some of these other notions that were being raised, without needing to be polemical or replace
value maximization, but where we can see these other survivability criterion as potentially different
decompositions of unified objective functions that are informational and so on, I think that's going to
be quite far ranging. Because there's more situations I would venture where we would rather have controllability
and expectation bounding and meeting rather than point stacking. So final comments. Eli?
Yeah, so I just really want to close by re-emphasizing that we don't, you know, we're not,
I think I have this joke on my Twitter profile, abolish the value function. And that's really just a pun
for the people who can get it. But, you know, we're not trying to tell people, contrary to their
subjective experience, oh, you don't really have, you know, value in your brain. There's actually just,
you know, trying to track your reference trajectory. So in the point two, we can talk about, you know,
which specific kinds of feedback control, what kinds of feedback mechanisms are really being spoken of
in this paper. And I think as, you know, preview, it's negative, both negative in the sense of avoiding
negative reinforcement and in the sense of trying to flatten out a response function and be able to
proportionally respond. So, you know, with the benefit of hindsight, this paper is going to have a pretty
limited, you know, domain of application. But it's helpful in that it gives us a language to turn around
to the, to the empiricists and say, this is what we want to actually look for.
Any closing comments? Otherwise, that's a great note.
Well, Eli and Jordan as well, thanks for coming out and for engaging in .1ary. And we'll see you
next week. Thanks, guys. See you next week.
Bye.




























































Thank you.

## 4o-LmkycAC0

Thank you.
Hello and welcome. This is ActInf Livestream number 50.2. It's November 3rd, 2022, and it's our third discussion on this paper.
Welcome to the Active Inference Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
This is a recorded and archived livestream. Please provide feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to find out more about participating in projects and learning groups.
All right. We are in livestream 50.2 in our third discussion on interoception as modeling allostasis as control.
And we had a .0 background and context video. And two weeks ago now, we had a great number 050.1 discussion.
So we're just going to have introductions of people who were here last week, and then Ian will share something for a few minutes.
And then we'll be discussing whatever people want.
So we can each just say hello and anything that we want to explore today or some reflection from the last two weeks.
So I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California. And I'll pass to Dean.
Thanks, Daniel. I'm Dean. I'm here in Calgary in Canada.
And not much to say other than I'm looking forward to getting past the content, which was the zero, the context, which was the one,
and figuring out what we can conceptualize into in this too. I'll pass it over to Jordan.
Sure. So I'm Jordan. I'm a postdoc working with Lisa Feldman-Barratt and Karen Quigley at Northeastern.
And I think I said the last time that we've done this, this paper sort of emerged out of the energetics reading group that we've done.
So I'm broadly interested in brain energy metabolism. I've been doing some other work on that.
And I was not here last week in the week between these sessions because I was at the International Conference on Brain Energy Metabolism, which was very fun.
And yeah, I think I'm excited to get into the conceptual details of this paper here too.
And interested in thinking about what a control theory model of the brain and of interoception looks like.
I'll pass it over to Eli maybe.
Hi, I'm Eli. I'm the first author on the paper, grad student with Hjelndr-Wilhelm Vandemeind, who is sort of our undermentioned co-author.
And with Lisa Feldman-Barratt and Karen Quigley.
I would say that I just got away from a conversation with Maxwell Ramstead.
So I'm actually a bit excited about Active Inference.
He really clarified for me what it is and what it means.
Yeah, and I think I could pass to...
Is that all of us?
Yep.
Or Ian, do you still need to go?
Hi. Yes, thank you.
So I'm Ian. I'm based in England, UK.
And so my background many years ago was in kind of undergraduate of biochemistry and then PhD in molecular biology applied to immunology and how white blood cells can determine between molecular signals of safety and threat.
I didn't stay very long with that.
And then I moved on to working on environmental management projects and therapy.
So manual therapy, health mentoring and related things.
And in that world, a common kind of theme I noticed was paying attention to bodily signals and sensing and interpreting bodily signals.
But I didn't have a way to talk about that confidently that made sense with the versions of homeostasis and the autonomic nervous system that I was taught in the 90s.
So when I, a few years ago, discovered there was a small group of researchers studying interoception, I got very excited very quickly.
And I've been involved recently in a little bit of research on training for improved interoceptive awareness with a university nearby here.
And when Daniel shared that this paper and said it was going to be on the active instruments institute, I got giddily excited and wasn't quite sure why that was.
So I said, when I was trying to figure it out and watching 55.0, I'm asked if I could share a few pictures, which maybe I'll do now if I can share screen.
To, oh, is that going to be possible?
Sure.
And I'll crop it so that it's the whole screen.
Okay.
So I thought, why was I so excited to see this paper?
And I hope it might be able to help people in the therapeutic world.
Because I know that you've sort of talked about physiology, meeting engineering.
But then this is a slightly different, maybe a slightly different take.
Yeah, go full screen.
All right, just give me one.
Oh, there we go.
Yeah, give me one second.
So, oh, is that, can you see that now?
Yep, I'm just going to make it big.
Just give me one second to get it finished.
All right, go for it.
So in the .0, I heard people talking about baked in reflexes.
And it made me think of these pictures, which have been going around on the internet of why, sorry, why are cats scared of cucumbers?
Is it because they're born to be scared of snakes?
So kind of some kind of genetic, you know, cucumbers look like snakes.
So they go from feeding mode into fear mode.
Or is it that their cruel owners have just put something surprising behind them?
Which, so it's just stimulating a startle reflex.
Either way, I don't know what the cat's interceptive experience is.
But there certainly seems to be something that is automatic is happening there.
So thinking about in the therapeutic world, there's what's often, what we're often trying to achieve is if something is, if a behavior has become maladaptive and starts to feel like it's reflexive for a person.
So let's say a phobia against spiders or a phobia against public speaking or a phobia, you know, a fear of going into public spaces, then the person may feel like, I know I'm going to suffer in this situation.
It's just a reflex reaction.
But with interoceptive exposure therapy, what I find is interesting is that people are able to, in a safe space, able to say, okay, when this thing happens to me, I feel maybe.
Short of breath, tightness in my chest.
So if we can recreate that sensation in a safe environment, can gradually they learn to change whatever their predictions or their beliefs are about what that sensation means.
And it seems to work.
And, you know, one method of doing that for, if breathing is an issue for people with anxiety is to recreate it by breathing through a straw.
So the, you know, the aim really is to turn something maladaptive into a more adaptive behavior or a vicious cycle into a virtuous circle.
So instead of triggering this kind of reaction, which feels unpleasant and is involved, you know, reflexes or supposed reflexes are being triggered that are linked to shortness of breath or increased heart rate.
Instead, they can learn to create some changes in the body that might be associated with something more pleasurable, such as, you know, relaxing with family on a beach or some kind of pleasant situation.
So different changes in their autonomic nervous system.
And in general, what we, you know, what we are sort of interested in doing is using inter interception as an access point to be able to untangle, you know, the story, the thoughts that people have from the situation they're in and the bodily sensations that they're sensing or that are arising.
So, Dean, you mentioned about packing your parachute.
So Dean, you mentioned about packing your parachute.
This was another kind of image that came to mind.
Most babies are probably born with some kind of reaction that stops them throwing themselves out of high places, but it does seem to be possible to override any interoceptive fear and for some people even to enjoy throwing themselves off high places.
Likewise, we can learn, you know, we can learn that situations such as maybe sitting in front of a laptop with an email box full of emails for some people can lead to an interoceptive sensation.
It's like a sinking feeling or a cramping or, you know, a heavy feeling.
So then they've learned, they weren't born with that, but they've learned to associate these situations with something really, you know, stressful.
Ah, this was from the paper, I think, Jordan or Eli, you referred to last year, sorry, last week, the dot one.
I haven't digested it fully, but it, you know, it's really becomes apparent that the direction of these circles and the loops within loops,
are quite complex, but I really liked the way that you described, these are my reflections now from what, where you ended in dot one, which was this idea of kind of cooperative control or optimal control.
And, you know, I was sort of taught about feedback loops as being like thermostats and, you know, maybe fat levels in a person's body being influenced just by the hormone leptin, for example.
But it seems that the set points in the settling ranges are much more mobile than once was thought.
And we see that now with, you know, and involve a lot more crosstalk.
So rather than just targeting something like leptin as the problem for the obesity sort of crisis, then, you know, this is just a stat taken from UK government office,
which created an obesity systems map that identified, you know, 108 interconnected variables that determine people's energy balance in relation to obesity.
And some of those things might include marketing and advertising, social pressures.
So how do we, you know, how do we bring all of those things in to these types of models that are being created?
And then there's epigenetic factors as well.
So, you know, people can inherit their exposome through epigenetic changes and can that change their intraceptive predictions?
And, you know, how I think about this from a kind of health mentoring or coaching.
Well, if this, I'm not quite sure if I've wrapped my head around time averaged the concept of time averaging completely.
But, you know, if I have someone comes to me and they say, we're talking about the health and they want to be healthy enough in 20 years time to be able to support their grandchildren and play with their grandchildren,
then that's if that's a strong enough interceptive signal of pleasure into the future, you know, or strong enough desire, can that override the short term interceptive prediction of bliss,
bliss, which is maybe achieved from some, you know, very predictably produced junk food that's been designed to create a prediction of, you know, an interceptive anticipatory pleasurable sensation.
How do those over time, how do those two different kind of competing desires work with each other?
Is it a battle of will or what's, you know, some of them seem really deeply reflects, they both seem deeply reflexive, but they are often at odds with each other.
And again, with this kind of time averaging I was thinking about in the allotment, this isn't from my allotment, but you know, plants when they're stressed, they bolt early and flower early if they think their environment is dry or not,
haven't got enough nutrients or enough space for the roots, then they will flower early go to seed early.
So is that what time averaging is related to?
And the other thought was about this idea of someone mentioned about exercise being good for you, because it's a short term stressor, and it helps your heartbeat slower over the long term.
I see lots of sort of people talking about hormesis in the health and fitness and hormetic stressors in the health and fitness kind of arena, but we don't seem to have a good model of it or a way of telling what the sweet spot is for a hormetic stressor.
Yes, and there's lots of, you know, people doing hormetic stressors at the moment, Wim Hof and hot and cold therapy and so on.
And the last thing I'm nearly done, the last thing that interested me after was this idea of ergodicity, and the distinction you made in this paper between ergodic and non-ergodic sort of ergodic systems.
And I was at a parkrun last Saturday, and talking to some of the people, my friends at the finish, about how difficult it is to, you know, you can feel like you're,
you're interceptively feel like you're running really bad one day, but then your time is actually quicker than what you expect.
Another day you can be really up for it and excited and feel buzzing, and you get to the finish line and realise you've gone slower.
So this picture is from someone who broke the world record, she did a marathon in under two hours, and part of the tools in their toolbox was to have a laser to keep their speed constant throughout the marathon.
So, you know, the both at any point, either in one instance or throughout the whole marathon, they, their time was constant.
So I guess my question is, is technology, if we've, if we're trying to design systems based on the idea of ergodicity, will we, are we reverse engineering that into our lives, maybe?
And where would that lead? If you've seen the, the, the film, Don't Look Up, and it's all about prediction and modelling.
So what will we, what will we be evolving into if we don't have, you know, the right systems that are truly matching biological, what's actually happening with our biology?
And yeah, that was, they're my reflections.
That's great.
Awesome, Ian. Thanks for bringing in all of that. That's really insightful.
So I think we have more than enough to just begin. So let's just start with whoever wants to reflect, please. Jordan first.
I mean, yeah, I guess I can, this will be going a little bit off of the paper here, but I think just what you were bringing up is, is interesting to, um, some of the other work that I've been doing as well, too.
And what we can think of, what we can think of sort of extending the systems that we're talking about in this paper outside of the body, right?
So some of what you were bringing up was you were talking about, um, some of the sort of social feedback that you get for, um, maintaining allostasis.
Um, you were bringing up the example of email and the sort of interoceptive response that you can get from anticipating, um, stress from, from email, from communication, these sorts of things.
And you're talking about how there's, how external references, and you were giving the example of technology and a laser to keep pace on a marathon can help, um, can basically act as an external, you can use external reference signals.
Right.
And I think one way to think about social influence or some, some of the social forces on interoceptive experience is also as like external reference signals, right.
Or it's at least as external factors.
And so the, um, I think one thing, so you can think about the, the example of the email that you were giving is it's an interesting case, right?
Because you basically have, um, in some ways you're kind of opening yourself up to this import,
to this portal of potential interoceptive disruption that can arrive at any moment.
And that's not going to be, um, it's not going to have some of the usual, uh, contingencies that would allow you to predict it.
Like you would in other cases.
Like if you're going to a meeting, you're going to your, you're going to go meet with your boss, you know, it's at four o'clock.
You know, that none of the sort of social signals from that, that could potentially be something you have to react to something that you have to adapt and then tear up the state to something.
Something that's going to cause you to have to leverage or basically mobilize your body to respond to that situation.
Those aren't going to happen until about four o'clock.
When you go to that meeting, if you're open to email, you're basically going to be able to be prompted within any sort of work hour.
So you need to be prepared for that potential mobilization at any point, right?
If your boss is like a real, you know, if your boss is really awful, then maybe you're going to get emails in the middle of the night.
And if that's the case, then you need to be prepared for some sort of, some sort of allostatic mobilization at literally any point of the day, which is going to bring with itself some sort of consequences of needing to have this system in a state of preparedness.
Because disruptions could come at any point, right?
And so I think the, if one of the principles that's in Eli's paper here, right, is that we're defining, putting together an allostatic response as being, keeping variables at multiple levels of this control system in a state where they can be maximized.
And so if you're in a state where they can be maximally responsive to the sorts of threats that could emerge, then that's going to look very different if you're constantly in a state where you need to be prepared for a lot of different disruptions that could come in from social sources.
Versus if you're in a state where you could rule some of those things out, you know, it's the weekend, you know, your boss or colleagues aren't going to call you.
And so you can not have to have some of these variables in a state of preparedness to immediately react to those sorts of things, right?
But that's, that's what that made me immediately think of.
And I think I could go on and on because I have some other work that's on sort of social, social allostasis or social influence and how we can impact people through that.
But maybe I should pass it over to Eli because I feel like I've, I've set you up to think about how maybe this is relevant to what we're doing, right?
In terms of being prepared for an adaptive response and how different contexts can, can change that, right?
Thank you.
Yeah, Eli, want to go for it?
I think you're muted.
Sorry.
I found really interesting the thing with the laser actually, and I'm sort of wondering how that, how those metabolic trade-offs are taking place in the brain of a runner.
Because, you know, normally the evidence shows that people will adjust their gait or their running speed to sort of optimize their allostatic challenge and therefore their energy efficiency.
And here it looks as though the point of the laser is that you keep the actual speed constant, which means you're letting the level of allostatic challenge of the interoceptive sensations vary a lot.
Or at least a lot more in order to keep the actual speed constant.
And I'm wondering how this can, like how this can happen in the brain, like that you construct this alternative sensory variable that you control instead of the interoceptive sensations and what sort of where, how motivation can be grounded in interoception to spend this extended time undergoing interoceptive challenge.

I'm on the sensory end of it.
I'm on the sensory end of it.
Then they typically, or, you know, to basically attune people to having some interoceptive awareness.
And then, Eli, do you think with the laser, maybe are you giving people, you're basically, you're giving people something that might be a more high fidelity, like sensory signal.
Like if they're going to try to keep this laser at sort of center of eye fixation, they need to move at a certain speed. And there's other, there's other variables that can follow from something that's more easily tracked in the external environment. Whereas it might be more difficult to keep on tight, tight, like sensory control over some of the interoceptive signals. You can, you can structure that for people. So it's a little bit easier, maybe.
But I mean, yeah, my, I, I, sorry, I was just thinking that the laser is teaching them to ignore their interoceptive signals, actually, to place more emphasis on a constant speed required to win than it is on, you know, oh, my, you know, my legs are feeling a bit heavy, or I'm feeling a bit dehydrated, or, you know, I'm feeling a bit hot.
So they're ignoring those, so they're ignoring those, and focusing more on the outside world.
Can I just ask a question? Because I know, I always take it from the, I'm the real novice here. And I think sometimes that that can add something to this. What if the laser is as an offloading?
So the top down, bottom up that, that back and forth that, that you guys with your paper, really clear, clearly said, there's two directions here in this interoception?
What if, what if the offloading interrupts?
What is this is, is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this is this
approximating for you that's taking less energy for yourself now you can consume the calories in
running or you can consume the calories in trying to keep things within a range and but if you're
not burning up calories to try to keep things within a range you can now apply those calories
to the running if i could uh give a thought on just that there's so much to add to i'm thinking
of where else are there lasers in tasks like running and it makes me think about the task as
the offloading that principle of a small task expanding to the amount of time that you have
that's more in the cognitive domain like if you have five minutes to write the email you have five
minutes if you have an hour you have an hour and then similarly with moving a pile of dirt or doing
some physical task when the only thing that's being considered is the decision to do it somebody
might surprise themselves with backpacking or undertaking allostatic challenge under the task
structure of something that's external so like the laser it's already set versus uh without that
the task force of something that's external so like the laser it's already set versus the
laser it's already set versus the laser it's already set versus the laser it's already set
it doesn't present itself as an affordance at all
so there's just um and then also really interesting was the note about um ian you added about how some
days you feel very good but your speed or amount lifted might be lower and vice versa
so in the models as presented does the entity have a true interoception so what is that difference with
the experience and performance and valence
of a given allostatic load
well i'm not sure i'm i'm not sure if i can answer that question but i think that
the thinking about one thing that's going to happen if you're going to continue to run for a long time
right is that there's going to be certain there's going to be certain motor signals you're going to
have to give and there's going to be certain sensory feedbacks that are going to come from that partly
interoceptive information and the problem is that if you're wearing yourself out over the course of a
marathon those are going to be moving targets right there's not going to be some consistent amount of
force that you're going to need to apply and as your muscle weakens as you're running for longer and longer
the amount of force is potentially going to have to change so it's going to become difficult to
to keep even a consistent speed right you're going to have to actually vary the amount of force in the
actual motor commands they're going to have to be given um and if you don't get um
if a lot of the feedback that you're getting from that isn't
isn't especially precise right because you're moving along the road the environment's moving around you
it's difficult to get some consistent reference point for it and so what the laser is doing right
is it's basically giving you um some sort of constant that you can um that you can regulate in
lieu of having to perform the calculations to regulate a lot of other stuff that's changing in
your body over the entire period of it right it's and i'm thinking about it in terms of you do a similar
thing with like a metronome or something like that as well right where if you're trying to coordinate
a lot of different people to perform musical notes in time you'd want to have a conductor
you'd want to have um you there's there's a real use in having external reference points for managing
those things because literally everything in your body's changing as you're performing this stuff and
commands need to be commands need to be given to to regulate in the face of all of that change
eli's pointing so i think eli's got a point um yes i mean i was just going to say like we know that as
you move a bunch of your sensory and interoceptive signals change so they're basically never actually
constant in the first place if there's something you want to hold constant then yeah you need something
like the laser that effectively gives you an artificial source of constancy a source of constant
constancy outside the body because you don't have one internally
yes yeah and it's what what's also occurring to me um as you're saying that is as well as the
internal conditions changing you know the the external conditions are changing and you know
maybe getting windier at various points of the course um and there may be you know uh daniel you talked
about um when we spoke a while ago about ants if they when is it appropriate for them to react to
weather changes and there may be you know we want a marathon runner to essentially ignore all the
weather changes um and just keep running at the desired speed so it's almost um yeah maybe that you
know the last slide i put there was a bit of a a distraction really i don't think it's a distraction
at all though but because i think that the no i think it's super super useful because like part of
again this whole idea of um multiple variables in the body changing all at once that's kind of core
to what we mean when we're saying allostasis right we're saying that there aren't any particular constants
that are there there's a lot of variables that are moving and changing and what eli's making the
point in this paper is that in lieu of set points in a lot of those cases what you want is some
variables to try to occupy a zone of maximal flexibility to changing circumstances um
but at some point like it there might be some variables deep deep down in turn like very very
central to regulating the body that are going to need to be kept at some close to homeostatic level
and so one of the things that was coming up for me and working with the brain energy metabolism
conference is that variables like blood oxygenation might be one of those right those are very tightly
regulated if that strays outside of some very narrow parameters you're going to have really serious
problems but if you think about your runner running the marathon the um that blood oxygenation level is
going to be fluctuating it's going to be challenged there's going to have to be responses there are other
compromises made in the body to maintain that and if that's the very if that's one variable that's
being kept at a tight that's being tightly regulated at the core of interoceptive information
other compromises that are going to happen to regulate that down the line might be changes in
muscle force delivered changes in speed a lot of fluctuations that are happening in terms of how
they're moving their body through this race and so if you're giving them some external external
sensory signal to couple to basically at the other end of this control hierarchy that eli's describing
right then you're giving them something at the other end of it to couple to to make their
movement through the environment a bit more regulated and predictable so you can think of it as the
entire control hierarchy that eli is describing in this paper we have some very closely regulated interoceptive
values far to the left we have a deep net of predictions and prediction error throughout the entire
cortex that's performing some regulation um across the entire network and then we have exteroceptive
information at the other end of it and what you're doing with the lasers you're basically giving the
organism the goal of fixing some of those values at the exteroceptive layer to give some more structure
as they move throughout this entire deep deep deep network in all the space between right yes
and what i'm thinking also that you know what the marathon runner did before that marathon so
the marathon was made predictive his work his breaking that record was made easier for him by the laser but
also you know maybe he influenced his blood his blood oxygenation you know this the upper and lower limits
of the acceptable settling range by doing um altitude training to stimulate more um red blood cells he
might have done hyperbaric therapy um to all those things which will make it easier for him just to
follow that later right and i guess in eli's framework right that would be that's not necessarily changing
the settling point of blood oxygenation but what it is doing is at variables that are just slightly levels
down from that you're eli would this be right to say you're basically widening out that sigmoid function
so that there's more adaptability um from that additional training for increasing red blood cells
that sort of thing is that right yeah definitely i'd also sort of add that some physiological variables
are very tightly regulated but one of the open questions is
is sort of how at how many removes are they from a disturbance so like blood oxygenation or the ph in
the brain that you mentioned you know what does it actually take to disturb those
right like blood oxygenation you can probably disturb by just having greater or lesser uptake of oxygen
from the blood brain ph i'd imagine that honestly i'd imagine that you have to disturb a lot of
things sort of disturb your way through the outer control system like the outer several layers of
control systems before you can actually perturb that but you can think about things like the
fact that you have a blood brain barrier in the first place is one thing that might help keep
that sort of thing tightly regulated right exactly that's what i mean is that yeah you know living
systems tend to be sort of homeostatic or allostatic at every level like a cell maintains its own internal
you know homeostasis in some sense or allostasis by interchange with its environment then an organ
system may also have you know such as the brain may have the blood brain barrier you know and sort of
other levels of protection that insulated from its environment right because it has to be in
cooperation with other organ systems for sure and i guess the thing that i'm saying is just that the for
for some of those parameters that do need to be really tightly regulated like that right you might see some
some some uh some naturally developing physiological structures like the blood brain barrier that are
there to help keep those values tightly regulated as opposed to having it be more under behavioral control
in which case there's some there's some flexibility there's some allostatic flexibility in those right
the what you want is if there's something that really really really has to be kept at a certain level
you would ideally have some of the evolved biology work to fix some of those parameters in the physiology
itself maybe what do you think i'm sorry actually could i just take my dog out for five minutes
i was thinking earlier oh sorry no go ahead go ahead jordan i was just going to joke about i want to go
find a cucumber and try that out of my cat too yeah actually um terry in the chat wrote irish cats don't do
this there are no snakes in ireland seriously i've tried it with our cat oh so not all cats well and
our cats lived indoors for her entire life except for the first six weeks or so which was probably
blind for half of that so i should try it out on her too and see if there was some learning component to
it or if she if she has it innate sorry dude yeah go ahead dean i just wanted to kind of throw this in
here and and i don't know i'm feeling kind of bad because eli's walking his dog but i'm sure you'll
you'll pick up the thread here so in the in the dot one i brought up this idea and i'm not sure how often
it's it's not ubiquitous yet but i i think that the focus in this paper is about perspective swaps so
what do i mean by that i kind of wanted to do a quick lap around that ergodically and then see
what you guys think about this so uploading to a laser as as a perspective uh in the dot zero daniel saying
staying within the connection space as he was talking about cdf to pdf as being another type
of perspective taken um the idea of bringing psychologists and their perspectives and
engineers and their perspectives together in in an institute or a lab setting as a as a different
type of that different perspectives colliding or at least paralleling um yeah yeah dance dodgeball
opposing teams each having a different perspective because they're wearing a different pinny
colored pinny um instrumental one of the things we talk about a lot in active inference is
instrumentalism and and inaction or the idea of um sort of the embodied space versus the theoretical the
map yeah perspective and the territory perspective um and in this paper's case the specific feedback control
focus as a perspective right what i'd like to do is take that idea that there's all these perspectives
that one can be swapped in and swapped out within the idea of regulation within ranges yes but i'd like
to talk a little bit about what ian brought up which is i think is a really critical point and maybe
quite complimentary not corollary but complementary to what the paper was talking about you said if we do
something in a safe space now to me i'm going to ask you this to me safe sometimes means controlled
meaning the agents set the condition or at least they perceive they have some control over that
condition okay so that's a perspective that's sometimes perceived as ergodic because it's predictable
right then we have a sense of how do we strategize from that set condition one that's variability reduced
to one that's condition set or variability retained and i use the example that you had on one of your
slides which is 108 interconnected variables that determine dot dot dot because to me that's what this
paper is trying to focus on that specific feedback control is that shift in perspective that swap
between the variability reduced because that's what that's why i said the variability retained for me
as a skier was i've got an open field it's pristine it's 12 12 inches deep and away i go but as
more trees start amassing my ability to be free because of variability my my variability factor changes
and now the condition set is my pers my perspective swap has to be can i continue or am i just going to
end up bashing into a bunch of limbs right right so the bringing of the two together to me i want to kind
of make clear what i mean by perspective swap yeah i don't think it contradicts what you've written in
the paper i think the move from cdf to pdf is a perfect example of that perspective swap and i'm not
sure it's just a derivative because as i said in the last live stream you bring you bring psychologists
and engineers into the same space and one doesn't get to rule over the other you need both to create that
that swapping condition right right so right is that it is that essentially what specific feedback
control helps us get a better sense of not just a grip or an optimality but sort of a a clear separation
so that we can do the oscillating so that we can do the swapping and so that when we're having these
kind of interactions we're not doing a transdisciplinary thing here we're really trying
to get our heads around why did the laser work right because we can perspective swap that we might get
closer to something satisfactory so i'm trying to understand so when you're talking about a
perceptive or perception swap i don't know if i'm going to answer your question satisfactorily we might
have to wait for you but i'm going to try my best here because i'm not the that's all i want you know
because i'm trying my best too that's nobody's got to be perfect right right right and i think but i think
that that's part of what factors into what i was going to how i was going to try to answer here which
is that i think that um so
so the way i'll try to answer this is i'll try to draw on some of the social some of the social
elastasis stuff that i've done which is involving more like you're saying interactions between people if
we're bringing psychologists and engineers together this sort of thing so if let's say just
if i answered your question right now let's let's pretend that i answered your question in a way that
precisely got to the core of it and just stopped the conversation
and you just said oh yeah i got it that answers it in a word right
right then i might have perceptive i might have perception swapped slope so closely to
the way that you would frame this question and so perfectly understood that the way that you'd asked
it right that we don't actually explore the space around it in a way for other people to come in to
understand anything of what's going on exactly if i actually didn't totally understand your question
and i need to ask questions and we need to bounce this back and forth for like several minutes then
we might still come to a settling point and we might perform some gradient descent to come to an
actual answer here but because it's going to take longer it might end up bouncing around through different
parts of the space of answers that we could look at and end up capturing other ways that um
other perspectives might be able to understand it right so that they can catch some element of it that
was predictable or that fit with some internal model that they'd already generated and then to be able
to follow along to the gradient descent to reach down to that point right so i think that part of the
advantage right of having interdisciplinary conversations and we've done this a lot especially
you know in working with eli and then working with the engineers at northeastern these psychology
engineer interdisciplinary collaborations right is that there will be a really long and frustrating
period where people just do not understand each other um and you need to actually work through
that because that's a period where you can do some learning and you can actually get some
understanding of other perspectives other ways to build a model of the environment other ways to
sort of take a perspective on events that are actually happening but um there will be a temptation through the entire thing to cut your losses and leave it
um because it is frustrating and it is metabolically costly i'd say um to do all of that information
processing and to follow that process and it's not always obvious when the gradient descent is going to
end either or when you do understand each other or when everyone is sort of followed into the loop and
are able to follow that down to make the environment predictable to come to a shared understanding
um you know it could have you might know when you're getting close but until you get to that point you
might be in a really long and frustrating process of of search prediction error uh of uh basically bouncing
around through the environment of trying to to come up with some model that can predict it right yeah so
i feel like that was a very meta way of trying to answer your question but i think does does that help i think
there's a i think it gets it part of the use of of interdisciplinary work right and and how we uh
how having these different perspectives are going to help us explore the space more fully because if we
if we just had an internal language to each other if we perfectly understood each other in the first
place then like you don't actually end up exploring the space in that case because you descend to
you descend to sort of common predictions too fast to to really bounce around and explore everything
you just you've basically described the capitulation to a retroactive or an abductive
logical process that's all you've done and i don't think there's anything
too nasty about that it's been around for over 100 years and
and i think it's having a renaissance so thank you cool cool cool cool
oh ian
oh yes as you were talking there about this you know um different disciplines coming together it was
reminding me of um one of the active instruments institute's uh papers that were covered a few weeks
ago on uh social communication as control i think it was um and also reminding me of you know the difficulty
of a newborn child and a parent um you know that all the child can do is cry when it's
feels some sort of discomfort and then the parent has to try and figure out what that
that cry means does it mean it's hungry does it mean it's um nappy needs changing does it mean it's
too hot or cold so there's a there's a period of learning each other's language and learning what
each other's cues are and regulating each other and controlling each other um yeah that's what
arguably that's all we're doing all the time as socially as adults we just got a more bigger set of
vocabulary and um we can influence our environment more than the baby well then we can tell each other of
what our what our expectations are too right like the baby is giving a really diffuse signal that
there is some interoceptive state that's disrupted and then the adult has to like we were saying right
explore around and bounce around until they can converge on that and get the baby satisfied to
satisfy that interoceptive state right but you know if i
i so some of the other work that i've done is looking at how i really want to look at this paper
that of uh of social communication is control because that's related to some other stuff that
i've been doing too but is that um i think that you can think of social influence as um
basically people regulating uncertainty in a social environment by um conforming to predictions that
other agents have in it so you can think of a social norm as a set of collective expectations
that people might have in an environment um and if you conform to those expectations then you can
minimize prediction error for people and you can minimize the likelihood that their behavior is going
to change that your environment is going to become disrupted more entropic anything like that and so
the baby's basically creating uh entropy in their environment for the adults in the room to try to
minimize by satisfying interoceptive needs for them you can as an adult once you can communicate maybe
get around some of those problems by saying you know you ask someone to pass the salt at thanksgiving
or pass you know pass the butter you've made an expectation extremely clear and then people can
satisfy that expectation and everything continues on predictably right they could also refuse and say
no i'm not going to pass this on but if you do that you will move things onto a more unpredictable
trajectory right you're going to uh push things out of the sort of bounds that people are used to
navigating and you're going to potentially move off into this space of having to explore each other's
reactions like like dean was talking about right yes yeah and what you're sort of saying there it's
reminding me of um some of the work so it's a greek research researcher called dimitris xylid gatas i think
he's he's done a lot of work on ritual and um how rituals basically you know he's put heart rate monitors on
people and measured cortisol levels and so on over you know the weeks and days following rituals
and showing that it's you know there's a lot of synchronization that occurs during rituals um but the
so the synchronization of physiology but that's bound up in these kind of codes or rules about how our
plan or our group or our society should operate so it's kind of i you know my interpretation on that
is it's training a person's physiology to align itself with social behaviors is this wait was this
demetrius bolas demetrius um his surname is spelt x y g a l a t a s he wrote a book recently called
ritual how seemingly senseless acts make life worth living but um yeah he's done some um study with
measuring you know heart rate variability and stuff for fire walking kind of rituals and so on
that's really cool jordan you did mention demetrius bolas and the work from 2020 through others we
become ourselves the dialectics of predictive coding active inference also hinging on a shared first name
but a very relevance paper as well um and then one thought to connect this idea of synchrony uncertainty
controlled novelty in communication and in rituals that's when people are the laser for each other
with their attention so then it's like okay we're gonna do a role play where this is gonna be the
case i'll synchronize this perspective you'll have this perspective we'll just be like it will be just
two stubborn characters having this argument it'll be very funny and then that is a predictable play it
could even be scripted or at the very least you can have fun and so on so it's very interesting that
that is reflected in the social space whereas the marathoning and going for the record which few
people want to do most people can take a much more relaxed approach than the person trying to set the
world record but in the social space uh as dean brought up there's a lot that we can bring to bear on the social space
from variability reduced settings like laboratory studies on cognition fmri studies with social stimuli
but the social space is a variability retained area of application right and so there's a challenge with
the translation yes jordan but but social norms right or sort of some social standards or mutual expectations
add some variability constraint to that social space right because there's nothing physically stopping you
from doing a lot of different things in any social setting but the point is that if you want to stay
in a variability reduced space and i think that there's some metabolic advantages and interoceptive
advantages to staying in a metabolically or in a variability reduced state right then it's just the
predictions of other agents that um set some of the bounds of where you'll wander into a variability
increased state if you wander outside of those expectations or a variability reduced state if you
stay within them right so as long as you're adhering to some predictions that other agents would have in
that environment then you're going to stay in a variability reduced state and you can stay
you can stay for lots of purposes sort of socially invisible to other agents you don't need to create
new disruptions to an environment that you're going to need to be prepared to adapt to right
thank you dean sorry i'll lower my hand again so the fascinating thing about the paper was um i used a
basic heuristic that says when in doubt and we're pretty much always in doubt zoom in zoom out and so
when i when i look at the scale of what that would mean from the perspective of interoception
those time scales are much tighter than if i zoom it out to the allostasis involved in running a marathon
my zoom in zoom out range and potential gain is much different for the allostasis than it is for the
interoception that's involved over that same course of time and so that's where i found the specific
feedback control which implies that there must be a general feedback control as well so interesting
that's where i realized part about the four different time segmentation possibilities allows
for that zoom in zoom out um is that am i contradicting what the point was that you were trying to make
in the paper eli um i'm i am slightly wondering where you got four specific scales well you have the l4
in terms of oh yeah oh that was just for modeling purposes no i understand that but i mean you can
still you can still inflate that to yeah yeah but i think that's a pretty standard part of the
hierarchical active inference literature isn't it yeah okay but do you think the idea that again we can
swap from from the specific to the general is again it just seems to be again and again it's that ability
to move within ranges but but the range doesn't necessarily remain consistent unless of course you're
following a laser but that goes back to my original question is because we offload the the metabolic
commitment that we would have to stay at that level of consistency we can then turn those resources
over to other aspects of that endeavor
let me try to ask that a different way to jordan i think would be um would be how would different
patterns in this type of a multi-timescale framing reflect different metabolic or energetic costs like
does the brain use more oxygen glucose ketone bodies micronutrients who knows during what kind of activity
such that there's what kind of a link between the physiological costs in gold yeah versus i mean cognitive
angle i mean i think the way to to do it and this was i think um i was thinking of this when you asked
gila too is that the the trick is right is that if you're regulating um
some of the input to the interoceptive input that you're trying to regulate that might be really
central to allostatic regulation right could be from sensed interoceptive variables uh like
you know like blood oxygenation like blood glucose but the trick is right is that and this is that i think
more what i'm interested in what i'm trying to develop with thinking about brain metabolism is that
all of the steps and all of the communication that has to be done at some of these lower orders of
this hierarchical scale right isn't free it has metabolic costs itself right and so
you know in the human brain the actual resting state cost of the human brain when it's just
so you're just sitting still in the mri scanner is about 20 of your body's metabolic budget
um it fluctuates a little bit as you're doing some sort of uh as you're doing sensory processing
as you're dealing with unpredictable information the details of how it fluctuates like those matter
too and we can get into those um there's relative changes in how much glucose you're consuming versus
whether you're consuming the glucose with oxygen for like a more efficient yield of uh of atp energy but
but but the point is just that neuronal signaling itself is super expensive and if you're navigating
an unpredictable environment then you can expect to have some of those expenses kick up or have them
change in ways that are going to have to be regulated so what that means right is that even
though there's a hierarchy of processing here where you're taking in sensory signals you're passing
them up a cortical hierarchy and you're compressing them if you're doing that more and more and if you're
an environment where you have to be passing potentially more and more prediction error up this chain
that can itself then be changing um important interoceptive sensed variables that might enter at
different points of the hierarchy because there's still sense information but they might be more
centrally regulated they might have downstream effects if those start to go out of whack right
so basically i think that it like you brought up too that you know thinking about this from an allostatic
perspective instead of a computational perspective and i think the computer metaphor that people have
been using for the brain kind of computer scientists don't often think about cost in lots of ways too unless
you know but they'll think maybe about time cost of how many cycles this like deep neural net is going to
take to train but they often don't think about the fact that like all of the components of this
computer do take like real energy to run and you know you can heat up the planet mining bitcoin you can
do all of this stuff too there's external there's uh uh external costs to all of this that aren't
taken into account when you're actually training these systems the brain can't ignore that because it is an
actual biological system and its whole point is that it's going to have to keep that system working
navigate the environment and grab metabolic resources to keep the cycle going and so um all of this
computation that you're doing yeah isn't free it adds up and then can uh potentially have downstream
effects on on sensed metabolic variables that are critical great thank you ian
uh thank you yeah i was just thinking then after um what jordan was saying about you know climate change
and um that if that's a prediction that's maybe you know two decades ago wasn't going to affect my
life but it might affect the lives of my children or my children's children to act now with that that's a
that's a very abstract you know there's probably for most people there's nothing in their environment
that would um give them that prediction of future threats in 50 100 years time so they have to create
a very you know abstract sort of image of what the planet's going to be like and then to you know all
the huge energy expenditure that's required to switch to renewables to you know organize society differently
that's going to require a massive you know allostatic load in the short term or
interceptive sort of yeah demand chronic low-level interceptive disturbance
to create that shift through generations right and so i think you see right like there's
if what your brain is regulating is
at the core of it some of the interoceptive parameters that are necessary to keep your
body and your whole organism moving forward right then being thrown into a constant state of uncertainty
is going to be costly if we think it's true that processing all of that uncertainty is going to
have a metabolic cost attached to it so there's going to be some i think the way that that your
sort of brain as a regulator is going to work is probably going to want to return you to some
relatively predictable state and so the issue right is that if you're if you require if you can
if you can model and understand externally right like if you can understand that in a long that the long
term trajectory that you're on in terms of climate change is going to lead to disaster right it can
still be really difficult to divert from that because the trajectory is at least is a predictable trajectory
that you're on until it hits some of these critical exponential points where it's suddenly going to
break right and so i think you can see that with climate change i think you can see that with the
pandemic you can see a lot of cases where there's um there's a temptation to return to some sort of
trajectory where when things are going moment to moment they're relatively predictable they don't
require a relatively large amount of attention um and if you're going to enter into some uncertain
uncertain change state i think you there's going to be a sort of collective pressure of a lot of
brains regulating themselves to get back onto some predictable trajectory right you can't sustain like
just complete uncertainty for a really long time because i don't think our brains can handle it
so i would have to ask uncertainty about what uncertainty about the immediate lived environment
so what's going on around you what are you doing when i got up today like i made coffee i got on the
computer i have a predictable set of sensory signals that i'm going to be running into i have yeah yeah
like a daily routine these things i don't mean in a broad sense yeah yeah because let's see so what
was it climate change pandemic so you know most of these are not actually things that make your day-to-day
life that unpredictable that's exactly what i'm saying i'm saying that those long-term events those
things that you might be worrying about those things you know that we're talking about being worried
about climate change they don't actually impact your day-to-day life right now very much and so
changing your day-to-day life substantially now to deal with them is going to be difficult
that's all i'm saying well not necessarily because the reference trajectory for actually dealing with
them is not necessarily that unpredictable either different from what you're already doing doesn't mean
unpredictable it's true but the period where you shift what you're doing to something different is
and so i guess what i'm saying is that a change is something that requires
a difference in trajectory from where something was already gone
yeah but i think the thing about so the thing about our trajectory-based formulation of allostasis
is that well the whole point is that you know if you let's say you plan to go to the store you're
driving on the road you make a right turn is the right turn unpredictable no it's not it's a predicted
baked in part of the reference trajectory change does not have to be
it's a predicted outcome and it's a predicted outcome and it's a predicted outcome and it's a
!
I think that would be unpredictable and i think we should avoid conflating those two


can i can i bring this back yeah examples of things we talked about in the dot zero so daniel brought up a
really interesting point when he talked about um glucose stacking and i automatically sort of brought me to
the idea of uh people who are have diabetes and those that are uh i think it's hypoglycemic unawareness
they're the most brittle diabetics um and essentially what that speaks to is they have a large blind spot to
sort of the cumulative effects of what's going on because the pancreas isn't working correctly doing that
kind of regulation piece that blind spot and the and the severe consequences of that point but
again i don't want to beat this like like a dead animal but because you are blind to something implies
that you cannot take up that perspective and then the consequences of that are more severe when you
absolutely don't know how your body is going to respond to that donut or not right so again it's it's
we talked about it in the in the in the context of jordan was really good in clarifying we can't think
of this in economic terms but i think we can think of it in terms of blind spot terms if we have a blind
spot to this how do we respond to it how do seven billion people respond to it if well what they do
is they revert back to the to the now that's what they do about their blind spot right because they
just don't want to take up the perspective swap because it's way too challenging
they might also sense there might be you might think of it also so right of this control hierarchy of
that um if you're missing uh an ability to sort of sense and regulate some parameters in the hierarchy
there might be downstream consequences of of glucose use that can be sensed but the problem is it's
going to mean that you don't have as tight control you're basically like you're saying you have a blind
spot in that hierarchy that isn't as tightly regulated and so it could potentially wander out of some of the
bounds that are going to be uh adaptive or safe because you're performing some sort of second
order control on it instead of um controlling it more tightly with some of the sensors that you would
normally use right yeah but what do you think if i could just give one quick response actually on this
idea um the leverage point of the control system is the true control variable so beyond being a good
regulator having a volume knob in your head if there's a volume knob in the generative process
the ultimate control situation is to just have the actual control of the volume knob and there's
cases where that's possible there's case where it's not but where it is possible it's the leverage point
and then jordan you just pointed to if you're missing this ability to either um sense x like we can't
directly perceive our glucagon circulating level or responsivity across different tissues it's just too
multifaceted and subliminal of an interoception directly different hormone balances and so on
the technology and measurements are increasingly allowing that to be laser focused um without the
ability direct to directly control those subliminal factors to either sense or act on them we can only
apply upstream or downstream control so we could modify our niche or use signposting or stigmargy so that
our environment dissuades us or make something impossible like time boxing or just putting
something away um or downstream consequences like if like um having um uh some kind of supplement that
helps with lactose digestion so we can't regulate most you can't put oxygen in the blood simply you can't
simply change the amount of cholesterol and so actually being able to have a framework such as you're
describing where we can talk about the true physiological variable the actual substance of the essential
variable but also recognize that we're only going to have interoceptive access into potentially noisy or
variable proxies that are influenced by many things and they're going to be like sometimes multiple
steps up or downstream like lightheadedness in the context of glucose regulation but that can happen for
a lot of reasons so it can't be simply the cue so really interesting there um eli or anyone else
uh so i think we have to differentiate between how could you build an active inference control system in
general and how are nervous systems built in specific how how our nervous system is built in specific is an
empirical question and i have pretty strong doubts that it's all just a matter of leverage
for pretty much the same reason that i have my doubts about it's all about avoiding change
like there's just such wide variability of behavior in real life there are people who embrace change
there are people who challenge themselves you know there are people who give up some of their leverage or
control over some things and if we don't look at those if we sweep those actual behavioral instances
under the rug of a sort of general principle that says well everyone ought to be very controlling and
conservative all the time then i can't help but think it's a sort of scientific sin so so you like
dean and i were talking when you were out too about um because sorry about that by the way um normally
she's a bit more allostatically resilient but she might be ill oh i hope she's feeling better but we
were talking about because i think maybe maybe there's a misunderstanding because i don't think
that we're saying that people only want to control or make their environments perfectly predictable right
i think um part of what we were talking about right we were talking about this idea of shifting
perspectives or this idea of um how do uh
uh so we were coming at it from the perspective of what a collaboration between psychology and
engineering really gets you in the first place even right and what we were talking about is that part of
what it does if people have the goal of trying to understand each other at the end of it and reach some
sort of mutual predictability right so that they've developed some understanding that they can build a
forward model from that they can actually uh they have a model of um of the environment that
incorporates some understanding from the the other collaborator right there's going to be a period of
that where you don't necessarily understand each other super well and there's going to be a long period
of speaking to each other and not totally making sense and having to ask a lot of questions and
having to search the space and what we are talking about is that from the perspective of fully exploring
a space to actually develop a complete model of it or at least a better model of it there's actually
some advantage of not having things um quickly achieve that predictability for each other if you
quickly just gravitate you know if i answer a question and the other person just like immediately
understood what i meant by it it might be because you know i answered it in a way that just happened to
nail it for that one person but no one else in an audience is going to be able to understand it no one
else who's listening in is going to be able to understand it and so by having some sort of imperfect
process of gravitating toward making things predictable for each other you know we actually achieve some
more explanation exploration and we sort of get a better sense of the space that we're actually
moving through and we might generate a better model than we would if we just immediately converged right
yeah of course
but i think yes oh sorry i'll go ahead
you raised the difference between these two questions how is the nervous system built in specific or in
particulars and how can you build or what is an active inference model in general so maybe return to
the top question um sure yeah so i think this is one of those things that can get a little conflated
when we have these collaborations of psychologists and engineers where from the engineering side if you're
building something for uh so to speak the other acronym that you can form out of active inference
you know ai instead of actin then you don't want something that works like a human nervous system
necessarily well you may want to share you know a few properties but actually you're building it to
solve some sort of task or to exhibit some sort of relatively well specified behavioral routine
and
therefore it's going to be in most respects very completely different from a human being
and that's actually not just because you're trying to avoid um what is it rossom's universal robots
right where of course those were actually made of flesh and blood like it's not because you don't
want your computer to grow feelings and decide to go on strike it's because a priori there's no reason
to build a machine that works like a person in the first place maybe it would decide to go on strike but
you know the space of things that you can build is just so much larger
that what you would usually do as an engineer is just aim towards the point of the space that you
actually need for your task and that also implies a sort of converse proposition which is that the
human nervous system is a pretty specific point in a space of things that could have evolved
or even in the space of things that did evolve you know human being versus
what is it it's not a sponge it's that sea organism mentioned in the one of those first in papers
that you know when it goes through a certain life transition it latches itself down onto a rock and
goes through a little stage of metamorphosis where it eats its nervous system yeah c squirt thank you
ian ian like those both evolved there is some space of possibilities that includes both the c squirt and
the human being this implies that it's a pretty broad space of possibilities and if we're using active
inference to model them both this implies a very very large space of possible active inference
models formalisms controllers
so um eli uh if i've heard you correctly there you're sort of saying that artificial intelligence or
tools that humans make um that might be modeled may or may not be modeled using active inference um
they you know there's usually a an outcome or a goal that's that that we that's quite clear why we
build them so it might be i don't know i want to build a coffee maker to make me coffee um and i might use
some you know very intelligent um methods to to build that coffee machine but the out the outcome is clear it seems to me that with the nervous system we're still not clear on what the outcome is
so if it's you know if it if the fep is right then it's just to minimize free energy minimize surprise but am i right you're sort of questioning whether that is the that is the cup of coffee we're after at the end
um yeah and so we always have to sort of remember that dog walker just got here
um we always sort of have to remember that surprise means under a certain generative metal
and so the models that are present in free energy can involve sort of epistemic value
you know like uh what's it called verisimilitude to the sensory world accurate modeling they can
also involve a reference trajectory
and so they can also you know they can involve both perception and action and that's a really broad space of things
why are they doing like surprise doesn't mean of minimize surprise doesn't mean avoid change
it means minimize you know it means optimize this information theoretic functional
whose meaning is actually pretty strictly mathematical
and is the is the outcome always to be auto poetic so to make another nervous system
i mean is it like i don't know that's why i'm wondering
i would think it usually is if you're making a copy maker it probably isn't
like prop makers sometimes you have to disassemble them slightly to replace the parts or to clean them
and so you don't necessarily want it to be self-organizing in the sense of trying to
what like make another carafe when you take the carafe away to wash it
but i think that if ian's asking about auto voices he's asking about
is this something so you're you're making a distinction you lie between a living and a non-living
system or between a living system and a tool that you've made to give it a certain input and give
a certain output back right so so is maybe just to repeat his question you know and say for a living
system then do you think that some of the fundamental controlled variables here are are auto poetic
and there i think i have to say i don't know because i am not a biologist and i haven't seen the full
range of weird stuff that other organisms do and i want to be very very cautious about the idea
that we can sort of introspect gather what we think are a few general principles of human behavior
and you know as as introspections go they may be pretty good ones and they may generalize pretty
broadly and then expand that to the entire rest of the kingdom of living organisms like the entire rest
of the tree of life so just as an easy counter example there are insects that die when they mate
this is an ordinary baked in part of their life cycle and you know if you want to talk about that as
auto auto pieces then i think we have to auto poesis then we have to ask what is being self-organized
the parent or the child because the parent empirically is being disorganized
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
much to me easier, more easily described as a leap of faith embedded within a step function
rather than being provided the functional requirements as a case use and then building
the algos to carry that through. That's a very clear difference between the two things.
One is a bridge and the other is we all get in a bus, build a ramp and then fly over the
divide. And then if we're really good and we land it, we go back the other way and go,
we, because we're still allostatically and homeostatically existing. But to your point,
I think we have to be clear that those two things are quite different. One is alive and the other is
not. And both require math, but not the same math. And even among, I would actually caution,
even among living systems, living involves metamorphosis. It involves death at a certain
point. It involves reproduction. It doesn't just involve individual survival. That is not how an
ecosystem works.
No, for sure. And I think what I was just going to add was that I think from an autopoetic perspective,
I don't think anyone would disagree with that. I think that what someone would say is that you
need to think about from a perspective of reproducing the relationships that create an organism,
reproduction in that process, right, could be a process of recreating the organism or recreating
the structures that create that organism when there's components of it that couldn't be
repaired without reconstructing the entire thing, basically, right? So you have, you'll have death,
you'll have any one of these systems are going to have components of it that can't be repaired.
And if parts of it can't be repaired, then a way of basically ensuring that that system continues to
exist in the relationships that compose it is to reproduce and create a new system that has those
relationships, but has the parts that are going to terminally fall into disrepair over a certain
period of time, start fresh so it can begin that cycle again, right?
Yeah. So this, that's actually an empirical claim about the evolution of aging, which is that aging came
first, you know, at say the single cell level and then reproduction follows to cope with that. And I don't
know enough about the history of life to know whether that's true or not.
If I could connect this very interesting theme to Dean's bridges and ramps, which are two different
engineering projects and have two different sets of structures to modify the niche with. And also Ian's
original point about the epigenome and the exposome and taking ecological developmental and
evolutionary perspectives on human health. So the process of epigenetic canalization
and the way in which epigenetic variability can become entrenched through genomic changes, like one protein
that has a bifunctional aspect over evolutionary time, when that region undergoes
some chance duplication that could allow those two, um, tandem proteins to diverge and functions and like
sub specialize, because there's a new capacity in the genome for the coding sequence to take on some of the
responsibilities that had been taken by a protein modification or some other dual functionalization of the
ancestral protein. So the bridges are on the continuum towards modifying the environment, modifying the anatomy to embody the constraints of the environment, like the buoyancy of a fish.
And then behavior takes us closer and closer to the brain. And then behavior takes us closer and closer to that person jumping off the plane that Ian showed.
Whether it's like one footstep, which is many times a challenge for all kinds of various regions.
I mean, it can be really anything. I mean, it can be really anything. And that's kind of the challenge of, of movement.
To the, um, social risk settings and people having different profiles or envelopes of their risk in different areas of being alone, of being with other people, all these different settings.
Um, but those are more ramp-like because in the end, especially when it's socially extended, you can't have the actual bodily, you can't embody the content of social variability, but your, your physical body can embody the content of being regularized with the abiotic niche.
But the brain can only be prepared in a way that, you know, is different from the body.
Hope that kind of brought it back to that epigenetics angle because behavior is even more epi than epigenetics.
And so allostatic are changes that are faster than it. So it makes sense to put it within a broader evolutionary perspective on how our priors got honed in to even this modality.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, in our last, um, 25 minutes or so, where do we go from dot to
either the researchers or Ian, wherever you feel.
Um, the point you made Daniel about evolutionary, I, you know, I didn't mention evolutionary biology specifically at the beginning, but, um,
for me, that seems like a, um, maybe a blind spot here.
Um,
you know, I'm thinking also about Markov blankets and if you, you know, gut, gut microbiome,
um, influencing my,
the, you know, the, um, neurotransmitters that I produce.
And do I, do I include my gut microbiome in, within my Markov blankets?
And if so, you know, what am I feeding my gut microbiome?
Do I include the food that I'm selecting within that Markov blanket?
And if so, do I include the fields that the food is growing in?
Um, cause that will affect the foods.
And if so, do I include the microorganisms in the, in the soil?
Cause that affects the, how the food, and then that will affect the microbes in my gut.
And that will affect me.
And then do I look at the weather?
Uh, so, you know, it's, it's more of a kind of communion, communion of subjects rather than,
um,
bound objects,
but we have to start somewhere.
So as a bit of a jumping off from that,
I think with all active inference work, there's always this incredibly important question, which is we can use the framework across so many different scales.
And then, you know, I just had, um, Maxwell Ramstead tell me that they derived a theorem that literally every physical system has a Markov blanket.
And then I asked him, well, how do you pick out the ones that we're interested in studying?
And he said, sort of,
you know, basically he said, well, there isn't necessarily a theorem directing you to the most interesting, you know, or a metric that tells you which ones are interesting.
So that's still in the realm of just an investigator's choice.
And I think, you know, there, we really have to figure out how to ask,
when do we think we're going to get something interesting out of applying this framework to a given object of study or to a specific object of study?
And when do we think we'll be doing something sort of like re-deriving evolution?
We're like, it's useful to do as a formal exercise.
But to my knowledge, we haven't learned anything new about evolution from the free energy principle or active inference that we didn't know before,
mainly because people had already described evolution in terms of inference,
you know, prior to describing it in terms of active inference.
I think another thing that's useful to think about, and I've been thinking about this a lot lately,
is in terms of what are some of the metaphors that we're using to scaffold the scientific questions that we're asking?
Because I think one of the things that's a big strength of this paper of Eli's, right,
is that the title itself is actually a sequence of two metaphors, which is interoception is modeling allostasis as control.
And so I think there's a sense that if we have particular questions, you know, if we set ourselves up to think what is the,
what's the sort of framework that we're using for thinking about the questions that are interesting or not,
as Eli is saying, what are the systems that are interesting?
What sort of metaphor is a Markov blanket?
What sort of metaphor is active inference?
What are the sort of things that these are directing us to look at?
And does thinking of control in the way that this paper has been doing direct us in a different direction to think about things in like a slightly different way, maybe?
Can I tag on that right away?
Can I get your response to this, Jordan?
Can I tag on that right away?
sometimes as being continuous and progressive but are we talking whether we're talking markov blanket
or whether we're talking anything that's gap respecting is not necessarily gap filling
that's my question to you jordan what do you think i think it's i think it's more about the
gap respecting than the constantly searching for something to jab and wedge in it because that that
space that that eli spoke to that that possibilities thing that really matters in terms of staying alive
right it's not when you get out of the particulars max ramstead says there is no rule for that yet
that's that's what you have to self-organize so what do you think i don't know i don't know how
to answer that i'm trying to familiarize feel but but what i but i guess um so then jordan i think
you should do you want to prep what you're saying for a moment and i'll give an answer to that
for sure or you just take over
so i think the thing is that at least in our lab we are a physiologically focused affective science lab
right and so we sort of come to active inference with a set of systems of interest and a set of
phenomena of interest in mind already and that doesn't necessarily help other people pick out what
they want but it does indicate that you can bring what you want to i think active inference ends up
being a bit of a potluck field at a certain point that's a good answer yeah yep one thought on that
is the structure of a lab with a system or a question in mind is a epistemic framework that allows the
investigators to actually take on bold new theoretical choices and explore different frameworks that are
investigating a specified system of interest like we're studying blood pressure regulation in the
context of professional dodgeball players or interoceptive awareness in intramural dodgeball players
and then the lab exists to funnel that into different kinds of analyses and scenarios that help address
that system like all of the labs studying different human diseases and sometimes and with challenges and successes
making their work in the lab connect back to the real world and being able to take on new theoretical
perspectives some which might not initially appear to be helpful until years of basic research have occurred
around some molecule or gene family so yeah that's very interesting what maxwell added and i think speaks a lot to
many of the notions that we've been discussing like pushing at not having two realms in the metabasean
with a highly rule-based and then leaving the outer level with where there is no strategy
we just accept the priors without having metacognition on that level
because that's just the limits of how far the model was extended out yep
um do either of you authors want to add anything about dodgeball
oh yes yes i was going to tell i was going to tell everyone why it was dodgeball so um
essentially in basketball you have to shoot to the hoop so you throw the ball goes it either
goes into the hoop or it misses if you're passing you know the person either catches or you missed
you know the ball is going to be able to do it in dodgeball so you can see the ball is coming at you
and so the idea here is that you're picturing yourself trying to dodge
and this lets us sort of merge the intuitions about predictive processing and control
where the reference signal is to avoid contact with the ball
so therefore the stimulus becomes both a prediction error and an actual control error
so in life you're always playing dodgeball with something
i mean if you walk out into the middle of a traffic yes like
there's always some obscure possibility of being you know hit by a rock out of nowhere but hopefully
most of the time in life you're not actually playing dodgeball with something well there's always something
that can disrupt you right yeah there's always you have a system it can be disrupted in many ways
i'm just kicking on it because i think again it's it's about metaphors right and i think when you're
talking about basketball you're talking about having a goal you're talking about having um some sort of
externally defined goal that you're trying to perform actions to satisfy and then you tally up the score
in some way of it right versus in dodgeball you can get hit and you're out and you know the same thing
is true if your your physiological systems can get disrupted and you're out you're dead right
yeah but i guess my intuition is that in dodgeball the ball is coming for you in a way that most of
the time it isn't physiologically no that's true metaphors aren't perfect but i'm just saying that
yeah physiology is not adversarial no no no but there's one with the oh no sorry go ahead oh it just
remind me each sport provides kind of a different metaphor none of them total or of course exact but
there's games where you're avoiding the ball there's games where you have to hit an inanimate object and
then it bounces off like wall ball um there's games with implements without implements there's uh
marathoning there's sprinting there's throwing things then there's just one two three eleven all
numbers of different players on ice as dean knows and each of these settings have their interoceptive
challenges and social included in that model dean yeah i was just going to say the metaphor
you can have you can have a lattice of rope that makes you a bridge and you can have a lattice of
rope that makes you a fishing net one captures one allows you to cross one is in between one is enveloping
and i think that's why we use metaphors but the point that i would make is that when you mesh
something you still have those gaps and i think it's important to see the non-continuity in this i
think that's where the math the theoretical the ability to bring it down to that level if it's not
if it's not only one it's not perceived as only being one math if there are maths involved i think you
create the conditions around which better understanding can move forward now to jordan's
point it takes longer if you don't have the proper gauge of mesh to catch the smaller fish and that's
i think what maxwell was speaking to it's up to you to decide whether you're catching guppies or tuna
there's your there's your metaphor for the day guy
one short thought is the a zero to one which is a boundary we can talk about in the future is um
when the entire or large subsets of the active inference ontology and frankly just the use of
statistical modeling these kinds of transformations are not 2022 sinesh et al inventions with respect to
control processes um once one undertakes the statistics toolkit they enable new visibilities
into what was already latent every time somebody had shown something in terms of a cdf
they didn't always show this but this is also taking logs of variables and you know changing cdf and pdf
some of these atomic units already exist and this paper does an incredible job of putting the setting of
interoception and the function of allostasis into the intersecting legacies of control theory and cybernetic
approaches as well as more recent developing threads many of which don't have a formal basis initially
like ecological psychology and affective modeling and so bringing those two areas together is kind of that
psychologist engineer conversation that was brought up and that's like the dodgeball game
the game now are they throwing if they hit each other do they knock each other out or are they sending each
other you know and as we explored initially it's not clear and the in that uncertainty in the beginning
of the exchange it's not like the dodgeballs are particles they're more like waves
what will jordan and eli your post paper directions be or how long are you going to be continuing or what
directions here jordan i think you should tell them about our lab meeting next week
oh yeah we're we're covering um so i think one of the things is we've talked about uh
controlling variables here we were interested in um or i'm interested at least in thinking about uh
other control perspectives there's a perspective perceptual control theory um to think about whether the uh
that basically the behavior is a means of um controlling inputs or controlling sensory
inputs to a system uh but more specifically i'm interested in um thinking about how we can apply
control systems thinking to neuroscience more generally so i think people are very used to
taking an fmri image for example uh bold imaging and then treating it as an input output system where they
deliver some sort of stimuli to the brain they'll observe some output which will be a bold response in some
region and then they'll interpret that as causal that they deliver stimuli they see an effect in the
brain and they've detected they've identified some cause-effect relationship and the problem is that
people have been doing that for 20 30 years now you have a million different strands of these supposed
cause-effect relationships and you don't have a whole lot to structure them and a different way to think
about it is that the brain is um is a negative feedback controlled system that's trying to regulate
some uh homeostatic variables within it or allostatic when we consider them in the context that we're
doing and so if we deliver some sort of stimulation to the brain we're basically perturbing sensory input
to it and then we're seeing some perceptual response or we're seeing some restabilization within
the brain to bring it back to homeostasis within a region um and we're not really
getting at causal relationships we're looking at control systems that are being perturbed so
that's coming off of the chapter that was by henry yin called the crisis in neuroscience which there's
also a really great um brain inspired podcast episode about that too which is worth checking out
and you like you have some ideas too to follow up to think about um control and affects right yeah so um
to start with that i would sort of make a small amendment to the notion of a negative feedback
control system um jordan can you catch the podcast link yeah sorry just good i could okay oh no i've got it
um and say you know maybe we should be thinking about nervous systems as mixed feedback control systems
so sometimes you need to stabilize a state of sensitivity to the environment rather than
resilience against the environment and that would involve positive feedback and that's sort of where i get
into thinking about affect is that you know if you say that there's sort of these two modes of control
positive feedback stabilized control for states that are very sensitive to the environment
and then negative feedback purely negative feedback really it's positive feedback in the service of
negative feedback over the long run and then purely negative feedback states that are trying to be
insensitive to the insensitive to the environment and you have failure and success for either of them
and all of a sudden it sort of starts to look and you can structure the feedback loops in different
ways it starts to look more like some of the core properties of affect that jump out in our data
and sorry that's a very hand wavy explanation and it's because like we really don't have
like i don't have this in the form of more than a few notes on my ipad
but there's should i link the other brain inspired episode that got you yeah yeah yes like that that
one's good enough that i included a quote from it in i think in my slides from here that we had
a lot of the rudolph sepulcher quote yes yeah yeah control is to engineering what philosophy is to the humanities
wow wow very interesting directions ian and dean what are your next research and education directions
um i'll go first i'm gonna listen to those podcasts is my next steps and um i've just really enjoyed
this conversation and um what i think you're all all trying to achieve is amazing stuff and it's whether
it's whether um studying humans is going to help us make better ai on robotics or whether attempting to
make better you know engineer better machines is going to help us understand humans or whether you
know we're going to as you said uh jordan bounce off each other and improve our understanding both ways i
think it's um it's a good thing over to dean thanks ian thank you ian thank you eli thank you jordan
always thank you daniel i think um i think the last two and i want to thank dave douglas although he's not
on a tile today as well because he was there for the um dot one it's it's really rewarding you when you
can actually have a conversation with people like i mean normally it's throw up the dodge balls and then
if you had this conversation in that's in that space you know it would basically be yelled out of
the gym so they could get on with the game and then there's these people that would actually want
to figure out well what's really going on here you know besides the person that leaves and has to get
the ice pack because they got hit in the head or whatever and i think the i i think the idea that a bunch of
individuals can sit down and have one of these perspective swap sessions because they're all
really good translators in their particular area of focus really it kind of changes the idea around
what we've been doing and we're trying to do an active inference which is you know create create a
bigger tent create a sense that people with different backgrounds don't have to feel strange because they
don't well i don't know as much about active inference as max ram said so i'm going to spend 10 000 hours to
have a conversation about this that's not what we're about what we're trying to do is pull a bunch
of people into the room and let them translate together swap those perspectives actually go away
as ian said i mean i'm going to go away now and figure out what why really why does this laser idea work
not just sort of in in a hypothesis in my brain but really go away and think about that for a bit and
i think if we can do that more um in a you know semi-formal way you still have to cover the content
and you still need to get the contextual background but to get to this place where we are today
jordan to your point it takes time but man the rewards and the payoffs it's just huge and again it's
again daniel all the work that he puts into doing this it's just it's awesome so thank you
thank you yeah thank you this is really fun yeah great conversation so really appreciate it also as
always all right till the dot three anytime you or anyone else want to continue or present any other
time always welcome so farewell thank you very much bye awesome thanks