SPEAKER_10:
Hello everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

It is Active Inference stream 9.2 and it is December 1st, 2020.

So happy December to everyone.

Today we are really excited to have David, one of the authors of the paper we're going to be discussing.

So it will be just a great discussion today.

Really looking forward to it.

Welcome to Team Calm, everyone.

Team Calm is an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us on our website, at Twitter, via email, at our YouTube channel, or our public Keybase team and Keybase username.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

Also, all perspectives and backgrounds are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live stream goes, mute if there's noise in your background, raise your hand so that we can hear from everybody in the conversation and let's use respectful speech behavior.

Just some quick updates on upcoming Act-Inf streams.

Today we are in 9.2, December 1st, talking about this Projective Consciousness Model paper.

And in the rest of December, we'll be talking about two papers.

On December 8th and 15th, we'll be in Act-Inf 10 on a variational approach to scripts.

And on December 22nd and 29th, we'll be in Act-Inf 11.

on sophisticated, effective inference.

So two cool and very interesting papers that we'll be getting to.

But today in Act Inf 9, we're still continuing our discussion of projective consciousness model.

First, we're going to have some introductions and warmups.

Then we'll go through 9.2.

As with previous times, the projective consciousness model paper by Willa Ford et al., 2018,

And in last conversation in 9.1 and 9.0, we talked about some of the groundwork and the aims and claims of the paper, as well as going through the abstract and the roadmap.

Today, especially because we're lucky enough to have an author on board, we're gonna be talking about a few deeper and auxiliary questions, as well as going through a few key quotations and talking about maybe some of the implications for the paper

And then as always, we'll return to the figures and ask what each figure is representing or invoking.

So cool to have this discussion today and then different papers in 10 and 11.

And then we'll have a whole new suite of papers in 2021.

So get in touch with us if you want to participate.

first though with our nice small group today let's introduce ourselves we'll go around and give a short introduction or a check-in and then just pass it to somebody who has not spoken yet so i'm daniel i'm in california and i will pass it to adam uh hi um i'm adam uh adam saffron i'm in


SPEAKER_03:
Bloomington, Indiana at Indiana University as a postdoctoral researcher.

And I'm very interested in consciousness and recently came up with a theory I called integrated world modeling theory, which has a lot of overlap with David's work and which I find to be really fascinating and inspiring.

So glad to be here.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool, let's go to David.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello there, I'm David Rudroff.

I'm an associate professor at the University of Geneva, Switzerland, and I'm one of the co-authors of this paper and somebody who works on trying to model the role of consciousness, including its phenomenal aspects in, let's put it that way, generally speaking, biological cybernetics and more particularly, active inference.

Thank you for having me here today.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Let's go to Sasha.

Welcome, Sasha.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, everybody.

My name is Sasha.

I'm in Davis, California, and I study developmental neuroscience and how synapses form in the developing brain.

And I'm really interested to be part of this conversation today.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Then we'll go Alex and Stephen.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, everybody.

I'm Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I'm a researcher in Systems Management School, and I pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto, and I'm doing a practice-based PhD into participatory theatre approaches and the use of landscapes to explore themes.

And back to Daniel, I believe.


SPEAKER_10:
That introduces our nice group today.

As far as the warmup questions go, we'll just have people raise their hand whenever they feel like it.

And I'll just drop out the first two questions at the beginning and they are what interests you about studying consciousness and what is a way that we can study it.

So both David and Adam, I know you've thought a lot about this.

Maybe one of you two would want to go first here.

Yeah, David, how did you get to this area?


SPEAKER_02:
It's a long story, but to make it short, let's put it that way.

It's really related to philosophical and existential questions and the quest for turning this type of question into something scientific.

But actually, I was not that interested in psychology when I was younger.

I wanted to be either an astrophysicist or a conductor of orchestra, but I did not.


SPEAKER_10:
Interesting.

It's a different type of coordination that you're achieving now.

Stephen, and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'm interested in consciousness.

In a way, it's kind of a late arrival because I...

always thought that was something esoteric that i couldn't really participate in but um and uh i've suddenly seen this as starting to come center stage um and in both this active inference world but also being talked about more in in in the participatory theater environment so you know what what does it mean to be consciously aware to have imagination and what i

think is quite interesting is to try and move beyond this kind of pan-psychic approach that seems to permeate a lot of people who actually go there.

It's either something that's ignored and pushed to the side,

or it's everywhere and everything in this panpsychic.

And what I am really interested in is how can it be engaged in terms of how we are reflective or reflexive or participatory and what consciousness means in terms of talking to people who aren't the same as us.


SPEAKER_10:
Interesting.

Definitely the coming from a different perspective is something that's baked into this type of a framing because yeah, everyone's coming from a different perspective.

That's our starting point.

That's not our conclusion here.

And then there's questions about how we're going to coordinate amidst that.

So we could either have anyone else raise their hand on these questions, or I'll just put up this special point two question, which is, what is something that you have thought about differently after reading the paper or participating in last week's discussion?

And for me, it was actually biking in the morning and seeing the moon just look massive and thinking about that illusion in the context of the projection and what we talked about last week, as well as some other literature by these authors.

So I just thought, what might be some differentiable experiences, some little tests that we could do that would be able to capture differences between the projective model and other models of consciousness?

I didn't really have an answer, but it was just something I was thinking about after our discussion.

Anyone else after reading the paper or participating in the discussion?

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, one thing that it was really helpful, this unpacking the diagrams last week, and I noticed that

there was that box for the head of the perspective, the consciousness, perspectival consciousness.

And it suddenly made me realize that, yes, this can bridge more back into the embodied work because I'd had a discussion about this paper before with someone who's in theater and interested in kind of some of this more kind of esoterical kind of ways of knowing, but I'm trying to find a way to bridge it back to

the embodied sort of inactive work and i sort of by seeing it in the in that kind of head i suddenly realized okay it still does come back to the physicality so that was really really useful for me cool cool sasha


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, after last week, I just began seeing everything as, you know, more geometrical and thinking about people and their behavior as projections, kind of.

Yeah.

Recognizing that we're always seeing just one side or one perspective of someone's behavior.

And specifically that, that GEB logo, it just, that's all I could see.


SPEAKER_10:
Right, with the light from the different sides showing the different letters, GEB.

yeah and we'll come back to geb a little bit later in this discussion any other thoughts from the panelists on these warm-up questions otherwise i'm sure there'll be a lot to get into a lot of tangents to go off onto cool all right david go ahead


SPEAKER_02:
No, I just wanted to say that there would be a lot to say about the points and questions that were raised, but perhaps we can not do that now and go through the stream and see your questions come about.


SPEAKER_10:
Great.

So today in this discussion, as with our last two weeks, we've been talking about the Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood, which is a paper in Frontiers in Psychology, December 2018, by Williford et al.,

And thanks, David, again, for coming out to the stream.

It's always awesome to have the authors.

The aims and claims of the paper we did go through in a previous week.

But David, just I'm curious here, how do you present this work or how do you introduce this topic to different audiences who might have familiarity with different topics?

Like, how do you frame the aims and the claims of the paper?


SPEAKER_02:
So lately, I've been particularly talking in contexts where people come from artificial intelligence, robotics, virtual reality.

with, you know, of course, some broader philosophical interests, and I generally try to frame it starting a bit like you did, I mean, from the question of, you know, what we could call biological cybernetics, and you elaborated on that term before,

and how active inference for a situated autonomous system with survival challenges is an interesting paradigm to understand cognition within biological cybernetics.

And then I come to the question of what would be then the role in that.

process of what you know we entreat as being consciousness what we can say about it emphasizing the big and important challenge of connecting let's put it that way for short you know the phenomenology of subjective experience is some aspect of it with

for lack of a better word, functions.

Why do we perceive and imagine the world the way, and others and yourself in the world, the way we seem to do at a certain level?

And how that actually, how can we make sense of that to understand computational, in some sense, process that are key to, you know, adaptation, you know, resilience in the context of biological cybernetics?


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Thanks for that.

And I think it was really clear how you laid out that connection in the paper.

Basically, there's the functions of consciousness, which we'll go through soon.

And then there's the subjective aspects, which were captured in the invariance.

And the PCM is like a bridge that's going to be connecting the subjective invariance of consciousness to some of these functional attributes.

And so we're kind of going from point A to point B across a specific river.

And so if we can really be clear about which sites on the riverbank we're building from and then be really clear about what the bridge is and isn't, then we'll have a really good discussion about consciousness as opposed to just swirling around and

thinking it does everything and nothing and it's everything and nothing at once and all these things so any thoughts on the aims and claims from anyone else otherwise we'll just go through to the next section cool yep we have a lot of questions coming up so in uh previous weeks we looked through the abstract sentence by sentence just to understand how

The authors were taking the free energy minimizing approach of active inference, biological cybernetics, and then connecting this to a few other areas such as geometry and the embedded psychology.

And that was the abstract.

In the roadmap, we had the sort of outline of where they go.

They start with an introduction and go straight to the methodology and then talk about the two riverbanks in that previous metaphor that we want to connect, the phenomenological invariance of experience and then the functional features of consciousness, and then sets up the problem in a way that hopefully could be solved.

So maybe, David, I'm curious, like,

in other papers how have you structured it differently or this was in 2018 what have you been um like wishing that could have been explained more or where have you bolstered the theory since then all right that's a huge uh question um so number one uh


SPEAKER_02:
Kenneth Williford, the first author of this paper, we expected him to join.

I don't know if he will join later.

He's a friend of mine and I admire for the quality of his mind.

He's a philosopher.

And so the structure of this particular paper we look at today is, I think, deeply informed

by his philosophical methods.

If you were to read the first paper we published on the topics in the Journal of Theoretical Biology in 2017, you would find a

too wordy though, but very different way of presenting.

But they are totally consistent with each other.

And in both case, you know, it's still work in progress.

So there are still a lot of questions.

And of course, we are not claiming that we explain everything by far.

We're trying to restrict ourselves to things we think we can frame in a classical scientific framework.

And I've been working for years now in my lab, and we are actually finishing a paper on that, to integrate, based on the general principle of this model, in addition to visual illusion, as we did recently in the Moon Illusion paper that was published in 2020, a mechanism of affective and social appraisal and processing

social perspective taking, based on projective geometry notably, but not only, to model and understand how artificial agents, virtual or robotics, as a model of ourselves, if you wish, can do theory of mind.

and how that plays a role in emotion regulation, adaptation of behavior.

And that's basically what I've been doing.

And interestingly, without taking too long, there are some studies from psychophysics that

that show, based on empirical data, that if you are confronted with an object or something you feel is dangerous, like for instance a snake, for some phobic for instance, the intensity of your fear will be a function of the inverse, more or less the inverse of the distance of the object.

And that has been formalized as being something you can identify with an empirical psychophysical law called Steven's law with a certain type of exponent.

And as it turns out, actually, the projective geometrical framing just gives you that naturally.

It transforms information, the apparent size of object, according, under certain constraints, to a law that is inverse from the distance.

more or less.

So you can recover things that have been documented before and understand how they may play a role in appraisal.

Something I fear when it's closer, it's bigger.

It takes more of my field of consciousness, if you wish, to make it simple.

And so one way of

motivating my behavior of, for instance, avoidance is imagining myself farther.

So the thing is smaller, takes less space, and as a result, it has less impact following the very same law we're discussing.

And therefore, that will minimize my free energy and I will move away.

And I do that with robots and things like that.


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, very cool.

Yeah, I'm imagining this like fear is proportional to one over distance, something in that family of equations, like a bus that's 100 feet away, not scary, 50 feet away, not scary.

It's still on the flat part of the fear curve.

And then it gets exponentially higher when it gets closer to you and takes up more of your field of vision.

So and then there's also long distance threats, somebody with a projectile or something like that.

And so that entails a causal model where

Somebody who's doing a certain action might be able to make an object quite big in your face very soon, but maybe it's not quite there yet, but it could happen rapidly.

So that's kind of an interesting take.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So the point here is along the line of what I was saying, trying to understand what is or what could be some aspect of the causal role of consciousness in things like appraisal and motivational behavior.

Here the point that we make is that actually the spatial structuring that we put forth, based on projective geometry, implies, naturally, something about, you know, relative size that is consistent with psychophysics.

And so it's to say that we find, somehow,

this structuration of space by consciousness act as a sort of lens, a magnifying device, if you think about it that way, that, in virtue of its own geometry, will have an impact that can then be used for other aspects of motivation and programming of behavior in the context of active inference.


SPEAKER_10:
so maybe we'll get back to this intermodal area again but that's the visual field and uh not all organisms or humans may have the visual field but it's clear that the spatial objects we visualize them in space and uh there's something similar though like if there's a lot of noise in the background but something is what you're taking up your field of audio awareness and so it's like in each of our senses there can be a sense like a sensory um expansion of focus

Greetings, Lee.

Just play on.

We're just continuing the discussion.

But go ahead there, David.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

So one of the essential things we emphasize is that it's actually not just the visual field.

It is the cognition of space as informed in a multimodal manner through audio.

you may recognize object and all of a sudden you kind of have an image of sort, the spatial representation of that object, as if you could see it even though you don't see it.

Blind people do that all the time.

They have actually perspectival representation and they represent

object in space, based on other sensory channels, there is an inference that is being made.

And the idea is that consciousness operates at some level of abstractions, once you have actually extracted information from different sense modalities, and then they become spatial objects, if you wish, with variety of properties that you put in perspective in that field of consciousness, and based on which you will operate at the conscious level, if that makes any sense.


SPEAKER_10:
Yep.

Interesting.

It's like, it's so hard sometimes to disentangle from the eyes, vision, perception, debacle, nightmare, because we know that we're not experiencing what photons hit our retina.

We know it's a generative model and you're really taking it to the next level.

And it's like, no, you're not even just seeing a generative model of the visual field.

You're seeing this extremely into your quote, seeing this integrated field of consciousness, right?

And that may depend on your visual abilities or your acuity, but it also is something that's quite derived from intermodal stimuli.

And yeah, well, that's cool stuff.

Let's get to this projective geometry idea.

And we, as non-geometers, talked about it a little bit in previous discussions and just tried to capture a few of these points that you said were differing critically between Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries.

So I'm just curious, and perhaps those who are not familiar with hearing about geometry and consciousness in the same sentence, just...

what is it that brings geometry to the table and how do we end up even talking about geometry and consciousness together


SPEAKER_02:
Excellent question.

So first of all, a little disclaimer.

I'm not a mathematician, even though since I understood early on that what I was trying to do required to think mathematically in a fairly advanced way, I banged my head to try to progress.

But I'm privileged to work with real and very good mathematicians.

So that helps.

But nevertheless, I can...

give you, to the limit of my knowledge, some info about it.

Number one, I would say, generally speaking, you know, if experience, one conspicuous aspect of experience, of subjective experience, is a spatial manifestation.

Not all experience is reduced to space, but a big chunk of it involves it, so it's good from a scientific standpoint because then it becomes something you can think about mathematically.

And a lot of models in, let's put it that way, in cognitive science has been based on information processing, sometimes very formal models like advanced Bayesian models or even active inference.

And so there is a lot of emphasis on the mathematics of information theory, so to speak.

And here the notion is that in order to bridge information processing, if you wish, with aspect of experience as manifested as a space, geometry comes obviously as a scientific object, as a mathematical object, as something necessary.

So the challenge is then to understand how to articulate information theory with geometry in order to have a fuller account of the process.

So then now on the specifics of projective geometry, it starts from trying to find some, let's call it that way, phenomenological invariant that most people would agree upon to a certain extent.

Considering experience introspectively, it appears that it's obvious in vision, but I claim it's general in most perception and imagination, that the way we

quote unquote, represents the world.

Let's not enter into the metaphysics of representation.

Let's use it in a pragmatic way.

Here, this notion of representation is in perspective.

Obviously, parallel lines do not appear to us in vision.

as parallel, but they converge at a certain vanishing point towards infinity.

There is an horizon, and it's three-dimensional.

It's not like just a projection of a 3D world on an image.

We experience it with a sense of depth.

And I argue that

The same when you imagine yourself somewhere, considering something, aiming at something.

The notion of aiming at is very important in the phenomenological tradition in philosophy.

It's not just about visual vision, it's about spatial aiming.

And in all those circumstances, the world is mapped.

Is there a world that seems to correspond to our surroundings, a world that corresponds to things we remember, or even a totally fantasy world of things that may never exist?

Every single time we build a world,

experience in consciousness the point is that there is a perspective that is being taken with these properties of having an elusive point of view somewhat in perception we tend to feel it in we feel that we are in the middle of that space so that the origin is somewhere in your head perhaps

but that's not necessarily the case and that's not something that we can identify as an act the way we could identify the location of an object in space it's a music something that the phenomenologists have talked about a lot and it's in perspective so if you take those two things

an origin of the projection or of the point of view that is elusive and a three-dimensional representation of space that is in perspective.

Then the only geometry and

And the geometry that account for that is projective geometry.

And here, since we say the space is in three dimensions, there is this notion of left, right, up, down, and forward and backward.

It's a three-dimensional projective space.

And then that means that this space is ruled by the so-called projective transformation that are

specific type of transformation that comes from a group of transformation that transform perspective into that space.

So, for instance, you can transform a point of view from the point of view I have here looking at the screen to an imaginary point of view I would have in a different position, myself or somebody else.

And all of that is naturally governed by that geometry.

So then that geometry appears naturally as

A, if not D, candidates to account for this aspect of phenomenological experience.

And therefore, then you can start thinking about, OK, how that can play a role in the process of active inference.


SPEAKER_10:
Nice.

Thank you for the clear explanation.

Really, in that little bit, the clearest part moving forward is this elusive origin and spatial perspective that we have.

If someone can imagine an experience that doesn't fulfill those two conditions, then we're already breaking our assumptions.

But if you can, that's great.

It's like write a paper about it.

But given that there's consensus that there's an elusive origin and a spatial perspective,

we can then say that we're in a family of geometries that are related to this projective transformation.

And so going from there, there's other downstream consequences.

So really difficult topic sometimes to talk about.

Of course, transdisciplinary ideas.

But I think it's really clear how the structure of your argument is set up.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Just a couple of questions.

is the distance as things go away, is that, and you feel less intensity in terms of the fear or something, is that linear or is that kind of exponential or is it very dependent on the space?

And I suppose the other question is, is this transformation between one mapping to the kind of projective geometry?

So it's not like you store it in that form.

There's some sort of,

action to make it into this projection.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, very good question.

I'm going to try to address them to the extent I can.

So number one, these experiments that shows the spatial relationship between subjective fear and distance, they found a power law with an exponent minus one.

So basically, it's like the fear decrease as a function of the inverse, one over the distance.

So it's not linear.

It's not exactly an exponential.

if it's not linear.

And as it turns out, that's the very basic

rule of perspective when you want to build a space in perspective you divide by your coordinates xyz coordinates by a parameter that corresponds to the distance along with you are basically projecting the direction of aiming that can be for instance in front of you so basically you find that in that geometry there is a similar operations if you wish

as those that are implied by the one over distance models that is empirically derived.

So that's non-linear, but it's a very particular type of non-linearity that is not a super complex non-linearity that can be handled computationally, which I guess is important.

And now

The second part of your question, can you remind me of it?


SPEAKER_00:
It's just about that transformation between however the brain stores it and this projective phenomenon that we experience.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

So the idea here is somewhat what we have to presuppose if we want to embrace that type of model is that there is an unconscious world model, which is complex, which is constantly updated, that somehow store information more or less in memory in a Euclidean manner.

and that we access that information by taking perspective on it, so by transforming this sort of quote-unquote occlidean representation into a perspectival, objective representation.

That involved multiple steps and that's something, for instance, we developed the most basic one, I would say, in our Mono Illusion paper, in which we show and we

how the calibration of a projective frame in 3D.

So we set the parameter that defines the projection and free energy immunization.

That's the idea, it's free energy minimization acting on geometry.

Hunter's illusions, such as the moon illusion, explain the illusions such as AIMZOOM illusion, and many other illusions we did not develop in this paper.

And that is somewhat, the idea is that in, you know, sometimes people talk about access consciousness,

Let's not enter into the complexity of that debate, but let's say that the hypothesis here is that in the way we access information that's in consciousness, there is somewhat a change of

coordinates, quote unquote, from a Euclidean representation to a projective one.

And that operation is essential in what makes information conscious versus not, you know, model, if that makes any sense.


SPEAKER_10:
Thanks for the answer.

Let's go to Lee.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, hiya.

Yeah.

So I was just wondering to sort of build on Stephen's question, if if a fear response is exponentially related to distance, does that hold or is there any research that shows whether that holds for a counterfactual version?

So I'm thinking here about phobia or trauma.

So if you have a particular experience, you know, often in PTSD, those things are replayed.

So yeah, did you have any thoughts on that or any pointers?


SPEAKER_02:
That's really a great question.

Okay, the literature on this, on the basic experiment, is not huge, surprisingly.

And your question is super interesting indeed because

And we would like to demonstrate that even if you do it in an imaginary way, you recover this type of effect consistent with the model.

I'm not aware of such study, but I'm doing so much multidisciplinary work that the literature I have to cover is vast.

And sometime I may miss important studies in specific subfield, but definitely that gives us the roadmap for a great experiment.


SPEAKER_04:
Because in the literature, I'm thinking of Benjamin Bergen on simulation.

He talks about the difference between canonical perspective and I can't remember the other one, but it's essentially first person perspective and the ability to shift between these.

So I just wondered whether it might be related, but I'd be certainly interested if there's any research that you're thinking about doing.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, David, unmute, and then go ahead, and then Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
So you want me to speak now?


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, if you have anything to add there.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, I misunderstood.

I lost the screen.


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, yeah, no, great point, and thanks for that question, Lee.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, very interesting stuff.

Makes me think about this consciousness and understanding of...

how to interact with your space as like narrative building and how that develops over the lifetime that like as a child, that the things that you're afraid of are quite specific and nearby.

And as, you know, as we grow up, we're afraid of much kind of larger, but more distant things.

But there's something, you know, some transformation we have to figure out

as far as we still have to be motivated and afraid of the things that are either very afraid or very, or sorry, very scary or very unlikely.

And those are still enough to motivate people to avoid them.

And so I think that's a really interesting, yeah, something in there about changing the scope of your


SPEAKER_10:
uh non-euclidean projection let's say um as you uh grow up nice sasha and it's kind of like when you go back to see something scary in childhood you go oh wait it was only a six inch stair that we were jumping off of well you're bigger but also you have a different world view and then just like in the computational psychiatry realm we might talk about difference in a statistical parameter leading to decreased motivation or decision making

It could be a distortion of this projection that results in things being perceived as dangerously close.

Claustrophobia, people are too close to me or people are too far away from me.

There's so much there with the social touch as well.

Let's go just...

onto the sort of new parts of 9.2 and talk about some of these other slides and questions we have.

So last week we talked about the functional features, the cybernetic features, as well as some of these other theories, threads that were drawn in, like the availability, kind of like a workspace, the simulation theory, motivation of action.

We talked about that last week.

as well as the questions about the phenomenological invariance with the emphasis on point one being that relational phenomenal intentionality so just pause the video and look at those if you want more detail or of course read the paper but let's go to some feedback from participants so one thing that a participant who couldn't be here today asked

was one thing I'm curious about is whether they are working on more complex forms of the model with higher temporal depth that kind of speaks to these adult fears considerations we talked about.

And then also this person added another thing I'm curious about more philosophically is what do they mean by now?

They have an extended phenomenological background for the model, which suggests that the now would be extended, like an extended now.

However, in naturalist models, which I assumed active inference or potentially artificial intelligence framework-based models are a subset of, time is often modeled and understood as point-like or as a continuous variable with points.

I wonder what the implications are or what there might be if they mixed up these two interpretations of what the now is, the physical and the psychological now.

So David, what do you think about these questions from the participant?


SPEAKER_02:
They are great.

I'm going to try to address some of it, of course.

And again, there are still a lot of things to discover and understand.

And one of the things we like about starting with a mathematical model is that then it acts as a guide.

Now it's the theory that tells us where are the problems and where are the solutions.

It's a general analogy, sorry, I'm going a bit off track, but it's useful.

And without comparing ourselves with Einstein, don't worry, we don't have that ambition.

If you think about general relativity, once the mathematical theory was derived, basically people looked into it and started thinking, there is a problem with this theory.

It tells us that there should be black holes, right?

And in fact, basically, the theory predicted things that nobody could observe, of course, before, and very difficult to observe.

And that was a consequence of the mathematics.

And so that's the idea that we follow from a scientific standpoint is let's give us mathematics and see where it leads us.

One thing I'm curious about, the first question, yes, we are working on more complex form.

I alluded to that at the beginning.

Number one, this notion of transformation as an inverse law of distance related to this literature is not to say that we appraise information only that way.

was to show at least to that type of relation in appraisal.

And to some extent, our model makes sense of it.

Now about the more complex form, remember the space here, the geometry is one thing, but it's embedded into an active inference framework.

with a lot of complex computation involving higher beliefs and preference, internal model of the body, of others, of objects, including internal model, that's what we are doing now, of beliefs about the beliefs of others and beliefs about the beliefs that others believe others have.

So basically, level six of second order theory of mind.

And by actually...

imbuing an artificial agent with this type of statistical processing and combine with the geometry, then we can start modeling how

you know, inspired from simulation theory, we can put ourselves in the shoes of others.

We can try to imagine what it would feel like to look at things, to observe things, to aim at things as they seem to do, including understanding that they may have different beliefs and preferences as us.

You know, the same object may look cool to us.

And so when you get closer, it's better.

But for them, maybe that's something they hate.

And when it gets closer, they want to run away.

So then we have a way of extending the model very naturally with the same math, with the same general principle to encompass theory of mind and social affective perspective taking, if you wish.

And one interesting thing that we find is that when you enable artificial agents with this type of process, then you enable them also to be influenced by each other.

because you may be able to understand and predict other behavior, but not care about it.

But if you do, then the agents, the little robots or the virtual humans, start showing a joint attention behavior.

They start interacting, looking at the same thing, looking at each other to kind of confirm that they understand what the other likes.

And they constantly put themselves in the shoes of the other and reciprocally.

And through this process of projective perspective taking, informed by all these kind of Bayesian-like models and the free energy minimization, they start showing very complex behavior, including, you know, we have reproduced in a non-verbal way the famous Sally and Anne task, you know, about

theory of mind, basically, that's two puppets.

One of them, they are together.

There is some object of interest in a basket.

One of them leave, the other take the object of interest from the basket and put it in the box.

And typically, you ask children when the other come back.

Where do you think she will go?

And if you understand false belief, you will say, well, because she believes that the object is still in the basket, she will go to the basket.

And so we have modeled a kind of simulation framework in a nonverbal way for that.

And we show agents actually exploit their understanding of false belief in others to approach disingenuously object they would like by, you know,

being freed of being bothered by the other because now the other has false belief.

The same way we can kind of simulate some aspect of social anxiety because anytime you have an agent that believes that the other agent doesn't like it, then playing the algorithm, just running the algorithm, anytime the agent imagines itself approaching the other agent that

the agents suppose do not like him, then he puts itself, because he does social perspective taking, in the shoes of this other agent.

And when he imagines what it is like for this other agent to see himself or itself get closer because of the same rule we have discussed,

he understands that would raise free energy in the other agent, and since he takes into account the other agent's opinion that he attributes to the others, therefore that raises its own free energy.

As a result, it tends to avoid approaching the agent that it believes doesn't like it.

So you see, you start having very sophisticated behavior all through this basic processing.

So that's for the first question.

Sorry it was long.

I hope it was not too confusing.

Anytime you have to deal with theory of mind, in particular second order theory of mind, and talk about belief that another may have, about the belief of another, et cetera, et cetera, and so on, it's become very challenging for the mind.

So now, regarding the other question about the now and the spacious present.

So in a way, it's a hard question to answer, and we are still working on that.

In a way, there is the physical time, let's call it that way, which is point-like, probably that is involved in the underlying processing.

whatever it is based on the brain or based on some computational algorithm.

So there is a timer.

And then there is the time as it is integrated, perceived, and structured in consciousness.

And the idea here is that because we are doing active inference, constantly anticipating the future to some extent, even a very close future, it can be at different scales.

So then we are trying to recover from that, but we are not yet there, the notion of this kind of extended present, so that basically at a given time instant, that's not the right, at a given moment, if you wish, you not only have this instantaneous representation of space in perspective,

but you have a process in which the anticipation drives the next instant in a manner that is integrated as a whole.

So it's very abstract what I'm saying.

We're also trying to understand how we can put time pressure within this free energy context, and we have solutions for that, and also how the agents can

dive into the autobiographical memory under the same process.

We are also very interested, now it's moving away from that, but it connects to questions that we had before to the, I would say, pathological transformations, in the sense that here we are talking about very adaptive behaviors, very tuned to sensory-motor contingencies and constraints,

And so that as this embodiment, the fact that we tend to have this first person point of view, refer to the representation that we have of our body in space, that's constraint, that embodiment constraint somewhat reduce the number of possible projective transformations.

And because only some of them will give you that type of point of view.

But if you relax those constraints,

then you can get very wild things that I find are very interesting to connect with the literature on psychotropes, on mystical experience, on arts.

And to give you an example, we have not published on that yet, but one of the things that happens to the agents is that

you know if they they have the possibility of basically being freer in the application of the projective transformation they can use for instance in the context in which they are in a desperate world in the sense that everything they can think about or do as an embodied agent will yield a very high level of free energy there is no good solution then one option is to release the constraint on the projection and when you do that

In order to minimize free energy, the agent will tend to basically put their

point of view, quote unquote, at infinity, what we called the God point of view, which is a bit of a bad choice of words.

And so basically, that means that one way of minimizing free energy for those agents is to releasing those normal constraints is to escape towards infinity so that basically the world become very, very far.

And then the structure of the representation of the world you have start having very odd symmetries.

that may remind us of mandalas or things like that.

So I'm shutting up now.


SPEAKER_10:
Wow.

A lot of stuff there.

Let's go Adam and then Lee and then Steven.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, can you hear me?


SPEAKER_10:
Yep.

Sounds good.


SPEAKER_03:
So one thing I've been struggling with in terms of time and consciousness is whether it's

better to think of it as like a series of kind of discrete snapshots or more of a continuous flow.

I'm personally leaning more towards discrete snapshots.

And so with respect to projected geometric modeling, I'm wondering whether the refresh rate might be like at something like alpha frequencies, like 10 times a second to primarily like posterior courtesies getting into the mix

establishing that 40 perspective.

But then more like, and you mentioned like access consciousness or where that might start and like the whole active inferential unfolding that that might be more at like theta frequencies, like three to four times a second.

And then like, you might get something like a North off style, like a spatial temporal alignment based on like your interoceptive States, maybe more like Delta frequencies.

And so you might have this like nested hierarchy of time scales with a core screening over events at various resolutions.

But at the bottom of it though, it seems like where like the core of it is this establishing of a field with projected geometric modeling at the center.

And I guess, are these estimates, I'm wondering, discrete, do you think, or is it continuous?


SPEAKER_02:
That's really a very good question and a very sound and interesting hypothesis, you know, with this sort of empirical testing, because it's a whole program of research.

I've been for a long time an electrophysiologist.

I worked for a long time on this stuff.

I don't anymore, but I'm very open to pursuing collaborations on that.

First of all, I should say I don't have a satisfying answer to that question.

I think it's indeed multi-scaled.

I think that it has a discrete, quote-unquote, sharp, if not discrete component, which may be perfectly embedded in a more, at least in the way it manifests itself, a continuous flow.

But that is, I don't think, in and of itself,

doesn't pose a challenge, a theoretical challenge, it's just complex, but we can think about how it could be done, and we can also think about how it could be calibrated based on the type of biological reason you are talking about.

What is more of a theoretical challenge is this notion of spacious presence, in which somewhere, that's the

words that the phenomenologists like Husserl would use, we pretend, or pretension this notion, in the now, there is somewhat us in the center of that now, and there is at the same time a pretension towards the future, and somehow there is simultaneously, as a manifold, an experience of the, you know, here and now, and an experience of the just after, and at the same time there is still this resonance of

this retention, to use Husserl's word, retention of an immediate past.

So you can think, okay, there is an immediate past, there is an actual present, and there is a close future, and then those things are somewhat bonded together.

But the difficulty is to try to think how actually you can find a mathematical expression of a representation of that in which they are actually part of the same whole and not just, you know, something you could argue, well, but then that means that, you know, they are ultimately separate process.

So we're still trying to work on that, see if there is any way of thinking about that, but we are not yet there.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

We'll do Stephen, Lee, Sasha.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just building on the idea that the projective consciousness can be released when things are not certain enough to be able to know how to make sense of action in the world.

it sort of ties in with this way that indigenous approaches are shape-shifting and they're trying to attune to an environment which they aren't able to construct in the way that we tend to construct and place ourselves in the centre of.

So I think there's an interesting thing as well as there being the risk, if it could just be the increasing level of ambiguity and uncertainty

in the world so that's interesting that you take that i'm just wondering if there's as well as the projective thing going from the self and maybe to infinity do you think there's a like there might be another process another type of geometry come in the other direction like it could be and and and this it sort of shifts towards the self-centered and there's an allocentric

mechanism as well.


SPEAKER_02:
So that's such a great question and that touched to another work that we are pursuing with mathematician Daniel Behnken and Kenneth Williford, who just told me unfortunately he could not make it today, sorry, about what sometimes people have called pre-reflective self-consciousness.

It's a bit along the line of this bizarre sense of the spacious present, but now it's about self-consciousness in the sense that that's what people have called sometimes the self-consciousness hypothesis.

Not everybody agrees upon that.

that we are always, consciousness is always conscious of itself.

That is, it's not like a higher order theory where there is a consciousness, for instance, perceptual consciousness of something and then you reflect upon it and become aware of the fact that you are perceiving that.

The idea is that it's actually the manifold itself is such that there is this pre-reflective slash reflexive relationship

that is fundamental to it.

And so philosophers like Sartre, I believe, and others, I've talked about, how to say that in English,

the seers seeing or seeing the sincere, if you wish, the one we see is also seen at the same time as if there was some sort of duality in which whenever I have a first person perspective and I'm looking at the sky, it feels like there is something in it that feels like that the sky is looking back at me.

Well, as it turns out, it's a natural property of the most, you know, bizarre, strange and interesting aspect of projective geometry, which is not just, you know, it's a very complex and rich geometry.

And we're trying to work that out thanks to this mathematician around this concept of duality, reciprocity, in which there is, at once,

Potentially, we're still working out the math.

The fact that you take a perspective implies that there are reciprocal perspectives and that you look at something and these things look back at you.

I know it's odd, it's bizarre, but it's my attempt to try to touch upon what you were talking about.


SPEAKER_10:
OK.

Lee, then Sasha, Adam, thanks for all these cool questions.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so I'm anticipating that I might be about to ask a stupid question, but I'm going to go ahead anyway.

So it was stimulated by the fact that you were saying that you were kind of interested in, you know, like mystical experiences in relation to projective geometry.

And I was thinking about the meditative experience of non-duality.

I was wondering whether you have come across this and whether you see it in any way related to projective geometry perhaps?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I used to be, I mean, I was at some point, I don't know if you know that person, a student of Francisco Varela, unfortunately passed away during my PhD.

That's why I moved to the US to work with Antonio Damasio to finish my PhD.

And of course, with Varela, I was very interested in

let's say, meditation in the broad sense of the term, both from a scientific standpoint as a possible method to study consciousness, but also more at the personal and existential level, I got more acquainted with that.

I practiced it.

I even studied it a bit.

And I've been, for instance, involved in a very nice workshop in Israel

and perspective on consciousness where this type of tradition, multiple traditions, we are meeting together and we had very interesting discussions and thought about that.

Very nice group.

So, can you try just for me and for the audience perhaps to specify the phenomenology, the aspect of the experience you are describing?

the specific meditation experience that you are describing, this kind of unified experience?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure, I can try.

So I think in some sense, there was

Prior to a certain point, there was an assumption that there's a separation between the observer and the observed.

And that starts to break down such that you kind of, it becomes one space for one to be better.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I think that, of course, I'm not saying that's the answer.

I'm saying that perhaps that contributes to that type of state that connects to what I was talking about of that intrinsic to this, the reciprocal relations that are embedded into this geometry.

I wish the mathematician I work with was here.

There is something like

it's non-trivial, that's important, a reciprocity between looking at or aiming at and being looked at or aimed at simultaneously.

It's not like necessarily you lose track of the perspectives that you have, but there is this richer experience that is implied by this type of geometry.

So in that sense, at some level,

You can perfectly conceive within this geometry how perspective can be taken from anywhere and are all connected through projective transformation, but even deeper.

Perhaps through notions of dualities that I unfortunately could not expand upon because I would totally fail.

That's why I need to work with mathematicians.

That gives you this sort of

a unified experience of some sort of bizarre panopticon where you could be anywhere, you could be looking from anywhere and from your particular perspective and being looked at, that could be you, that could be something else.

And that's a manifold of point of view that at the same time is grounded into a unique point of view that exists in full dimension.

So I know it sounds bizarre, but that's just the maths.

That's what they are.


SPEAKER_10:
Thank you.

We have a new visitor, but Sasha, go ahead.

Then Adam.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just thinking about this whole time perception question, whether, and I guess it's two separate things.

It's, is time discrete or continuous?

And the second question is time perception, discrete or continuous?

And if it is possible for people to have different spatial understandings or perceptions, then it's also possible for people to have different perceptions of time passing and different rate of how everything is happening.

And is that...

How do we integrate that or allow for that to happen, that people perceive time perhaps very differently?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, that I don't think in and of itself is a deeply difficult conceptual challenge, at some level at least, in the sense that

It's not different if you want to think about it as having systems that have internal model of beliefs

and understanding that somebody else may have different beliefs.

In my robot, in the example I was giving, it was many beliefs about whether or not an agent likes or dislikes something.

And all this, let's put it that way, let's be broader.

In the mechanics of the whole system, there are a lot of parameters that concerns beliefs, that concerns the calibration of projective frames that can be different from people to people.

So I would guess that it's not a satisfactory answer.

I'm sorry, but that could be the same for the way the flow of time is...

structure is construed within consciousness.

To me, at some point you are living with complex systems that have statistical models with a lot of parameters.

So it's perfectly logical that if you have parameters pertaining to time consciousness,

they could be different from one person to the other.

You know, at that level of abstraction, I don't think the problem is an essential challenge in the sense that, oh, here there is a big paradox that I cannot resolve in a consistent manner with mathematical thinking.

But of course, there are much deeper questions than this whole, what we were talking about before, this whole spacious present, this kind of extended experience of experience of the present, of the now, is more difficult to grasp to me.

Yes.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Let's go last comments here from Adam, and then we'll welcome Kent.


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, can you hear me?

Yep.

So in talking about this sort of reciprocity or mutuality of like when you look and then looking back at you, it started to make me wonder about the extent to which

projective geometric modeling might be intersubjectively bootstrapped, and that it both enables theory of mind capacities in terms of giving you this flexible transformation between perspectives, which would be at the heart of mentalizing a theory of mind.

But also to engage in that, I'm wondering if that helps to induce the capacity.

which then feeds back and makes you better perspective, which then, and a kind of bootstrapping process.

And now I'm wondering in terms of like evolution and development, like when is this starting to arise?

Like you could, in theory, think of this happening like non-intersubjectively in a way where it's like, I don't know, like a predator sort of like hunting, maybe if I go here and doing sort of like, where do I need to be to get, like if the organism has like,

a model of itself of some degree of temporal depth, and it's trying to do something a little bit more elaborate, trying to like forge for information, well, that's gonna go, hey, I go here, I'll have a different perspective, and this is like influencing the policy selection.

But in humans, it's probably really heavily intersubjectively bootstrapped.

Anyway, so some thoughts.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm not going to make a long comment to not take too much space, but I find everything you say that I agree with you.

I think actually you're right, probably so.

There are very interesting stuff in ethology and animal behavior, even in relatively recent literature that suggests the role of projective representations into the way animals

try to lure others into either being a mate or being a prey.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Welcome, Ken.


SPEAKER_05:
You can say hi.

Hi.

Yeah, sorry I'm so late.


SPEAKER_10:
All good.


SPEAKER_05:
Good morning.


SPEAKER_10:
Do you have anything to add or just feel free to raise your hand any time?


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, we'll do.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Well, there's a few more slides.

This was really a great set of questions by the participant.

So that's really fun topics.

Here's some quotes that I put up there.

And the part I wanted to kind of start off with is the second half of the second quote on here.

which is just a system running the PCM would more closely approximate the actual complexity, organization and processing power of human or animal brains.

And this could very well on the author's view, literally be an artificial consciousness.

So maybe getting into sort of questions about what does it actually entail to have the awareness?

What if you make a system that has action and perception and it does a projective geometry transformation and it, you know, it's doing it because you're the one who made the robot.

So I was just curious to hear about from the robotics side or from the mathematical side or from the neuro phenomenological, what else is happening in humans?

Is it evolutionary?

Is it linguistic, et cetera?


SPEAKER_02:
So I would like Ken to speak, because he has a lot to say.

But since you're asking about robots, and that question is very relevant, of course,

I will answer as a scientist.

I'm hiding behind the method, the scientific method, not to avoid the question, but to tell you first that I don't have an answer to that fundamental question.

What I'm trying to do, and that's, I think, the only thing science can do, at least as we know it, and you can take the model of physics as a prominent example of that, is to try to understand, not necessarily why, but how

we do think, we do things.

And that applies to consciousness, to the phenomenology of consciousness.

So what we are modeling here is that phenomenology and how it is involved in other process.

And so at the end, the only thing I could say about my robot

in the way they are implemented at this point, there is a lot of work ahead, is that at least their behavior will be governed by principles that are central to the way consciousness processes information.

Let's put it that way.

So it doesn't imply at all that those robots are actually conscious in the sense we would like to, but at least they can demonstrate how

our consciousness and the principles that seems to shape our consciousness play a role in our overall, the economy of our behavior, et cetera, et cetera.

It doesn't give us an answer to why, you know, this is conscious in the sense, maybe actually it's with a certain level of complexity, it's sufficient.

And maybe Ken should speak now and rebound on that.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, I was going to say this passage, if memory serves, of course, this is a general sort of worry that anybody who works on consciousness thinks about it has, especially if you are doing anything with simulations, as David was.

So we started to think, well, of course, we don't think that the simulations that David has built

are actually contained consciousness uh you know actually contain conscious agents um so then you wonder all right you know so it's not it's not merely um processing information and the the way in a way that simulates what's specified in the model i guess you could say um it could be

things as well like so in a sense we we think okay this is a necessary condition for consciousness that you process information and the way the PCM outlines sufficiency acquire a certain kind of scale and complexity that

that we're not certain about yet.

So we shouldn't just assume that any kind of situation that follows this model is just ipso facto a conscious being.

That's kind of claiming too much.

What else is involved?

Well, we don't know, but it seems like,

This is we maintain.

This is necessary for consciousness, so Be conscious being will will have this structure process information in this way um And it for all we know it could be sort of Things that we don't we're not going to be able to reduce to principles

so easily that we'd have to discover empirically.

That's the, that's the reason we say here, the, an a posteriori identity theory.

That's, that's the idea that you can't really say what consciousness is a priori.

You have to find out what it is empirically.

And at some point you might find yourself in a situation where you could say, okay, these, suppose we build a lot of artificial systems that do this.

These exhibit all the behaviors and so on that make it seem like a conscious being.

They, you know, suppose they operate on a certain scale and a certain complexity.

At some point, we might be able to say, yeah, we think right here's the sweet spot.

Why exactly?

We don't know.

Maybe we will discover that, maybe not.

But on the one hand, it seems like you don't want to be

um shy of saying that the you know from what we can tell these are necessary conditions and on the other you don't want to be to um you don't want to you don't want to have a view of the sufficient conditions for consciousness that make it quite too easy you know so that's awesome yeah thanks for that response steven just a really quick comment and then we'll move on


SPEAKER_00:
Just quickly, I was just wondering, when you think about projective consciousness, is it like this is really summing up

a particular type of consciousness, which we are taking these projective, perspectival kind of ways of engaging the world.

And there's a potential, I wonder if there's a potential for that to seem like it's more like how consciousness is, because we culturally have taken that on to be how we think of the world.

But this might be like one way of taking a view from a more sort of higher perspective.


SPEAKER_06:
So shall I take this one?

Yes, Ken, please do, and speak more.


SPEAKER_02:
What's that?

I think you should speak, because I have spoken already a lot, and you have a lot to say.


SPEAKER_06:
So, I mean, our hypothesis is that this is not just of, you know, how we've been enculturated or

Let's see if I got your question right.

I mean, our view is that this is at least a necessary feature of all consciousness.

That's the claim.

So now you could imagine, and you could actually wed this kind of view to other theories of consciousness.

You could wed it to, you know, panpsychism for that matter.

You could just say, oh, no, actually consciousness is something else.

It's whatever, some fundamental property of nature.

But if you had that sort of view, this kind of work would still be of interest because it might sketch out how conscious beings like us, or probably animals, how they experience the world and how they process information.

Right.

So but and of course, when we make it so it's compatible with that, with really your consciousness that's cast at a kind of metaphysical level.

I guess our view would be something like, well, you know, suppose this suppose this type of model allows us to explain everything that we we think is pertinent to consciousness.

So it allows us to account for whatever behavioral and cognitive functions.

consciousness carries out, and for the phenomenology of consciousness, if it allowed you to account for those things, then

And suppose you could identify the type of structure this is and the sort of scale and complexity it needs to be organized on.

Then to our way of thinking, at least as it comes to the metaphysical issue, we have a tendency to think, OK, that's just what consciousness is.

We discovered this empirically.

We discovered it a posteriori.

There's no need to postulate any further metaphysics because any metaphysical account of consciousness

Well, it actually has the same structure.

It's something you didn't figure out a priori, really.

You just thought, okay, well, here's an account that would make sense of the fact that, you know, take panpsychism.

Why is anything conscious?

Well, you know, if everything is conscious, then it's no mystery that we are.

So that's an argument you could make.

Well, you know, as you probably know, there are all these different ways

Positions in the philosophy of mind about the nature of consciousness and the and the distribution of consciousness that in my view They're all kind of epistemically on a par.

None of them are really like you can't show any of them a priori you can't demonstrate so It seems like it's wide open to you on the theoretical level to be this kind of identity theorist Just you and you reach, you know when you have this structure have this level

You're a conscious being.

That's what consciousness is.

We figure it out empirically, and we don't need to sort of postulate anything else.

That said, it's totally compatible with other views.

So you could hold that, no, this is much more derived and primitive, like sensing or something is a basic form of consciousness or something like that.

We do think, though, that

So here's one thing.

It's not exactly a priori, but let's say it's a strong intuition that a lot of people have.

If you're conscious of anything, that's going to involve the appearance of something to something.

So it has this kind of appearance of to structure.

And that's a kind of spatial, I mean quasi-spatial structure, a proto-geometrical structure.

And that takes you already kind of in the direction of thinking of consciousness as like a space and like a projective space, in fact.

That's not, you know, you can't demonstrate that a priori, but it is a strong intuition that people have.

So I'd like to say, I think I say in this paper, don't I?

You know, follow your phenomenological muse.

Build your models and see where they take you.

We can't really determine those things a priori or just by

banging on the table with our favorite interviewers.


SPEAKER_10:
Thanks.

I see Adam and Lee have their hands raised, but just really quick, especially David and Ken, would either of you be okay with staying for a few minutes past the hour so we can just continue talking for a few minutes?

Okay.

I have a question.

about 40 minutes but so i'm fine oh beautiful so we'll just um anyone can depart whenever they need to and uh otherwise we won't have to come to a speedy landing there but we'll go adam and then lee oh hello um


SPEAKER_03:
I guess I'd like to hear a little bit more about the intuition for why it is that existing simulations might not be conscious and in terms of what it would actually take to get a sufficiency.

This is something I've been struggling with also.

For me, I've been mostly coming at it from the neural direction, thinking of like, OK, what in terms of neural systems might underlie these different capacities?

And then how would that be implemented?

I become a little bit more confused when I start to think of alternative implementations.

So something like projective geometric modeling, I'm wondering if that's primarily posterior medial cortices, and that's giving you this sort of flexible spatial modeling.

But then this is coupled to body maps of lateral parietal lobes.

And then this is part of one basically synchronous complex, which is mutually constraining each other as you're filling in this sort of joint estimate of the world and your lived body in relation to it, so basically exactly what you propose.

And so for me, it's like when I'm talking about a biological system, there's a certain grain at which this calculation

is being established through a metastable synchronous complex, or I call it a non-equilibrium steady state distribution, or I call it a self-organizing harmonic mode.

But if we're talking about something like a simulation on a Turing machine that might be doing the geometric modeling by very different means, is that an issue?

Is that not an issue for you?

Just curious to know more thoughts on boundary problems.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe I can give my thought about that and then Ken.

So number one about the functional neuroanatomy and the neurodynamical

mechanism that may implement the type of process we are talking about.

I think I agree with you.

In the paper we published in 2017 in the Journal of Cervical Biology, we have at the end a little figure that kind of summarizes our gross functional neuroanatomical hypothesis.

And indeed, it seems that the posterior

in particular the parietal lobe and to some extent the posterior mesial cortex, but the posterior mesial cortex maybe more is a bridge, a hub towards interaction with other systems, but the parietal lobe, and then we could enter into the detail, is certain, is probably where this sort of project, as we call it in the paper, projective geometrical engine operate.

And I think the way you attempt to make sense of the difference between, you know, something like the model being processed the way you describe it into a brain versus into a Turing machine, basically a computer is perfectly fair and right.

And maybe indeed,

when you do it in the Turing-like way, like when I do my simulations with my virtual humans and robots, it doesn't entail the type of experiential aspect of which we are trying to figure out the cause, basically the sufficient condition.

And perhaps, indeed, it's a very different context of processing, the way you describe it.

And that is actually key, perhaps not

It would need more elaboration.

Of course, there are still explanatory gaps here, but to make that process conscious.

So for me, it's not a problem.

It's a different type of implementation.

We can use the Turing light to do simulation from which we can learn a lot.

But probably, indeed, there is something about the embodied processing with this type of whatever the brain is doing.

I'm a neuroscientist initially, and I

We all know that actually we know much less about the brain than we pretend to.

And there are probably great and important deep fundamental principles still to understand.

And until we have understood the brain in a much deeper way, well, we won't be able to conclude on that question.


SPEAKER_06:
Ken?

Yeah, I can just add that, you know, I mean, suppose it

It sounds a little odd, you know, from the kind of computer science perspective to think that, say, performing all these computations in a massively parallel way so that, you know, I mean, you can imagine, you know, a tinker...

computer doing the computations involved and taking like thousands of years or something and you think okay that's it's not it's not merely running this program right but if you say okay it has to do with um massively parallel integrated computation of these uh functions um that of course sounds a bit like um

Like, strange.

Like, why would simply being able to do it really fast or do it in this parallel way make a difference?

But, you know, if you're serious about your identity, then you think, well, okay, we'll just find out, right?

It does seem really strange, though, to think...

that a Turing machine made out of beer cans and string, as John Searle would put it, carrying out these conversations would be consciousness.

So that's why I think it's a good idea to leave a little bit of space here, which is what we try to do in here.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe let me just add a little historical note.

It's not about Turing, but it's about von Neumann.

In his seminal paper when he was at the Bell Laboratory, I believe, he derived, he explained the foundation of his architecture that is now basically an implementation of a Turing machine into the computers that we use currently.

Actually, and then it become like, oh, von Neumann machine versus the wet brand.

But in fact, von Neumann in this paper starts from models of artificial neurons, the basic McClough and Pitt neurons, to try to figure out how basic computations such as arithmetic operations could be abstracted.

And then he proposes a serial model of computing

Emphasizing that at the time, because they had to use those vacuum tubes to make the equivalent of semiconductor, it would be too big to build a parallel machine.

It would just not be physically practical.

It would need like a giant building just to put enough tubes in there.

And so the solution of doing it in a binary manner and in a kind of sequential manner, it was just a practical solution.

But his thinking was broader.

So maybe there are also deeper aspects of computations that we don't understand yet and that could help us also to make sense of the experiential dimension.

That's an hypothesis.


SPEAKER_06:
And if I could add one thing to that.

It's also true that simply massive complexity hides... I mean, it has sort of...

I don't take this too seriously, but you all know the old sort of Hegelian idea that quantity eventually yields to quality.

So you have quantitative changes, and if you have enough of them, it's as if it transitions to quality.

Well, there is one way of thinking about that.

not taking the metaphysics of dialectics seriously, but looking at it epistemically, where very complicated things can end up being... In fact, this is kind of the way we are.

Oh, somebody brought this up.

Okay.

Well, all right.

So I'm speaking to... Nobody's going to be freaked out if I start bringing up Hegel.

That's good to know.

Anyway, the idea is

that particular notion of going from quantity to quality.

So just think of massive complexity.

You take a massive complex system as a whole, it can behave in ways that you have to understand sort of qualitatively.

You can't, I mean,

Even things like chess-playing computer programs, to take the classic example, approach your chess-playing computer, if it's a good program, from the intentional stance.

In Dennett's term, you regard it as trying to attack the team and so on.

You don't think of the...

low-level complications going on in it to implement that.

So that's all just to say massive complexity with the massively parallel patient, it's not totally crazy to think that that could yield something that has this kind of form and this kind of macro structure, if you like, that we experience qualitatively.

that consciousness has.

It's not completely crazy to say, okay, yes, serial computation couldn't do it, but massively parallel computation could.


SPEAKER_03:
It's no crazier than the theory of consciousness.

Thanks for that.

That makes a lot of sense to me.

I guess in my own thinking, I've been struggling with to what extent I'm dealing with practical versus in principle practical

issues with respect to boundaries and what it would take to realize consciousness.

So you could say the mass of parallelism is practically necessary, but is it in principle necessary?

And there does seem to be something strange, like church-turning thesis.

In theory, you can do it with the beer cans and rope and let it just play out in a really long time scale.

And eventually, you calculate the whole darn thing, right?

But you're just like, I don't know about that.

But why?

So it would be like, well, practically, there might be like a sense for like, okay, you need consciousness to both like inform and be informed by action perception cycles or something like that.

But that's still a practical, not necessarily like an in principle.

But then like, I guess I've been wondering like, okay, so if it's, if we're going to in principle, it would be like,

is the computational objects, like, real or not?

So, like, if, like, a simulation versus an emulation or things like this.

So, like, in, like, with, like, the recurrent dynamics, sort of, like, metastable synchronous complexes model I'm working on,

even then there's like an issue of like, is this a real thing or not?

And like, they're dealing with like this issue with respect to non-equilibrium, uh, steady states and the free energy principle, which is like these, um, these things are defined as these like harmonic modes.

Um, but then their, their boundaries are like, um,

they seem to be modeler dependent.

Or like in a neural system, like do you ever get like exact synchrony?

How much is enough to count?

What's the time scale at which the thing actually has its existence as a particular attracting state and relative to what?

And so this is where I start to,

Yeah, this difference between practical and in principle issues of implementation and what would actually and then what would let you say, OK, this thing is conscious.

I'm still really confused about it.

May I interject?


SPEAKER_09:
May I comment on that?


SPEAKER_02:
I don't seem to have an opposition.

So I started developing an hypothesis a while ago that I published in a journal called Advances in Neuroscience that actually died.

I don't think it still exists.

And it was kind of based on a reflection on my own work and the work of others in neuroscience and neuropsychology, notably working with brain damage patients.

showing that, you know, a lot of what we believe as being critical for cognition and many aspects of, you know, cognition and affective processing in the brain, like everybody believes now that the insular cortex is critical for craving and many aspects of the sense of self.

Well, I worked with brain damage patients that basically had no insular on both sides, lacked 40% of their brain, and nevertheless, you know, except for some deep anterior amnesia that can be explained by their whatever, they were normal.

So I came to actually think that the brain is much more complex than we think, that the way we observe it with the method we have, neuroimaging or electrophysiology, is very low level.

It's not different than putting thermometers on the microprocessor and trying to infer what type of operating system it's running.

And so I started thinking, so maybe there are layers of abstractions that we haven't understood in the way the brain processes information.

And one analogy that came to my mind

I was very interested in computer science at the time, is the process of virtualization in computer science.

That is basically a way, I mean, it's a simplistic way of explaining it, but a way of creating abstraction layers so that actually at the user level, of course we are talking about computer involving user, but at the process level, all the details of the hardware are hidden.

To take a very trivial example that is not a good analogy, when you use your desktop computer, you don't see the machine language.

You are not using Word.

You don't need to program in assembly language to use your Microsoft Word interface.

So virtualization is actually a process through which

software or process can be abstracted, hide the complexity of the hardware, and also become much more resilient in the sense that then you can kind of move things around across servers, across different things.

So it's not an answer to the question, but I still have this intuition and belief that perhaps there is something analogous that is bridging the gap to some extent between what we know and observe of the brain

subjective experience and more, you know, higher-order level process that is analogous to virtualization, that basically the phenomenal experience of consciousness is very useful for active inference, etc., but relies on neural mechanisms that precisely are designed to hide the nitty-gritty, small and complex details of the hardware

and therefore makes it more usable, more practical.

And of course, at the same time, it takes longer because you need to run many cycles to do that.

For instance, if you want to simulate a certain type of microprocessor over another architecture of microprocessor, et cetera, et cetera.

So I think there is something there about trying to understand how the brain may create a virtual space and through virtualization process that then may help

bridge the gap between the different domains we are talking about.

Even though it's not sufficient yet in my mind, it doesn't fully address the problem.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

Just a couple notes to tie together a little bit of the discussion.

So we've heard about a few classic philosophy of science dichotomies like necessary and sufficient, practical and principled from philosophy, and then also like real versus unreal.


SPEAKER_03:
Seems like to some degree, brains would like have to

because they're so complex, they would have to create these abstraction layers just to work as control systems, just to work as integrated systems.

They'd have to.

You'd have to self-core screen just to actually have purchase to do hierarchical control.

And then once you're doing this, then you might get

potential some flexible multiple realizability from that, potentially.

Or non-flexibility, too, depending on how you did it.


SPEAKER_02:
You summarized, Adam, again, a very good summary and better presentation of my own thinking.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, you've influenced me very heavily, so I don't think that's a coincidence.


SPEAKER_10:
um yeah one just to bring a few of these threads together this is all really interesting stuff so one is that in complexity we say more is different and that's related to this qualitative to quantitative uh more quantitative changes can lead to qualitative differences through phase transitions self-organization just qualitatively different behavior strong or weak emergence from just quantitatively more and then that's always going to be a relational question how many grains of sand are in a heap

That's the whole point is that's not pretending to be an objective question.

It's about the object, but it's not pretending to be a non-relational question, even though it is about the world.

And these ideas about which levels of the system are available for introspection versus which aren't.

is related not just to attention schema theory and attentional salience saliences from the fep and active inference but also a lot of things in girdle escher bach and so there is a uh hofstetter citation and a lot of these ideas have a lot of analogy there which just shows how in some senses many of the same questions are returned to even 40 years later

So we have to balance out the big computing hype from the really quintessential philosophical questions like necessary sufficient, practical versus principle, real versus unreal, perspectival and taking that seriously, the relational perspective, integrating topology and geometry.

So it's just really interesting to hear this great discussion and that the way the paper and actually the sequence of papers is written is very clear interfaces

and highly focused with different metaphysics but just saying it's neither uh simply necessary nor sufficient to have this projected mapping it's just under condition x and y for example the vanishing um you know privilege point and uh all these things we were talking about it just goes downstream from there so it's an interesting approach and as we're hearing from this discussion that come together

in thinking about these topics.

So thanks for bringing all these perspectives to the table, this cool stuff.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe Ken, can you comment on your reference that you had before on Douglas Hofstadter works and Gedalik Schoenbach, because actually Ken has worked a lot on these questions, has actually contributed to the I'm a Strange Look book of Douglas Hofstadter by editing a version of it, and he knows Douglas Hofstadter very well.

Cool.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool.

This is the, this is the section that where it was one of the sections where Hofstadter was cited, but I'd love to hear about this.

Can it be great?

Thanks.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Well, it's just a little bit of, I guess, history about this.

Like, um, actually I met David through, um, he and Antonio Damasio were contributing a paper to a book I was editing.

And Douglas Hofstadter also had a paper in that book.

And, you know, the papers were supposed to be like, I don't know, 30 pages maybe, and Hofstadter turned in 100 pages.

And it's kind of typical way.

So I said, well, look, you know, we have to edit this.

And he's like, you know...

Okay, but be very careful.

And so I went through this long process of editing down his contribution.

I cut it in half.

And that eventually became I Am a Strange Loop, which is cited here.

But he was ultimately okay with my editing job.

And in particular, what I thought ended up being really nice about I Am a Strange Loop

the way in which Hofstetter is able to describe basically the causal efficacy of implementing mathematical forms.

At least in philosophy,

Think of mathematics as a totally abstract, platonic way.

It doesn't have any causal powers and so on.

And then, of course, there's the Aristotelian tradition, which says, no, no, the forms are actually in the matter.

They're implemented in the matter.

But that position is not particularly important.

I mean, you can find it, but it's kind of like it's not the dominant sort of thumbnail sketch of this issue in the minds of most philosophers.

But I found Hofstadter's book to be really, really good on that.

Like, you know, implementing certain computational structure, certain ultimately mathematical forms has real causal power.

You know, it does change the system that implements it.

And it's perfectly legitimate to think of it as a causally real thing.

Uh, Yep.


SPEAKER_10:
One example from Hofstadter's writing that reminded me of today was when we were talking about whether it would simply be enough to have a data processing model that involved a projective geometrical component, would that be necessary or sufficient for consciousness?

And your very articulated answer was about how actually we know that these are some sort of, uh, features of what we want to be modeling, but they're neither at the necessary nor sufficient tier.

They're things that we're seeing as like sort of being spun off from some underlying process that there's still a lot of mystery around.

And so that's like the phonographs with the low resolution phonographs in Gertrude Escher Bach.

It's like you can make a very limited thing that does one thing without error or without some of the fancy attributes.

But then to extrapolate from this less is different, more is different case, it's like, well, it's not a phonograph, it's a hammer.

It's like, okay, it doesn't play records.

Yep, well, it's that kind of a phonograph.

That's what it's like to be that kind of a phonograph.

That's what it's like to be a light switch.

Okay, well, that's not really the complexity of system that we're talking about here, which is the embedded in culture human.

and then that level of complexity the full featured phonograph opens itself because of its strange loop nature to this whole new universe of recursion and of loops and of self-reflection projection

And then the phase transition or more is different question is like, how do we get from things that don't have that strange loop feature to things that do, but there's nothing that is sort of a strange loop or is not a strange loop.

It's like either it loops back with sufficient complexity to be strange in the world, or it's just not strange enough to be as interesting as these open ended infinite generative systems that we seem to be participating in.

Adam.

And I'm curious about how this interfaces with free energy because I don't think there's been a Hofstadter free energy crossover quite like this.

Adam?


SPEAKER_03:
Hi.

I'm thinking again about what David was mentioning with this sort of like reciprocity or mutuality of perspective of like seeing and then like looking at something and then this being looked at and the ways in which some of these things might be intersubjectively bootstrapped.

And I guess I'm wondering whether that puts a strange loop right at the heart of this model.

And I'm also wondering whether one of the things that might potentially get you is recursion and a powerful kind of reflexivity, which would then, you can then start talking about things like conscious access

all sorts of metacognition kind of like growing out of that potentially.

Yeah, some thoughts.


SPEAKER_02:
Ken, you need to answer that question, you know, in reference to self-reference and non-well-founded set theory and whole project, et cetera.

You are the one to address that.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, well, so actually that volume that David contributed to and Hofstadter contributed to, it was a book called The Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness.

And most of it was written by analytic philosophers and a couple of phenomenologists.

But that was the theme, basically.

People who think that, like,

like I long have, that consciousness involves this kind of reflexivity, kind of self-awareness that is not just introspection, it's a more basic notion of reflexivity than being able to attend to yourself or reflect on yourself.

And that book was about that.

But in that

book, I kind of looked at ways of formalizing this using... So the Hofstetter, we asked Hofstetter to

contribute to it because we thought that's that's right in line with Gertl Escher Bach and the notion of kind of using the notion of metamathematics and self-representation in self-reference in in the metamathematical context as sort of one model for the kind of self-awareness that's involved in consciousness he of course he that's a strange that's the kind of quintessential strange loop for him with respect to consciousness um and

But I, you know, looked at models using hyper sets, like sets that contain themselves as members.

And now recently, though, I mean, we kind of actually working on that is kind of at the origin of the whole project, the whole PCM project, because I moved back to Iowa City in like 2007.

I think that's right.

And David was there at, it's still in the, he had graduated from the neuroscience program there, but he was still working at the neuroscience program at Iowa.

And we kind of formed a little research group just based on this.

And this eventually, you know, sort of, we kind of discussed geometrical models a little bit, but David really had the breakthrough with regard to thinking of projective geometry as the,

the way forward somewhere around 2010 or something like that.

But we long wondered, can you really connect these two threads, the geometrical part, the projective geometry, and this notion of

for lack of, well, to use Hofstetter's term, strange loopiness of consciousness.

And we're actually still working on this.

So we think, we're not certain, but we think we, thanks to Daniel, because Daniel Behnkein, we think we found a way to connect these two notions finally more clearly.

David, do you want to say a little bit about that?

about how the PCM can sort of make sense of this notion of strange loopiness, strange loopiness?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah so that was uh really a driving force indeed in trying to select a a model uh so that the model would incorporate intrinsically properties like that so when i was trying to because i always had been convinced that you know there was something geometrical about intuition and so we needed to move from kind of abstract

graph theory and even with this kind of non-well-founded sort of set theory that allows you these loops, etc., into something more phenomenal, more experiential, more concrete.

And so I was looking into kind of possible geometries that had weird features beyond this perspectival intuition from which we introduced that.

And this projective geometry

under some boundary condition, but actually it's intrinsic to it, as a natural loop, if you wish.

What I'm going to say is going to sound very awkward, and it's a kind of qualitative description of things that needs to be expressed and formulated rigorously.

So sorry to the mathematician that may listen if I'm not doing it the right way.

But basically, when you look at a point at infinity in front of you, so the vanishing point just in front of you,

That's the same point.

That's the back of the point that is actually the antipodal point in the back.

Antipodal points, so two opposite points at infinity in that projective space, are topologically glued.

So that in some sense, actually, if you were kind of a virtual little creature moving into the space of consciousness, when you reach the point at infinity, you find yourself on the other side of the space.

And if you think about it, it's just as if actually the projective space, you know, when you kind of start messing with or considering the plane at infinity and its topological properties, basically was kind of a sort of mirror in the sense that basically when I look in front,

That's not the case in our visual experience, obviously, but that is in the structure of the geometry.

I look, quote unquote, of myself looking in front from the back in a kind of reverse way.

That's a property that is actually intrinsic to projective spaces, but that we don't normally see.


SPEAKER_10:
okay cool stuff here thanks for sharing all this history too so just two thoughts one is this virtualization idea and in girdle usher bach it's prelude ant fugue aunt hillary the ant colony and uh is it a virtual machine well there's yes and no in one sense

lower level details are shielded to the more semantically operative top levels.

So that's virtualization for sure, concurrent programming as well.

But is it a virtual machine in the sense that it's a dot VM that I can run on a different operating system?

No, that's not even the ant colony OS.

That's not a strategy that transfers.

So the virtual machine metaphor captures one aspect perfectly, which is that there's shielding of lower levels of the quote assembly code.

But also there's another feature of virtual machines that they've come to mean in the modern computing environment, which is like reproducible computing.

And that's definitely not the case.

That's because we have this embodied, inactive, ecological element.

So that's kind of a cool extension of a Hofstadter idea.

And then this idea of infinity being on the other side, it's sort of like you would if your light rays were being bent around the sphere or whatever shape we're on.

it would be seeing around so that's straight out it like a laser so that's sort of an attentional laser reflected by the higher concentration of photoreceptors the increased sensitivity to observations there but that being the point of attention and even meditative practices often focusing on attentional points and visual rays like that but it does if you think about the the ray of light going all the way around it would be the trajectory you would look at

to see yourself from the back.

So very interesting there.

And that's related to our conception of the space of the earth.

Whereas on a flat plane, it would just go to infinity and then pop through in like a piercing way because the space doesn't bend back on itself.

Adam.


SPEAKER_08:
Sorry.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
So I'm thinking that you, um,

might be providing an additional account of some of the phenomena that Graziano tries to describe with attention schema theory in terms of certain intuitions about the nature of consciousness and selfhood and a kind of like awareness is like a soul-like ethereal non-material intuition and so for Graziano for him consciousness is you know it's this

low dimensional sketch necessarily reduce dimensionality for the sake of control, to have a model that's more handleable, that throws away details and gives you purchase.

But that this like low dimensionality to it is like the thing that makes you, that if this is your awareness, this is, and your sense of consciousness and self coming from this, that this is part of certain intuitions about like immaterial souls and things like this.

But if your perspective,

inherently involves this kind of like strange loop, this like difficult conceivability where it's like you are both the constant context for everything, the reference point, but you're the one thing that's like invisible.

And in this kind of paradoxical way, I'm wondering if even, I'm wondering if that potentially contributes to similar aspects of phenomenology where like certain aspects of kind of like mystical intuitions.

about the self and consciousness.

Some thoughts.


SPEAKER_10:
Cool question.

We're taking it nice and interesting areas.

David, why don't you go ahead?


SPEAKER_02:
Ken could say a lot of things.

Oh, sorry, somebody else wanted to talk?


SPEAKER_10:
No, you or Ken, go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm going to just say something, but Ken will be able to better elaborate.

There was a...

If a mystic or, I would say, an esoterist named Rudolf Steiner, right, Ken, who actually believed that projective geometry, because of this sort of reciprocity of perspective, when I look at the sky, the sky looks back at myself, was a connection to God.

We don't endorse that view necessarily, but there is a history of mystical and esoteric traditions that invokes projective geometry in the past in that kind of context.

Right, Ken?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so there's the Steiner tradition, which one of his students, I believe she was one of his students, Olive Whitchier, she wrote a really good introduction to projective geometry.

which I highly recommend looking at.

It's got wonderful illustrations and they seem to have been onto the idea that projected geometry was crucial to consciousness and mind.

But they also had a lot of strange other notions that made them seem like cranks.

And then there was another interest in just higher dimensional geometry

that came from people like P.D.

Ouspensky, if you've heard of this guy.

He wrote a book called The Fourth Dimension.

And his view is that there must be part of ourselves that we don't have access to in the way in which we have access to three-dimensional objects.

And he thought that would be in the fourth dimension.

It's not clear that he thought that it was a projective geometrical structure, but it's still sort of in the ballpark.


SPEAKER_10:
Well, just one note there is that Ouspensky, who studied under Gurdjieff, there's some deep esoteric threads and, of course, going much deeper through time, alternative ideas about number, geometry, color, and, of course, philosophy.

those are in many ways what define the uh less religious at least in the exoteric sense of these wisdom traditions so it's very interesting to see the geometry spiritual connection return

after who knows maybe never even a separation but at the very least in most people's mind they think of it as shapes on a plane not about the conceptions of the lower level structure of reality or the higher level structures of reality like the shape of the universe shape of things shape of ourselves so very nice threads and david's a big fan of uh what's his name matilda geeker isn't that right


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, a poet, mathematician and Romanian prince who wrote many books about the connection between mathematics, aesthetics and natural form.

Yes, there are a lot of connections that were very inspiring to me.

My father used to show me his book when I was a kid and my grandfather was an art historian and he was also searching, you know...

interpretation of art forms from mathematics so there is a long family tradition that led me here so i'm sorry but i will have to leave to another call it was very very great i can leave you and you can continue to discuss and was very happy so we'll get in touch and stay in touch and i'll see you


SPEAKER_10:
Great see you all move us to the end, but really and can thanks so much.

It's like, always just great to have the authors on here to be hearing all this extra stuff.

So, the other slides, just to visualize them, people could screen cap them is just a few more quotes to get to that dialectic, which we actually got to talk about.

We could have had a few more just general questions, especially where does active inference fit into this whole picture and that's in the cybernetics and how it's carried out but active inference live streaming whatnot that's always what we want to think about.

And then we just had figure one, figure two, figure three, and figure four.

So those are just things that we could have talked about maybe, uh, in the future or in 2021, we could have the moon illusion or a deep dive on one dimension or another, because this was such a fascinating conversation.

So if, uh, Adam or Alex or Ken, maybe each of you want to have just a, uh, last comment, that would be great.

So let's, um, Alex, if you want to go first, then Adam, and then Ken or pass, no worries if not.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

Okay, I'll pass by now.


SPEAKER_10:
Thank you, Alex.

Adam, any last thoughts?

How is it going to change what you're going to work on or think about or just?


SPEAKER_03:
Too many thoughts, but one of the things I'm doing a lot of thinking about, like what neural systems might potentially contribute to different aspects of visual spatial awareness and geometric modeling.

And one issue I'm wondering about is the extent to which, at least in its visual nature, the conscious awareness might always be more of a 2D projection.

and that things like additional depth and additional dimensions might involve the ability to transition between different points of view in a coherent way, in a way that would imply a 3D world, but where at any given moment the visual aspect is

actually 2D and potentially without clear depth?

These are some things I'm wondering about.

And I think it's not incompatible with projected geometric modeling.

It would just be whether the engine, how distributed it is and the granularity over which it's being achieved.

And so this coupling between a 2D projection screen

And like, you know, a body map, like adjusting what you ought to see or something like the posterior cingulate, like saying like, okay, here's where you're like your eyes and your head is.

So, you know, giving, putting your perspective in there and then putting, it seems like 4D geometry could be perfectly compatible with this, but I'm trying to figure out how that works.

That was a lot of rambling, but thank you.


SPEAKER_10:
No, great.

Thanks for your participation.

And this figure two, I think points out some of what you're talking about.

That's a projection onto the 2D.

There's an ambiguous projection on the left because of the perspective being ambiguous.

And then free energy is invoked as like a symmetry break that gives a perspective on which side of the box one is actually on, given a prior that about how certain angles must be reflective of two dimensional representations.

So yeah, Ken, any thoughts on that?

And or just a last comments?


SPEAKER_06:
Well, just thank you for organizing this, and I'm sorry I couldn't make it for the whole thing.

And it's really been a wonderful conversation.

And I'll just say the next thing we're working on, Daniel and David and I, is a paper trying to relate the projective geometrical model closer to show how it relates to notions like strange strengths and...

pre-reflective self-consciousness.

It's kind of more basic type of self-consciousness than introspection or attention.

And to show that you can make sense of that in terms of the projected geometrical structure.

That's the next thing on the agenda for us.


SPEAKER_10:
cool sounds like a fun research direction so with all of this being said everyone thanks a lot for participating live and if you're watching for watching it too we will have the follow-up form link is in the calendar invite if you want to just provide us some thoughts any feedback suggestions and questions are always welcome

other than that just uh stay in communication really appreciate this great conversation and some awesome stuff so thanks again everyone for participating and watching and we will talk soon so see you later thank you