## OtX2Fpzn7KA

Hello, everyone.
Welcome. This is ACT-INF livestream number 49.0. We're discussing the paper, A Worked Example of the Bayesian Mechanics of Classical Objects.
Welcome to the Active Inference Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about participating in different projects and learning groups at the institute.
Well, we're here today in livestream number 49.0 where we're providing some background and context for the paper, A Worked Example of the Bayesian Mechanics of Classical Objects.
This paper was submitted to the Archive Preprint Server in June 2022, and we're going to be discussing and looking at a slightly revised version that was uploaded earlier this month on the 6th of September.
It's a single author paper by Dalton A. R. Saktivadevel. And this video, although all .zeros are, this one is too. It's an introduction and just a preliminary discussion of some of the ideas.
It's not a review or synthesis or a final word. And we'll explain a little bit more about our .zero approach in a couple of slides.
But suffice to say that with Jakob, Ali, and also Ander, we had a great time over the last two months really pulling back and trying to think deeply about how to frame this paper and really this whole area of research and development because there's a lot happening.
There's a lot being tied together. And so we hope that some of that sense making translates into the ways that we've laid out 49.0.
And we're very much looking forward to having Dalton join for the .1 and the .2. So Dalton, thanks for all the work and for listening to this .0.
Let's head to introductions and warmups. So we can just say hello and any other features of what we're excited about in this discussion.
I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California. And I think there's a lot that is exciting about this paper.
I didn't have much of a physics background before heading towards active inference in the free energy principle.
So taking a first look at a lot of these physics ideas was interesting, like seeing them as part of something that already could or had been integrated rather than starting with the puzzle pieces, I think was a little bit interesting.
And I'll pass to Ali.
Hi, I'm Ali. I'm an independent researcher from Iran.
Actually, what gravitated me towards active inference paper, this, I mean, FEP or active inference literature, and particularly this paper was, you see, I was always, I've been fascinated by doing the kind of elegant abstractions on some physical concepts or some doing
doing a kind of bird's eye view over the methodological way of doing physical modeling.
And I believe this paper and the other related papers offered by Dalton Sack de Vadevelle and the other and his other colleagues from Bursa's lab are the epitome of this kind of
FEP abstraction in terms of
FEP abstraction in terms of elegantly formalizing all the rigorous mathematical foundations of it.
And yeah, that's why I'm pretty excited to be here.
Actually, it's been a very fascinating and thrilling journey during the past couple of months since we began discussing this paper.
And so I'm very much looking forward to it.
Hello, I'm Jacob. I'm a student and researcher in the UK.
There are also many
people who are not able to do this.
Okay, lost you up for a second.
We'll just wait. We'll take a breath.
Okay.
We'll continue.
Sorry.
I got up.
Go for it.
Just start again.
It's all good.
Where was I cut off?
Just start at the beginning.
Okay.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.

I got up.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.
I got up.



























Okay, sorry, I got randomly disconnected. So hello, I'm Jakub, I'm a student and researcher in the UK. I'm really, I was really excited about this paper, specifically coming from physics background, which I must say, didn't help that much in initially understanding the paper on the on the first pass.
But I think it's really exciting that this kind of unification of physics and cognitive sciences is formed through works like this paper or prior work that Carl Fristen colleagues have been working on.
And I'm really excited about how this work might influence the future synergy of physics and cognitive sciences or neurosciences, which I think previously were quite disjoint fields.
But now, with the more focus towards like complexity sciences, we're seeing these similar patterns across a wide range of topics, which I find really exciting. So really looking forward to the discussion and the rest of the live stream.
Great. Great, great, thanks. So we're going to go to the big question, aims claims, abstract and roadmap. And then before we head off on that road trip and way find together, we're going to pull back to our approach and set a lot of context. And that'll be most of this dot zero video.
And then we'll briefly touch on some points from the paper. But most of this video is going to be actually in that context setting.
There's a lot of big questions that can be asked. And one of them is quite simply, what is Bayesian mechanics?
But to make that a little bit more operational, we could ask, what is the relevance of Bayesian mechanics?
What is mechanical about cognitive science? Are we talking about physical mechanisms underlying cognitive agents?
Or are we talking about something else? It's the second.
What is of epistemic and pragmatic value about Bayesian mechanics?
If we're going to be using active inference and the free energy principle as the gripper and the gripped,
then how can we understand what is valuable and relevant and salient in terms of active inference ways of thinking about it?
What would you fellows add?
What felt like really big questions that would lead somebody to want to be exploring this paper?
Yeah, Ali.
Well, actually, before talking about the specific pragmatic value of doing Bayesian mechanics,
I think what, at least in my view, what's really interesting about Bayesian mechanical way of doing
these kinds of probabilistic formulations and mathematical modeling is just, it's pure elegance.
Okay.
Okay.
Pick up again from pure...
Different elements.
I mean...
Sorry, Ali.
Pick up from pure elegance.
Okay.

Okay.

As I was saying, I think one of its main interests is its pure elegance in unifying the different approaches to FEP
in a kind of all-encompassing framework called Bayesian mechanics by which it can possibly...
I mean, the other frameworks and other viewpoints and even other kinds of mechanics can be recovered.
So, at least for me personally, this is the most interesting part and exciting part of doing Bayesian mechanics.
But I'm sure there will be much pragmatic value and much more applications that can potentially derive from this kind of viewpoint.
Awesome.
Awesome.
Awesome.
Where's beauty and elegance in epistem and pragma?
Jakob?
I definitely agree with Ali's point.
And maybe to add to that, I think it's really elegant that within Bayesian mechanics, you have a unifying formalism
with which you can recover much of the same loss that we see in classical physics.
Also, we can also talk about the quantum mechanics as being enclosed within the Bayesian mechanic formalism.
But at the same time, using those same concepts, we can also model systems which are not usually considered by physics,
like autonomous agents or any biological entity.
And that I think will be one of the probably one of the most relevant parts or contributions of Bayesian mechanics.
Awesome.
Beauty and elegance as indicators of scope and scale.
So, the paper is a worked example of the Bayesian mechanics of classical objects.
We've mentioned some details about it before.
I'll just highlight a few claims, some coming earlier in the middle and later in the paper.
So, earlier in the paper, it's often claimed that the free energy principle is as simple and general as the principle of stationary action.
And that is a citation to a paper that we're going to discuss in just a few slides.
It's simpler, but not too simple.
And it's claimed about the FEP that it can be sketched out how Bayesian mechanics of internal states of classical objects might look.
And that's a citation to Friston 2019, Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics, which we're also going to look at.
Nevertheless, there's yet to be a systematic investigation of even the Bayesian mechanics of classical physics,
despite it being readily available due to recent formulations as a least action principle.
So, we've talked a lot about on these streams and elsewhere about the free energy principle as a variational principle of least action for cognitive systems.
So, there was an opportunity that Dalton identified, which is to make a systematic investigation of classical physics and provide worked examples.
Towards the middle of the paper, there are some important aims, such as,
we began with the aim of showing that classical physics can be derived from Bayesian mechanics.
So, we'll work with different metaphors and ways of exploring it, but this is not like a layer 2 on physics.
This is a generalization that, in special cases, includes classical statistical thermodynamic and quantum mechanics.
We can derive Bayesian mechanics from the idea that a system is classical on average, just as we can derive classical mechanics from the idea that systems obey Bayesian mechanics for classical averages.
We're going to unpack that later, but it's a key claim.
And then, later in the paper, there is the aim to eventually formulate chaotic or itinerant systems under Bayesian mechanics, as has been done for earlier forms of the free energy principle.
And that's kind of what the paper is going to be leading towards and suggesting for future work, including that of G-theory.
Anything that you fellows would add?
All right.
Could somebody read the abstract?
Yeah, but before going into abstract, I wanted to point out one of the main goals of the paper, I think, would be
the abstract.
There are a couple of new results in this paper that wasn't introduced, as far as I know, in the previous literature, one of which is the derivation of classical physics from the principle of constraint maximum entropy and the reintroduction of supersymmetry as an explanation for classical chaos, as indicated on page five.
As indicated on page five of the paper.
So I think this is in some way.
This is in some way.
This paper is kind of expanded footnote to the previous papers, but also adding some new results.
I mean, it's a very important appendix to that paper by making some of the theoretical claims of specifically on Bayesian mechanics paper more concrete.
So, yeah, I just wanted to point that out as well.
Great point.
This should be of interest to people who are following the development and applications of active inference and free energy principle.
But it will become clear that the scope is very broad and people even outside of what might be perceived as just this community will hopefully find interest and apply scrutiny and continue the conversation with us.
So somebody may read the abstract.
Sure.
So Bayesian mechanics is a new approach to studying the mathematics and physics of interacting stochastic processes.
Here we provide a worked example of a physical mechanics for classical objects, which derives from a simple application thereof.
We summarize the current state of the art of Bayesian mechanics in doing so.
We also give a sketch of its connections to classical chaos, owing to a particular n equals to supersymmetry.
Short and sweet.
To the roadmap.
All right.
So the paper begins with a, I'm putting us, our video over the top fellow on this stack.
So the paper begins with an introduction and then dives into the concept of mechanics, which we'll be talking more about.
The subsections there are covering classical physics in one dimension, the basics of Bayesian mechanics, a physics of beliefs, and then a physics by beliefs, which is going to be kind of taking us into this cognitive lens.
Then a general equation, equation 15, for Bayesian classical mechanics is presented, and that'll be a really exciting equation and formalism to lead up to and unpack.
The following section four is a question of quantum ontology.
This is going to touch on discussions that we've had, including in Livestream 40, on the free energy principle for generic quantum systems, and about what quantum means and how we can think about things that are often described as being at the atomic scale.
Whether it's the idea of quantum mechanics itself, or bosons and fermions and all these other kind of like, wait, but I thought that was at the atom scale.
And what does it mean to apply it to cognitive systems?
There's then several cases that are addressed, and those are the worked examples.
That's the matching of modes, the tracking of modes, with the subdivision into terminal mode matching and infinite mode tracking.
And then towards the end, there's the adventuring into path tracking.
These are the three faces of Bayesian mechanics.
Mode matching, mode tracking, and path tracking.
We're going to look into it.
And a simple case of G-theory.
And so that is where one gets to by the end of this journey.
But before we head off, as promised, we're going to dwell for a second on how we can set context to even head off on this journey.
So would anyone like to just describe what the sections that we're about to jump into are about?
And what led us to use this approach?
Well, yes, actually, as we discussed before, we will begin by looking at some historical perspectives and historical context of all the developments of FAP literature throughout the past two decades.
And then we'll look at some of the key literature on which this particular paper relies upon.
And then we'll look at some of the three kinds of theories that's been introduced in the Bayesian mechanics paper as the way of anchoring all the theoretical arguments there.
And finally, we'll talk about the three non-Bayesian mechanics before delving into what Bayesian mechanics is and what are the differences and similarities between all the different kinds of doing physics or mechanics.
Awesome.
This, we hope, sets the discussion within historical and integrationist framing.
And it's going to be quite a journey.
So let's head into this section.
First, let's talk about some historical perspectives and different epochs of research.
Broadly, we can think about what happened before the free energy principles emergence in the pre-2000, the pre-millennial era, without going too specifically into what citation the free energy principle originates in.
Then we can think about the free energy principle between roughly 2005 all the way up through 2020 around.
And then lastly, some of the changes and developments in free energy principle literature since about 2019 to 2020, and some of Dalton's contributions.
So starting with the free energy principle before 2000, there's no definitive history yet for the antecedents of the free energy principle.
And surely a presentation or project more focused on that history could and should and will happen.
But a few of the places to search for in terms of the personal history of key contributors, and also places where peripheral contributions and important foundational precursors are described.
Some places to look include the statistical parametric mapping, textbook and documentation, and the decades of research that went into the neuroimaging work on SPM.
As well as a Carl Friston 2012 article, the history of the Bayesian brain.
And an interview with Carl Friston on wood, lice, and men.
As well as the auxiliary supplement to the above interview, am I autistic and intellectual autobiography.
So that'll take somebody from the sort of 0 to 8, and then 8 to 28, and then 28 and beyond of Carl Friston's work and development with copious references out.
On the right is a slide from livestream 14, where we explore just one aspect of tracing the thread, which was from the analytical formalizations of, for example, Markov, in terms of statistics and matrices,
all the way on through all the way on through Perl and the computational implementation of Bayesian statistics, on through to modern developments that integrate those kinds of Bayesian formulations of statistics with action,
which encompasses a variety of fields such as cybernetics, complex systems, synergetics, information theory, control theory, ecological psychology,
4E cognition, extended, embodied, etc., etc., autonomous systems, and all other types of frameworks.
So it would be a history of the world to talk about everything that happened before 2000, but these are just some threads.
Anything else that people want to add?
Yeah, maybe that as the theory gets more integrated to various different,
fields, I think it's going to be harder and harder to actually find that one thread that was the development towards the free energy principle,
where the reality is probably that, as with all roads leading to Rome, many trajectories lead to the free energy principle.
Nice.
Ali?
And also related to this historical context, I wanted to point out the heated discussions that's going on during the last couple of years
about the use of, I mean, some established vocabulary or terminology in active inference or FEP literature,
one of which is using the Markov blanket in a kind of different context.
But as Maxwell Ramstad's Twitter thread from yesterday pointed out to a very interesting example,
we can say the same for a lot of mathematical constructs.
For example, we can look at the concept of zero as a purely mathematical construct, but used in different contexts.
For example, it can be used as a null container or a null counter.
But on the other hand, it can be seen as the solution of a polynomial or a function.
And the same goes here for using the same mathematical construct or theoretical construct of Markov blanket,
but in a different context.
But that doesn't mean Markov blankets or any other theoretical concepts used in FEP literature are denying the or somehow are contradictory with the previous usage of that terminology.
It's just used in different context.
Awesome.
So as a really concise way to summarize, again, something where further presentations and work can do a much more comprehensive job.
There's a Maxwell Ramstad tweet thread from 7-11-2020.
And Maxwell breaks down developments in the free energy principle modeling into several waves.
And the tweet thread is readable here.
The first wave doesn't have policy selection per se.
The dynamics of internal and active states was determined in a stepwise fashion through gradient descent on variational free energy.
And so that was very much like a pure one-step gradient descent framework.
Second wave models started around 2012, equipped agents with beliefs about state transitions and the sensory consequences of movement.
That allows the calculation of expected free energy-like values.
And third wave models use recursive expected free energy functional, which opens up all of these related avenues.
So Maxwell's thread here summarizes some of the waves of development.
And there's so much more to add and unpack because there's been developments on multiple different fronts, or I wouldn't even know what word to say.
There has been formal developments and technical elaborations, as well as generalizations.
And also, of course, a huge area of philosophical discussion around these topics.
So there's been a lot happening since 2005 to 2020 in free energy principle.
And this is going to get us up to where we're ready to explore what's happened in the last few years from this kind of building momentum and progress in the space.
Anything to add, Jakob?
Maybe just a short comment that I think a lot of the first and perhaps even the second wave, we can probably see more influence of Carl Fursten's prior work on SPM.
And all the literature that surrounds it.
Whereas in the kind of third age or third wave, we are seeing more integrations into other fields like physics and overall complexity science.
Great point.
As the literature builds and as other collaborators began to upskill and contribute, then we start seeing some different approaches.
But there's initially a lot of similarities with SPM and it's really still quite a useful framework to use, of course, but also point back towards.
All right, then on to the third epoch.
That's post 2020 and Dalton's contributions.
So we laughed and had a great time reviewing many of the fascinating developments over the last few years in a range of topics made by Dalton, ranging from fundamental physics to neuroscience and most recently Bayesian mechanics and G theory.
A lot of the work is single author, other papers and works of note are collaborations, for example, with Ramstead, Friston and others.
And this is just a few.
This is some subset screenshots from our Coda knowledge integration work where we have a bunch of papers, blog posts, videos, tweets.
We were just bringing together a lot of different information and we'll look forward to hearing it from the source soon enough.
The specific papers that we want to discuss, we're going to in the next session.
But this is all to say that it's been a quite productive streak for Dalton and an awesome learning experience for us all.
So we really appreciate all that work and we're looking forward to the conversations.
Anything you want to add on this outside of the literature?
All right.
Next, we will go to the literature.
We're going to go through about four or five papers that are important steps on the way to getting to the worked example.
So let's just go right into it.
This is going to be a paper from outside of the Friston sphere.
In one sense, but not in another sense.
It's a 2012 paper by Udo Seifert.
And the paper is called Stochastic Thermodynamics, Fluctuation Theorems and Molecular Machines.
Surely the paper is worth a deeper take.
But just to highlight at the very high level.
Stochastic Thermodynamics, as reviewed here, systematically provides a framework for extending the notion of classical thermodynamics, such as work, heat and entropy production, to the level of individual trajectories of well-defined non-equilibrium ensembles.
That is going to be a key move and theme, which is a move from a kind of undifferentiated mass action or mean field approximation physics and finding compatibility between that kind of an averaging and recovering that averaging outcome via individual trajectories of well-defined non-equilibrium ensembles.
One can imagine that if they're interested in the consideration of specific counterfactual policies or in the behavior of multi-agent ensembles, simply having a mean field approximation, the kind of which classical thermodynamics has provided for work, heat and entropy production, it'll be another step and potentially an unprincipled or intractable one to ever go from that mean field down to the
trajectory level.
And so the kind of synthesis work that has to occur and is pointed towards here is to understand how a special case or a bridging formalism can connect this kind of mean field population scale summary statistic aggregate world to individual trajectories of well-defined non-equilibrium ensembles.
Anything else to add on this paper?
Anything else to add on this paper?
Well, actually, I think one of its, I mean, the central importance of this paper to Sakti Vaddweil's current paper is the definition of the probability, the path probability measure in the abstract Wiener space.
Mainly the equation number five, which I believe is a very significant preliminary stage toward deriving the general equation of Bayesian mechanics or equation 15.
Excellent.

The next paper is a single author paper by Carl Fristen in 2019, a free energy principle for a particular physics.
So it's a little small on the slide, but this is like an 148 page paper.
And you'll note there on the header, this work is under consideration for publication by the MIT press.
So there's an interesting story whose middle and end is unknown about the recent active inference textbook and the way in which that is providing kind of a handbook of active inference.
But then there's something more like a theoretical physics book that is going to be presented in some future time.
Particular physics is a multi-entendre or a pun in a few different ways.
This is a particular physics in the sense that because it's being specified, it's like a specified or a specific physics.
Like any dinner that you make is a particular dinner in that sense.
Also, really key to this notion of individual trajectories of well-defined non-equilibrium ensembles is the notion of the particle and the particular states.
The particular states are referring to when we have a partition that uses the Markov blanket.
So blanket states making internal and external states conditionally independent.
We can then talk about the blanket and the internal states as the particular states because they're like the particle that's floating around.
So in the Brownian mechanics world, then you have the dust molecule floating around in the water and the particle is the dust molecule.
And then the external states are the water.
And along those lines, the cognitive particle is going to be the internal and the blanket states.
That's what's going to have cognitive mass and inherit all of these physics terms that might be kind of like billiard balls are to classical mechanics.
We're going to be looking at what that particulate form is for cognitive systems.
So this was an extremely important work conceptually as well as socially.
Maxwell Ramstead facilitated and organized a really amazing discussion group over many months, working with a lot of people to go through chapters and surfacing a lot of important dots that could be connected.
We've got the connected technical contributions raised by many participants in that reading group.
And the work itself is a theory of everything.
But perhaps in a way that people might not expect.
So I'll just pause there.
If either of you want to give any overview thoughts on the monograph, what does it mean by a theory of everything?
Or what else would you add about this precursor paper?
In fact, I wanted to point out an important note stated in the footnote number one of the classical physics paper.
And you see in this paper by Carl Pristen, the word particle is used, as you mentioned, for the combination or the joint set of internal and blank states.
But in the current paper, Dalton prefers to use the word system for that concept.
And where when Pristen's paper refers to system, Dalton's paper uses agent environment.
So that might be helpful for people who want to read the literature, because in the rest of the literature, it's basically the same thing.
The word particle is used as the joint set of the internal and blanket states, but not in this one.
Thank you.
Jacob, want to add anything on the paper?
Maybe just to slightly add on the theory of everything that refers to the notion that anything that exists needs to have some kind of statistical independence from its environment, which constitutes a Markov blanket.
And I think we'll see in the in the coming slides that some contributions from Dalton have also shown this to be the case in in cases where the FEP has previously been criticized for not actually applying generally to
to systems which don't reach that threshold.
So, yeah, just wanted to add that.
Nice.
When people talk about a theory of everything and they leave out the space, they might mean like a theory of all of it.
But this is actually a theory of all of the open parentheses, observer dependent, modeler dependent, close parentheses, things that can be distinguished.
Again, that's where the observer is in the distinguishing from other things in a statistical sense.
If you can't distinguish it over the timescale of observation, it's just not a thing.
It's not to say that it's not part of someone else's theory of all of it, but in this sense, it's not a thing.
And that's what is also setting up at a very fundamental level for this notion of systems engaging in the bounding of surprise, because systems that don't bound surprise will not be observed to be that kind of thing in the way that the surprise was limiting.
And the work also points importantly towards compatibility among quantum statistical and classical mechanics.
Those are the three non-Bayesian mechanics that we're going to be going into.
Bayesian mechanics is going to generalize and encompass and integrate across all of these.
And it may offer a formal description of lifelike particles.
For example, classical mechanics could tell you what happens when a 200 pound object falls out of a plane.
But I think as Dean has raised, what happens when that entity has a parachute?
So there's something different there.
And what could the reductionist physicist do other than try to make a physics model of the elbow and of the ions coming in and out of the neurons?
Reductionism is kind of the way in that situation.
And so we're going to be talking about potentially a way to see that active particle falling out of the plane as something that could engage in agentic decisions.
Next paper.
Next paper.
This next paper is the free energy principle made simpler, but not too simple.
Be careful.
It is a paper from Karl Fristen, DaCosta, Sajid, Heinz, Olzhofer, Pavliotis, and Parr.
We discussed this paper in several discussions earlier this year in live stream number 45.
We have 45.0 background and context, and we have the dot one and the dot two with Thomas Parr and Karl Fristen joining for the discussion and saying many interesting and funny things.
The paper is providing a concise description of the free energy principle, which begins from a Langvann equation and ends with a Bayesian mechanics that can be read as a physics of sentience.
Noting here that sentience refers to feeling and acting entities, not to qualia, phenomenology, experiential entities per se, although people have provided interpretations that go that way.
This paper rehearses key steps using standard results from statistical physics.
Those steps are going to be one.
Establish a particular partition of states based upon conditional independencies inheriting from sparse coupling.
Again, particular is being used in the pun sense as it was before.
This is like one specific partition that you could choose to implement, and it's the one that results in particles.
Two, unpacking the implications of that particular partition in terms of Bayesian inference.
One of the kinds of inference that's really important is about internal states doing inference on external states mediated through sense states on the blanket.
And then three, describing the paths of particular states with a variational principle of least action, which is going to tie us towards understanding individual trajectories of well-defined non-equilibrium ensembles.
This paper was discussed elsewhere.
So here's Brock and I in the dot zero talking about non-equilibrium birds.
And then here we have Blue and Carl and Thomas, and we're just trying to catch up with what they're adding.
Anything that you fellows would add about this paper?
All right.
Now we're going to enter into the Dalton zone.
So, this is in April 2022.
Dalton presents a single author paper towards a geometry and analysis for Bayesian mechanics.
The paper presents a simple case of Bayesian mechanics under the free energy principle and formulates it axiomatically.
There's going to be a lot of interesting things to unpack.
Does anyone want to just give their read on the importance of this paper?
I think this is one of the first papers Dalton has attempted to provide the rigorous mathematical foundation for FEP by providing some formal proofs of relevant theorems.
But without, I mean, going into a lot of technical jargons, I mean, this paper is pretty accessible for people even not specialized in mathematical proofs and so on.
But I mean, by skipping those technical mathematical proofs, the whole conceptual framework or the gist of the paper is totally accessible in my opinion.
So, I think this is one of the very significant and important steps toward developing the more comprehensive theory provided in their next paper on Bayesian mechanics.
Great.
This is going to be connecting the random dynamical systems formalization and takes a further step towards comprehensive statement of the physics of self-organization in formal mathematical language, which is presented using gauge theory and some geometric notions.
And that's going to create a concordance that can be at least stated qualitatively, but has a lot of technical underpinnings, which is the relationship between the dynamical systems notion of self-organization in terms of bounded surprise,
connecting that to a gauge-theoretic formalism of self-organization in which gauge forces are acting on the system.
And others can and please should help us unpack this and do math streams with us and do a dot three, four, five.
Here we're going to point a little bit more briefly to two recent papers.
Well, they're all recent.
It's only September 2022.
This was only five months ago.
Here is a paper from August.
Actually, both of them are from August, but the first one was first published in July.
The first paper is weak Markov blankets in high dimensional sparsely coupled random dynamical systems.
That's a paper by Dalton.
And then a paper with Maxwell, Dalton and Carl on the map territory fallacy fallacy.
Would either of you like to just pick one of them and just describe like what was cool or important about these papers?
I would maybe say on the weak Markov blankets in high dimensional sparsely coupled random dynamical systems.
I think that paper is really crucial because it does unpack a lot of a lot of uncertainty that many people might have had with the FEP before.
Especially the spark spark sparse coupling conjecture that finally received a formal formal proof.
And I think it's also important in this paper that we are going to discuss, especially when we are talking about systems at the quantum scale or beyond the quantum scale where sparse coupling is more.
Is a much more present notion than non sparse coupling.
Yeah, I think this is a key paper in all of these prerequisite papers.
Thank you, Ali. Feel free to say something you'd like about either or both.
Adding to what Jakub said about weak Markov blankets paper, I think one other significant contribution of this paper to the FEP literature is introduction of the concept of blanket index, which was a very sorely needed concept.
Because, I mean, by grading the mark of blanket by this concept, we can see that when we talk about any markup blanket, it's not a singular or necessarily 100% consistent concept.
But it can be graded according to this blanket index, but it can be graded according to this blanket index.
Namely, when the blanket index is zero, we have the strongest markup blanket.
Markov blanket.
I mean, that also recovers the sparse coupled conjecture.
But when it maximizes, we have this concept of weak markup blankets, which is basically what most linear systems have.
Most linear systems have.
But when we discuss the higher dimensional systems or more complex systems, the markup blanket index somehow minimizes or in fact goes to zero in sparse coupled systems.
And that's awesome.
Awesome.
Yes, it is an important contribution.
And maybe we can unpack this paper more as they're also become more perhaps worked examples of weakly mixing Markov blanket zones and anything to add on map territory fallacy fallacy.
So, yeah, this is also kind of, I believe, a response to some of the criticisms going on about what's exactly the map and the territory of the FEP.
I mean, the free and rich principle, because most people believe that in FEP maps and territories are conflated.
And that's a problematic view in so many levels as discussed in this paper, because the claim of the FEP researchers are not that we have done some of the
some conflation of maps and territories in a kind of as setting on Bayesian mechanics paper productive language abuse or notation abuse way.
But actually, these are exactly maps unto each other, and we cannot separate them easily and talk about maps and territories.
So, the concept of map territory fallacy fallacy comes from this viewpoint by which this so-called fallacy is itself another level of
.
Awesome.
All right.
On to the next paper.
This is going to be a key recent paper from May 2022.
It is on Bayesian mechanics, a physics of and by beliefs of the beliefs, by the beliefs, for the beliefs with Ramstead et al.
This is ACTIMF guest stream number 23.1.
So, on the right, here's Dalton, Maxwell and Lars and I talking about what looks to be like it's going to be an American baseball field, but actually it's a path of least action.
And this paper introduces or reintroduces a field of study that has emerged over the last decade called Bayesian mechanics.
And it's that reintroduction and like nice to meet you again for the first time, which is why Maxwell called the stream that we did rebooting the free energy principle literature.
The paper is extremely accessible and engagingly written.
It reviews the state of the art in the literature on the free energy principle.
And then in this very nice figure that we're going to return to multiple times introduces the three faces of Bayesian mechanics.
We're going to go into them more in the worked example paper, but they are fixed mode on the left, dynamic mode in the middle, and then path tracking on the right side.
And the broader or the higher order like genera or family level distinction is the fixed mode seeking and then dynamic mode tracking are regarding modes of densities over states, whereas path tracking moves us into a path native formalism rather than like a point in state space formalism.
And they're all faces of the Bayesian mechanics under the free energy principle.
And this paper not only discusses those three faces of Bayesian mechanics, but it examines the duality of the free energy principle and the constrained maximum entropy principle developed and derived and explored in other Dalton work, which we're not going to talk about here.
Moving on.
That was the key literature.
Now we're going to stick on this Bayesian mechanics paper and talk about three kinds of theories.
So the three kinds of theories that we're going to discuss are dynamics, mechanics, and principles.
And because theory can take on many meanings, it's important to quote the authors on how they use and therefore how we'll try to use the term.
So they wrote, the word theory is polysimous.
It has many meanings.
What we have called dynamics, mechanics, and principles are ultimately mathematical structures.
In mathematics, these are called mathematical theories.
The content of a mathematical theory or structure is purely formal.
What are usually called scientific theories or empirical theories comprise a mathematical structure and what might be called an empirical application, interpretation, or construal of that system, which relates the constructs of the mathematical structure to things in the world.
So that is described and explored more in guest stream 23 and in this paper on Bayesian mechanics.
Let's go first to dynamics.
Go for it.
Go for it.
Whoever would like to walk through these next three.
Well, yeah, as indicated in a Bayesian mechanics paper, we can think about the dynamics of a system as a kind of descriptive or phenomenological, let's say, description of the system.
Or the kind of description that tries to answer the what questions of the system.
So if we look at it by the lens of many different physics or mechanics in classical physics, we might characterize it as kind of Galilean or pre Newtonian dynamics.
Or in statistical physics, we can say the behavior of particles under diffusion as an example of the dynamics of the system.
In quantum physics, we can talk about quantum dynamics as this kind of phenomenological description.
And actually, we're talking the other day about this term Bayesian physics, which I've used in this slide.
I'm not sure how Dalton would react to that, but in order not to duplicate the other slide, which talks about Bayesian mechanics explicitly, I use that term here.
So yeah, in Bayesian physics, we're dealing with the system by which the dynamics of a self-organizing system or some authors would call auto organizing systems.
Awesome. So dynamics are describing the what and we're showing Bayesian physics again with a caveat, Ali just mentioned alongside the three other physics that we're going to be discussing integration among.
So dynamics are the what that's how the billiards are moving on the table.
What is happening? The next level is mechanics. So somebody else may describe mechanics.
Yes. So the mechanics. So moving from understanding what the systems that we want to describe our are the mechanics, the mechanics can help us answer the how questions or actually create the mathematical formalism that will be able to make predictions about what is going to happen and how it happens.
So in classical physics, we have classical mechanics, either Newtonian, Lagrangian or Hamiltonian.
In statistical physics, we have statistical mechanics, quantum quantum mechanics describing how how things behave on a quantum scale, which we're also going to unpack a bit further in the coming slides.
And then Bayesian mechanics with the mathematical formalism from the paper physics of beliefs and also the word example.
So the equations that come out of the mechanics are ones that can be used in a predictive sense.
So in economics is kind of ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
which are kind of these overarching theorems or rather principles that say why things,
why the what and how questions or topics work the way they do.
And principles usually form this kind of axiomatic, or take this kind of axiomatic stance,
where from the principle, everything else can be derived or can be put under the blanket of.
In classical physics, the principle of stationary action is definitely one of the most fundamental,
that when we have two points in space and we want a particle to go from one point to another,
it will always follow a path of least action, a path of least energy along that path.
The same thing is present in statistical physics and quantum physics,
with quantum physics having the correspondence principle, which is very relevant in this paper,
where in the limit of large numbers, quantum systems approximate to classical systems,
which I think speaks to, is also related to the work here in the work example,
where quantum systems performing approximate Bayesian inference in a quantum setting,
follow classical paths on average, which we'll get into later.
And then Bayesian physics, of course, having the free energy principle.
Awesome. And just to put up what that table looks like, we also had a ton of other correspondences and rows and columns.
So anyone who's interested in this kind of concordance building work would be encouraged to participate in the Institute,
because this is a really awesome tool and helps show us potentially areas where statistical mechanics has been applied as mechanics.
Can we bring Bayesian mechanics to bear?
Or areas where stationary action was applied for classical systems,
can we talk about how the free energy principle might be able to reformulate that or provide access to new tools or new perspectives?
So this was our part of our table.
Let's go a little bit deeper into those three non-Bayesian mechanics or the three non-Bayesian physics.
Again, I'm really looking forward to exploring different ways that we can think and talk about these different physics mechanics,
but just one kind of way to think about how the special case of one physics could be an entire other physics,
like Jakob just described.
Like in the so-called classical limit, quantum systems behave classically.
But then also it has a space that goes beyond classical,
but that doesn't negate the relevance or utility or simplicity of classical mechanics.
So how can something be encompassing, but also provide identity for the special case?
And it reminded me of the anatomy of mammalian muscle fiber with this kind of hierarchical organization of blankets.
It even looks so much like the blanket illustrations that we've seen.
And so we can think about classical as then being a limit case of statistical and statistical being a limit case of quantum.
And then that is where Bayesian mechanics is going to come into play.
Okay.
Okay.
First, classical mechanics.
Who would like to do their short one-slider presentation?
Yes, Jakob.
So classical mechanics, as the name implies, describes the behavior of classical objects.
And I think the kind of two main threats to highlight here that are relevant,
even for understanding the paper on the work, the example of Bayesian mechanics,
is the Newtonian mechanics, which is usually the classical mechanics.
That's the first that people hear about with forces describing how,
with the description of the movements of objects described how,
based on how forces are acting upon them and the three fundamental laws.
And then the Lagrangian mechanics, which takes this more energy slash principle of least action,
stands where the main thing of interest is the Lagrangian,
which is just the kinetic energy minus the potential energy of the system.
And it takes a kind of higher level view of how, of given kind of generalized coordinates of motion,
how do systems evolve through time?
And then, of course, we could talk about Hamiltonian mechanics,
which is just a transformation of Lagrangian mechanics.
But those are the two, I think, main threats to understand.
And we also have the principle of least stationary action that is described,
that can be visualized with the picture in the top right corner with the brachistochrone,
where you have two points and multiple paths can be connected to that point,
but only one path is the one of least action.
And in this case, that would be the red path,
where if you dropped a ball on that surface,
the ball following the red curve would take the least amount of time
to travel between those two points.
Why is everyone in a hurry?
Okay.
Okay.
On to statistical mechanics.
Well, here, Ali, do you want to go for it?
Well, yes.
Statistical mechanics actually deals with the theories producing the behavior of systems
with probabilistic degrees of freedom,
especially the ensemble level behavior of large numbers of functional identical things,
at least according to the Ambeyan mechanics paper.
But I wanted to point out a comment made in one of Dalton's posts about the status of statistical mechanics
in relation to all the other areas of physics.
He writes, beginning from Einstein, theoretical physicists were interested in formulating all these physical theories
in terms of purely mathematical and rigorous formalisms.
And so we have a rigorous theory of classical mechanics and quantum mechanics and so on.
But one conspicuous absence in this list is the statistical mechanics here or thermodynamics.
Because although we have some physicists in the 20th century,
physicists and mathematicians like James and Kalmograph and so on.
But up to now, statistical physics remains mystery.
Not that all the related areas of physics, for example, the thermodynamical systems, condensed matter and soft matter or biological systems,
they remain complete mysteries.
So one of Dalton's aims in producing these literature throughout the past several months
is, at least to the best of my understanding,
is to somehow cover up this yawning gap in the literature
and doing that via formulating this Bayesian mechanics,
which can encompass purely mathematical formalism of statistical mechanics as well.
And also, one of the most fundamental principles of statistical physics,
which Dalton has used in these papers in order to formulate Bayesian mechanics,
is James' maximum entropy principle,
which is a principle by which the mechanics of statistical objects lead to diffusion
or the descriptive dynamics of the systems.
Great. Thank you.
And from this paper by Abad in 2012,
we can start to bridge quantum and statistical mechanics
by looking at how, on different criteria, they have some concordances.
So this is like going one layer deeper into those concordances.
Let's go on to quantum.
Okay. So quantum.
We've discussed quantum a few times on these live streams.
We've discussed some relevant topics in live stream 17 with Chris Fields,
and then more recently in live stream number 40
with Fields, Glazebrook, Friston, and Levin.
And would either of you like to describe quantum in terms of where it originated from
and how we might be looking at it a little bit differently here than some have seen?
Yeah.
I think as physics developed over time and we were trying to describe smaller and smaller systems
that higher precisions,
at some point we realized that systems don't obey these classical laws set forth by Newton or Lagrange or others.
And quantum mechanics is the formalism for describing systems on a subatomic scale.
I think one of the two major concepts to mention is the Heisenberg's uncertainty principle,
which states that when you have a subatomic particle,
there's always an uncertainty on its position in physical space
and its velocity where there's actually this kind of entanglement of the two in the sense that
if you know one with certainty, you know the other with uncertainty and vice versa.
And you have this kind of...
And you can move along this line where you can partially know the position
or partially know the velocity, but not both at the same time,
which I think is really interesting from the point of Bayesian mechanics,
because quantum mechanics is really one of the first subfields of science
where the notion of an observer and the act of observation
has needed to be ingrained in the actual mathematical theory,
because you can't just shine a light on an electron,
because that will ultimately change the system.
And so the interaction of the observer and the environment
and performing inference over what does...
How do individual things in the environment behave?
I think that's something that Bayesian mechanics is trying to unify,
and I think the quantum ontology is very relevant in this case.
And of course, we have...
Quantum mechanics is obviously a large field that's also connected to various other fields.
One other notion to mention would be the double slit experiment
that's depicted in the image on the right,
which was one of the first, if not the first, I'm actually not sure at the moment,
instances showing the wave-particle duality of subatomic particles,
in this case, electrons,
where particles display behaviors of both waves and particles,
and the behavior is very dependent on the way that we do our observations.
If we want to observe the electrons passing through a slit before they reach the screen,
that influences the behavior of the electrons,
then, when we look at the screen after all of the electrons have passed through the slits.
So we have these kind of weak Markov blankets,
but without the actual introduction, before the introduction of weak Markov blankets.
Awesome.
It's kind of like all the jokes around how people behaving differently when you're observing them.
Now there's a cognitive analog.
So some of those intuitions weren't so far off after all.
And we won't talk about the paper too much,
but there's a recent paper from September 2022,
Connecting the Free Energy Principle with Quantum Cognition,
where they introduced this concept of excess Bayesian inference,
which is kind of like Bayesian inference in a quantum lattice.
It's quite an interesting idea,
and it speaks to this intersection of quantum cognitive theories,
not in the sense per se that they've been developed in the ORC OR,
quantum microtubule entanglement of electrons domain,
which is still like a physical material properties topic.
Thinking about how atomic scale phenomena have rippling effects at the entities level,
the organism level.
Whereas these applications of quantum cognition to larger cognitive systems
may be absolutely compatible with those kind of ORC OR or quantum microtubule theories,
but they do not require that to happen.
It is more going to be referring to their ability to engage in counterfactual spaces
and the relationality that Jakob mentioned.
All of that brings us to Bayesian mechanics.
Okay.
Who wants to go for Bayesian mechanics?
Well, yeah.
In Bayesian mechanics,
we are dealing with coupled systems that perform inference over the systems to which they coupled.
In other words,
we're dealing with particular partitions in the sense of Prism's 2019 paper,
or the rest of the literature.
Or we're looking at the systems that minimize their own surprisal.
When the systems minimize their own surprisal,
they must somehow know something about their environment.
I mean,
inferring something about the external state is the classical view of the FEP,
at least as it initially formulated.
But this surprisal minimization follows from a kind of synchronization
between the internal and external states
via a synchrony map or sigma,
which is simply the statement that things which exist reflect data about their environments,
which is the other way of saying the above statement as well.
And also,
things that are surprising are things that ought not happen as we expect,
like breaking the laws of physics.
In other words,
it might look as a kind of tautology for a system that we will not expect for a system to behave in a way,
in a very surprising way.
In other words,
behave in a way that obey the laws of physics.
But one of the main points of the Bayesian mechanics is to formulate this exact viewpoint
by not focusing on a single trajectory of behavior,
but by somehow generalizing that statement to a whole fiber bundles of behavior,
as they say in the gauge theory.
So,
and systems in this sense can somehow be duly described instead of the traditional view of the FEP,
they can be described from the other way around by using the constraints maximum entropy principle.
I mean,
instead of looking at the system or agent from the inside and trying to somehow formulate its inference of its external state,
we can put the observer in the external environment,
looking at the system and deriving the exact same formula formulation by just flipping around or inverting the sigma synchrony map.
So that's one of the,
I believe,
central ideas of,
sorry,
central ideas of Bayesian mechanics.
Jakob?
I would just kind of summarize that by pointing attention to the image on the slide.
I'll read the caption.
I'll read the caption and you can provide an image meme analysis.
The left side says,
when the tree blows and shakes a tree branch,
it is because the tree branch has inertia,
but not enough to resist the force of a wind on another dot,
dot,
dot,
dot,
dot.
And then on the right side,
it says,
when the wind blows and shakes a tree branch,
it is because the tree branch reduces its surprisal about the state of the world by modeling it.
Yes.
So these are essentially equivalent statements.
One from the classical perspective,
another from the Bayesian mechanical perspective.
I think this notion might initially sound counterintuitive,
which is why I think it's good to start talking about it now so that it has time to settle by the time we reach G theory.
I think it's pan-inferentialist without being pan-psychist per se.
Ali also pointed to that extremely important theoretical duel between the free energy principle and constrained maximum entropy principle,
which then was mapped onto this view from the inside,
which is kind of a strategic agent trying to synchronize with external states or learn or reduce their surprise about external states as mediated by the blanket states.
That's the view from the inside.
That's the view from the inside.
And the view from the outside,
which brings us to the relationality Jakob raised in the quantum space,
the view from the outside is as an experimenter.
And the fact that Dalton has shown that these two frameworks are dual to each other is provided some of the most important theoretical synthesis in the area.
Now, the three faces of Bayesian mechanics.
So I'll bring larger a slide that was shared at IY recently, the 2022 conference,
and it shows the three faces of Bayesian mechanics,
mode matching, mode tracking, path tracking.
Those are the three faces that also are reflected in the earlier paper.
And that was guest stream 23.1.
In addition here, we see on the right is this chaos,
and that is kind of a little bit beyond where we're going to go today,
but it's an exciting direction.
So does anyone want to describe the three faces?
And then we'll head into the topics and paper.
Do you think maybe because we
have like detailed
slides for each of the...
Yeah.
Just to say that these are three different faces of Bayesian mechanics,
and we'll talk more about them soon.
Okay.
Here are some topics.
We're not going to talk about them at all, at all,
but we left some open slides and space to add even more
because they're topics that we want to talk with Dalton and you all about.
So supersymmetry.
This was the citation in the paper.
Here we have a lot of questions.
Free energy principle and constrained maximum entropy principle as theoretical duels.
Bayesian fermions, bosons, and ghost fields.
And anything else that people bring up.
We made it to the paper.
Let's review the roadmap before we really head off on this journey.
And to make this a reasonable dot zero and not go out too far beyond what we all understand here,
we're just going to be really looking at a few key points.
And if either of you want to highlight something, please just raise your hand and highlight it on that slide.
Otherwise, we're just going to take a brief stroll through the paper.
So again, just raise your hand on the slide if you want to say something.
The paper begins with a formalization or a scoping of the formalizations that will come in terms of Bayesian mechanics and about how it's going to connect to derivations of classical physics,
constrained maximum entropy or constrained maximum caliber, as well as supersymmetry theory in classical mechanics.
Section 2, Classical Physics in One Dimension, is studying the mechanics of classical objects and the way in which that they embody Newton's law,
which is that systems accelerate along force gradients.
Think back to Jakob's distinction between Newtonian mechanics as forces acting on objects versus the Lagrangian formalization,
precisely in the direction and magnitude of the total force applied.
No more and no less.
Section 2a continues along on this direction
and talks about different ways that mechanics can be specified around motion in gravitational fields like moving objects,
and also approximations arising from fluid flow.
Section 2b is the basics of Bayesian mechanics.
Bayesian mechanics can be seen as an account of the laws of motion deriving from the FEP,
concerning how Bayesian beliefs, that is systems with beliefs, such as coupled random dynamical systems,
which perform inference over the things to which they couple, behave under certain determinants of probabilistic motion.
And this is another really interesting note.
Much like classical mechanics serves as an account of systems that obey Newton's second law by minimizing classical action,
Bayesian mechanics is an account of the law of motion.
Bayesian mechanics is an account of systems that engage in approximate Bayesian inference by minimizing surprisal.
So, the ball minimizes energy by falling.
The candle minimizes Gibbs free energy by burning.
Cognitive systems are minimizing free energy by way of minimizing surprisal, otherwise they would fail to be that thing.
Cognitive systems are not going to be.
To be continues on.
To be or not to be.
The pure physics of the FEP arguably dates back to two landmark papers in the literature.
A free energy principle for particular physics, first in 2019,
and Markov Blanket's information geometry and stochastic thermodynamics, which we didn't review here.
The FEP has gestured at a new sort of physics.
And that is what this work is recently bringing a quite exciting crescendo and examples of.
And here is a referral to the dual nature of FEP and constrained maximum entropy.
Continuing on in section 2b,
we see a little bit of an unpacking around the idea that the FEP is a least action principle,
a pride to surprisal.
Where the application of least surprisal principle to specific objects determines mathematical,
or determines the mechanical theory about these objects.
So, it would be awesome for those who are familiar with Edo calculus and stochastic differential equations,
Lagrangian mechanics and path probability measures.
Here, we get to equation 15.
Ali, if you want to unpack a little bit what's happening here.
Yes, actually, equation 15 is a kind of generalization of equation 5 for a modal path
given by equation 12.
And this equation is described as the general equation for Bayesian classical mechanics, or
we can see that as the most central equation by which all the other results or their derivations
can potentially be derived, I guess.
So, here Q represents the position, but as a slight caveat here, because in most other literature,
Q is used for designating the recognition density, but in this paper recognition density is designated with R.
So, the Q is reserved for position, and obviously T is also the time.
The lambdas here represents the Lagrange multipliers.
And we have a kind of limiting situation or limiting condition in which the inverse of
lambda is much lower than 1 and the lambda 2 is equals to 1.
Yes, that's exactly the point there.
And in this limiting situation, we can reproduce the classical dynamics.
In particular, in the limit lambda 1 goes to infinity, there is no uncertainty at all.
And the most likely path under those constraints, the classical path of least action by construction,
is the only path we land any non-zero probability to.
So, all the other classical and even quantum derivations can potentially be,
again, be derived from this central equation here.
Great. We have all the equations prepared to explore further.
Now we're going to go into those three phases of Bayesian mechanics.
So, let's just start with mode matching.
Jakob, do you want to describe mode matching?
Yeah. So, mode matching is the simplest case of Bayesian mechanics for stationary objects.
The interesting thing that Dalton mentioned in the paper is that mode matching is only really valid
for brief time scales, implying that nothing ever really stays stationary.
I would be interested to unpack this further in the dot one and the dot two.
How brief these time scales can actually be?
Is it just instantaneous? Is anything ever stationary?
And how are different reference frames involved?
But in the simplest case, mode matching considers objects that at least in the approximate sense are stationary,
like a ball resting on the ground, where the ball is essentially doing approximate Bayesian inference
is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known
um bayesian mechanics does reduce to or rather imply newton's first law where for every uh for
every applied force there is a force of equal magnitude applied in the opposite direction or
for every action there's a reaction great like why don't you ever change your mind
I'm mode matching what are you talking about I'm doing optimal bayesian inference I've been doing
it all day okay mode tracking so in mode tracking we're going to now generalize from that ball resting
on the ground to what setting Ali or Jakob uh well yeah in uh the mode tracking uh unlike uh the case
of mode matching we have uh the target mode or the desired mode um toward which the systems
uh are tracking so that's uh I believe the the main difference between the mode matching and the
mode tracking uh approaches uh so uh but uh within the mode tracking uh we also have two subtypes of
mode uh tracking one of which is the terminal mode matching and the other one is the infinite mode
tracking uh so uh in the case of terminal mode matching uh we already have uh the uh terminal modes
toward which the system uh uh actually somehow uh the probabilistic states the probabilistic space of the
system uh tracks its trajectory uh but in the case of infinite mode tracking uh we don't
have uh I mean some end points uh because it's a kind of uh analogous to a circular satellite motion uh by
which we don't have the beginning and the end of the trajectory so uh also this kind of mode tracking uh
has been described as um as an alternative term a mode chasing uh so I believe uh we can
elaborate and unpack the details of that with Dalton great Jakob I would just add to the infinite modes
tracking case one very interesting um um thing that Dalton mentioned in the paper is that when you have this
when you have a constant path that's essentially uh that you're performing the infinite mode tracking on
the the state uh of the the surprisal of your states are always non-zero which I find really interesting
because uh for me it kind of implies that there's always a certain level of uncertainty but at the same
time this contrasts with the infinite case where for for the case of planets orbiting orbiting the sun
um the there there shouldn't be that much uncertainty about about the path because you know you're going
to follow that path uh for uh till the end of time uh just one thing that I found interesting
awesome so again just to recap for those who are looking for those worked examples
in the mode matching case we have a ball on the ground the mass is not moving we then have a situation
where the equilibrium steady state so so to say is not where the mass is now the center of gravity is in motion
in the mode matching case the center of gravity is not in motion the two cases of mode tracking where the
center of gravity needs to be moving cognitive center of gravity is terminal mode matching which is equivalent to a
a ball thrown in a parabola where there's some defined end point but it's moving along a path of least
action towards the end point and infinite mode tracking where it's in a continuous dynamical or oscillatory
acceleration process and again it's super interesting to think about what these actually entail cognitively
actually i'm sure we'll get there on to section seven so section seven broadens the discussion from the state
tracking uh framework of modes remembering this image where all of the modes whether fixed mode or dynamic mode
are regarding densities over states now we have densities over paths enabled by the gauge theoretic formalisms
so here are some uh equations and quotes related to path tracking anything to add
i would just i just wanted to mention yes go ahead go ahead yeah sorry i would just explicitly mention uh
one point on the slide that the formulation that path tracking is essentially the formulation of mode tracking
seen as a gradient ascent on the path probability density i think that um is um an important notion uh
in underst in understanding what the difference between path tracking and most tracking is um and also uh
uh maybe uh as a slight mathematical joke uh the usage of of the word reduces to when moving in between
is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um is um
wanted to mention that active inference is kind of subsumed in this type of path tracking systems so
and also the initial formulations of FEP up to 2019 I mean especially the 2019
Carl Fristen's monograph implicitly deals with this path tracking approach as far as I know but
somehow this typology of different kind of Bayesian mechanics is
pretty new to these recent literature and before that there was a lot of there were a lot of
confusions and misunderstanding about what kind of systems are we dealing with in each paper
awesome then at the very end there is a first idea of g theory so just like variational free energy has
f equation 2.5 in the textbook and expected free energy is g equation 2.6 in the textbook
here we move from f free energy principle fristen to g beyond and we'll talk more
about this with dalton but if anybody wants to add anything they're welcome to
i think uh one uh one thread that was open towards the end of the paper was with the application of g
theory to uh to chaos with the notion that we can use bayesian mechanics
the application of g theory to study systems that uh that uh seem that are dependent on the initial
the initial conditions and even though this uh this was so far purely describing the context of
non-biological entities i think it's really exciting to see the potential applications in applied active
inference where the your initial belief states do influence your trajectory through uh through the through
the uh the high dimensional state space and i think it will be very interesting to see how g theory develops
in that way and to see more connections between how we can use um notions from supersymmetry and chaos to
studying cognitive systems or physical systems cognitively uh yeah awesome very well said like
there are phase transitions or critical moments where when the ball falls on one side of the roof it goes
that way and when it falls on the other side of the roof it goes a different way and there are just
noticeable differences in terms of our psychophysics and this is really bringing the physics to psychophysics
and it's been quite a journey if either of you have any penultimate thoughts please provide them
well uh as i said before um it's been an extremely fascinating learning experience uh for me personally
and i'm very much looking forward to uh discuss all of these uh stunning ideas with uh dalton and learn
much more so uh thanks to everyone thank you ali jacob yeah i think i made my own over uh um my kind of
ending remark uh with uh with the last uh comment but yeah it's been it's been an incredible journey so
far and definite and an extremely fun experience to try to unpack this and uh in in our discussions and
i look forward to unpacking even more and uh
uh seeing how how uh this thread develops
yes thanks both and honor for all the work leading up to it and until next time
thanks bye
thank you

## dAtC-Enmc8M

Hello and welcome to the
and welcome everyone. This is ACTIMF livestream number 49.1. Welcome to the Active Inference Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work. All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will be following video etiquette for livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about the institute and how to get involved in projects such as the livestreams and others.

And we're really appreciative, Dalton, that you've joined today. Looking forward to how these discussions go. So we can begin just by saying hello and anything that we want to explore or discuss today.
And then we'll just jump right into it. So I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California. And I think some of the questions that are really motivating me today is,
what is mechanical about Bayesian mechanics? And how do we take concepts that have physical interpretations like center of gravity, or even some of these more atomic level terms that were brought into play?
How do we take concepts that have physical
and how do we take concepts that have physical learning? I think it is? And personally I had immersed myself for the past several months in Dalton's paper.
And for the past couple of months we had fascinating discussions around this particular paper. So I'm feeling kind of star struck right now.
this particular paper. So I'm feeling kind of starstruck right now. And I'm very much
looking forward to our discussion. And I'll pass it to Jakob.
Hello, I'm Jakob. I'm a student in the UK. And I suppose, I'm also very, very excited to be here
today and to discuss the different implications of Bayesian mechanics and how it's related to
other areas in contemporary physics and how that can then be applied to cognitive sciences and
neuroscience. Awesome. So welcome. Thanks again, Dalton. Feel free to just
begin where you'd like and bring us to the paper.
Of course. Yeah. I guess I'll also introduce myself just in case there are people in the audience that
don't recognize me or have a face to a name. I'm Dalton. I'm a researcher. I'm based at Stony Brook
University in New York, where I spend most of my time in the Department of Mathematics and the
Department of Physics and Astronomy. I'm also at the Versys Lab, where I'm on the Mathematics and the
Physics of the Free Energy Principle. So it's a pleasure to meet all three of you. And thank you,
of course, for the kind words. I think we can maybe begin with a very broad overview of the paper,
I will say. So one of my one of the aims of my research program is to get a better understanding
of the mathematics of random dynamical systems, especially coupled random dynamical systems or
systems that model non-equilibrium phenomena. And one of the interesting things to me
is the idea that within cognitive science or neuroscience, there are some algorithms that
have been developed over time that have been built specifically to cope with these kinds of problems,
which are problems that we don't know really how to make sense of mathematically, even physically.
So we're on the back foot. But in neuroscience, the primary object of study is a non-equilibrium system. It is
non-equilibria and understanding non-equilibrium phenomena in the brain. And so one supposes that the methods that have
been developed over time in this area, just maybe by trial and error, or at least trial and error by the
standards of perhaps a pure mathematician, may have some insights into maths and physics in the same way that
there's a very rich history of physics, inspiring more advanced mathematics, and then mathematics circling back and
making physics more rigorous. I think there's a great opportunity to do that in biophysical systems. And I
think the free energy principle is a source of great inspiration along those lines. So with that meta
commentary out of the way, one of the things that I wanted to do with this paper is to actually drill down
on that point. Because I think it's something that maybe gets lost in translation. If you just read kind of traditional
active inference papers that are all about modelling cognition, I think there is there's something on the other side of the
aisle to be said about what do those models of cognition say about modelling systems that are cognitive? Or what does it say about
complex systems that are cognitive-like? And how can we make sense of those things mathematically?
So that's in some sense the motivation for Bayesian mechanics. And that goes back to, well it goes back
a long time, it goes back to probably Karl himself. He mentions something like this at a couple of points in the
2019 monograph. But it was worth writing a paper specifically with the motivation that if we consider what's been written about the free energy
principle so far, there's a very nice foundation for better understanding the mathematics and physics of coupled or non-equilibrium
stochastic processes. And so that was the motivation for this particular paper. And in addition to building out the fundamental
mathematics in the first few sections, it's then possible to contextualize all that work with a
kind of nice worked example of what does this mean for some kind of simple systems? How can we actually
take this foundational maths and make it algorithmic again? And then foreshadowing maybe even greater
complexity in the very last section. So yes, a lot of this goes back to a paper that I co-authored with a number of
other people earlier in the summer called on Bayesian mechanics, where it's proposed that, you know,
complex systems have a kind of informational physics about them. And that maybe the material physics or the
maths for these systems is quite challenging in general. But maybe if you map these systems into the
informational world, you can utilize new techniques and make sense of these kinds of systems by
approaching it from a different kind of viewpoint. That is, I think, the strength of Bayesian mechanics,
as again, Carl and others have construed it, is it is a way of talking about informational physics, or the
physics of Bayesian beliefs, the laws of motion on a statistical manifold. This is various ways of kind of couching that in.
more formal language. But again, that was the motivation for the paper. And then, as that gets developed,
eventually, there's a point where we really get into the trenches and actually try and deploy this
in some useful way. I think that those are really the kind of two aims that come together in some sense.
Thank you for the summary. While there's many ways to begin and start, perhaps we could start with the context that we brought,
which was thinking about this, and you touched on some of these threads as well, such as the key literature and some of the history.
Let's continue on in this context setting before we get to the formalisms and the worked examples
and talk about the three kinds of theories, including what you mean by a theory, and then the three non-Bayesian
mechanics. And that'll set us up really well to see where Bayesian mechanics comes into play.
So this was in that paper just mentioned, on Bayesian mechanics, a physics of and by beliefs.
So what are dynamics, mechanics, and principles? And how were you using theory? And why was it so important
to be clear about what a theory was and the distinctions amongst these three terms?
Yeah, of course. So in that paper, there is this kind of trichotomy that gets introduced,
where we talk both about dynamics and mechanics and principles and disentangle them in a very particular way.
So we think about dynamics as a kind of observational thing. And it's important to separate that from mechanics,
because complex systems as a science is very interested in dynamics. Can I kind of infer the laws
of these kinds of systems just by modeling them using some kind of curve fitting or using some kind of
set of canonical models that I know sort of fits this situation? But at the end of the day, yes,
dynamics are mostly about the particular trajectories that a system takes through state space or physical space.
And this is conflated sometimes with what I call mechanics in that paper, which is something a little
bit different. It is the laws from which these trajectories are determined. So for instance,
dynamical systems people, especially in pure maths, really like the example of billiards. So you send one billiard
ball crashing into another one, and you could talk about the trajectory that the ball takes. And you could
write down the equations of motion for this system and just add up all the forces acting on it and figure
out what direction is this ball that got collided with, what direction is that going to go into, with what
momentum, and all of these things. But then figuring out that trajectory, once you plug in all of these
kind of boundary conditions, the mass of the ball, the angle of the initial contact, and so forth,
the way that you can kind of compose all that information together, that needs to come from
somewhere. And that's what we call, or what I call a mechanical principle. And this is not a distinction
that is new to the literature. I'm not breaking new ground here, but I think it is one of those things
that's not made sufficiently clear in the FEP literature, or at least in the physical, the places
where it's adjacent to physics. So mechanics are about the laws that give you those trajectories.
So we know that the force is acting on one or another billiard balls summed together because of
Newton's law of motion. That's a mechanical theory. If I have F, then I get M times A, and I can plug in
F and I can plug in A and I can get a trajectory. But if I abstract away from those particulars, I get
some kind of law that tells me, okay, how a trajectory is generated in the physical world.
Abstracting one more step, we can then ask, okay, so where do mechanical theories come from?
What tells me that I have the right mechanical theory generating the right dynamics? And this is about
the kinds of very fundamental laws that we know hold everywhere in the universe at a given scale.
So these are principles like conservation of energy, and this gives you the behavior of collisions or the
principle of stationary action, which actually gives you back Newton's law. So you can now chain these
things together and say, you know, one ball hits the other one, it goes in this direction, because if you
sum the forces and you add up all the directions, you get a net movement. And you can do that because
these billiard balls minimize or at least make stationary their action. So their motion must follow
this particular mechanical law, and that's the law that generates these trajectories. So the reason why
this is mentioned in the Bayesian mechanics paper is because these have, I think, been conflated in the
literature previously, because you have the idea of the free energy principle, which is a principle, it's a thing that
gives you back some kind of generative rule for the dynamics of specific systems. And that is usually
something to do with the motion of internal states on a statistical manifold, in the sense of, for instance,
Thomas Parr, Lance de Carsten, and Carl Fristen's article, Stochastic Thermodynamics, Markov Blankets,
and Information Geometry. I think that's the title anyway. So if you say, okay, the dynamics of a system
whose parameter performs approximate Bayesian inference minimizes the surprisal, then you get approximate
Bayesian inference as a law of motion or the dynamics of some object. And this law is usually written as a
particular gradient flow relation on the space of beliefs. So it tells you how do beliefs change as
those parameters doing the inference change. And then if you add in progressively more details, okay,
what do those internal states actually mean in the context of the system? What are those beliefs about?
These are the kind of boundary conditions that give you the trajectories, the specific dynamics of the
system. And there's an interesting sense in which these boundary conditions are literal boundary
conditions because understanding what's internal and what's external and being inferred is precisely
the specification of a Markov blanket. So as soon as you actually give the system a very particular
partition, as soon as you carve it up in a specific way, you start to get a sense of the actual evolution
of a system as one might see it in the real world. But this is, I think, separating things out in a formal
sense like this is useful because it avoids skipping from step one, which is minimize variational free energy
or surprisal. And then going straight away to this is how something like an active inference system does
prediction and action. You know, there's some steps in the middle that haven't really been filled out if you just
go from A to B directly. And when you begin to talk about the maths and the physics, collapsing things together like that
starts to throw away some important details that actually do make a difference in the way that you tell the story.
Awesome. Ali or Jakob, anything you want to add in or ask there?
Yeah, Jakob.
Yeah, I would maybe ask regarding the kind of laws of motion of Bayesian mechanics. You mentioned
approximate Bayesian inference.
Would that imply that the 3D faces of Bayesian mechanics, the mode matching, mode tracking and path tracking,
would you say those are also specific laws of motion within Bayesian mechanics?
You could say that, yeah. I think at this point the distinction gets very fine. And so there is a place to
usefully truncate it. But yeah, these are three different kinds of approximate Bayesian inference.
And so they are three different kinds of motion under free energy principle minimization.
And so this is kind of, I guess, a middle area between dynamics and mechanics. You've started to specify
some things like, am I doing approximate Bayesian inference over states or am I doing it over paths?
But you're still lacking actual dynamical details about what do those states and paths mean?
So this is maybe a middle area that blends the idea of approximate Bayesian inference as a law of motion under
surprise minimization and actually getting down to the very bottom of this pyramid. So if I were to put it
somewhere into this figure, I'd maybe slot it in. Yeah, that's pretty much what I'm imagining is you have
approximate Bayesian inference sort of roughly up here and then there are different expressions of that,
just as there are different expressions of Newton's laws depending on if you're in fluids or rigid bodies
or celestial mechanics. So you can introduce even finer partitions than these three.
There's many places to go. One question is what are these modes about?
Who or what is tracking what and when?
Yeah, so this is kind of about the idea being approximate Bayesian inference tells you that systems
match their parameters in such a way that they perform inference, right? So when we think about Bayesian
inference, we can talk about it as simply inferring the parameters of a probability density.
So in the free energy principle, when you get approximate Bayesian inference
saying, okay, systems that are coupled synchronize certain parameters, this is Bayesian inference.
And conversely, if you have that synchronization, you have Bayesian inference or you have approximate Bayesian
inference if you're inferring the parameters of an approximate density, which is where you get into
the factorization of the free energy functional that we are familiar with, where you have
a variational density matched to a joint density, but you can split it into the variational density
matched to a conditional density, plus an extra surprisal term that kind of measures how good that
approximation is. So this descends from that idea that you can deduce what a system is doing
just by saying, okay, it's performing approximate Bayesian inference, because that allows you to say
its parameters are synchronizing to the parameters of the environment or of another system.
So that's what we mean when we say modes. In this case, a mode is just a parameter of the distribution,
and it comes from some of Carl's earlier literature where he uses the Laplace approximation. So
specifically, we're matching the, we're kind of fitting a Gaussian density to some arbitrary probability,
and then the mode of that Gaussian is one of the parameters, because it tells you, okay, where is the
center of that density. And if you also get a sense of where the variance of that density is, now suddenly,
by fitting those two parameters, you can talk about the system, because now you can say, okay,
the physical parameters of the system are encoding these parameters of some density. And in a very
natural way, this gets you back much of statistical physics, because it's all about how does a system
reflect these statistics of another system, probabilistically, how does this look. But this
is kind of upgraded in Bayesian mechanics to noting that, well, that inference happens because the physical
parameters of the system are matching the physical parameters of the environment. And that's where the
probabilities come from. That's why we talk about beliefs. So when we say modes, we're referring to
parameters that are fit for synchronization.
Excellent. Thank you. Jakob?
Since we have the schema on the slide there, I just wanted to ask, where do you think that the G
theory formulation fits into this diagram? Because with G theory, there is approximate Bayesian inference, but
it's not necessarily density over states. So is it another node directly from the Bayesian mechanics?
Yeah. So in this figure, the approximate Bayesian inference lemma is a very specific thing
that originally goes back to, I believe, originally it's in a 2012 paper by Carl in Entropy called the
Free Energy Principle for Biological Systems. But certainly it's a much bigger deal is made
in the 2019 monograph. And it's the approximate Bayesian inference lemma, as he calls it, is
specifically about mode matching. Approximate Bayesian inference is a bit more general. So if you were to
kind of slot that in somewhere in here, it would maybe be parallel to Bayesian mechanics, because
just like classical mechanics, the law of motion is Newton's laws. For Bayesian mechanics, the law of
motion, the thing that generates specific physical dynamics, is approximate Bayesian inference. Or the
law that when you do have synchronized systems, you can write it as variational free energy minimization
in virtue of the parameters of the two systems matching up. And that's the parameter that minimizes the
distance between a held density and an observed density. So approximate Bayesian inference lemma is
that result specifically. But that's more general. The idea of approximate Bayesian inference is more general.
And probably someone needs to write down a generalization of the approximate Bayesian inference lemma
to paths specifically to talk about path tracking. But once you have a path that fits the bill as a mode,
and once you have two systems evolving together tracking each other's modes or each other's paths,
and if you have a probability density over those paths, you can now talk about approximate Bayesian inference
in the path setting. Now where that has to do with G-theory, so G-theory, the name and kind of the vision is
actually due to Maxwell Ramstad, a colleague of mine, also here in the Versys lab. And he has suggested that
G-theory kind of lies in the intersection between a few different things that fall out of the path-based
formalism. So if you have approximate Bayesian inference over paths, if you're doing path tracking,
then there are lots of things that do come out of this, almost canonically. One of them is everything
that comes along with path integral formulations in quantum mechanics. And this is, I take advantage of
this at various points in the paper. At one point I use it to explain, okay, why does Bayesian mechanics actually
make sense in the classical world? And then later on I use it to relate it to chaos. That's a specific example.
I think more generally path tracking deals with non-stationary systems very well, because you're allowed to talk about now,
how does the density, how does the belief change in time? How does the mode of a single belief change over
time to make a kind of modal path? And then what are the marginals? If you slice up the density along that
path, what do you get? So you can talk about non-stationary systems. You can talk about systems out of equilibrium
this way because you can relate the free energy principle over paths to what's called the principle
of maximum caliber in statistical physics, which is all about non-equilibria and entry production and
non-equilibrium steady states. So I think as we have written about it, G-theory is the
duality between path integrals and the FEP over paths, or the duality between max cal and maximum
caliber and the FEP over paths. But I think that's selling it short a little bit because it's also
the thing that brings in all these other ideas. And stochastic thermodynamics is a really interesting
one as well, right? Also falls out of the path-based formulas very well. Also does very well with
non-equilibria. So G-theory is kind of this larger object that makes sense of why that column of Bayesian
mechanics actually works and explains a little of the true power of the path tracking as opposed to
mode tracking. Why are we interested in forgetting about states? And that's the explanation for that,
or the justification for that, resides in G-theory, which is supposed to explain why do all of these
things just come out of the path-based formalism? Why does it make sense? And why does the FEP over paths
lie at the center of a lot of disparate fields? Which I think is one of the real, very powerful statements
that may be possible in the near future. Is the FEP actually canonically the theory of everything in the sense
that there are lots of approaches in statistical physics and stochastic process theory that trace back to the FEP
or the FEP subsumes or implies or something like this. G-theory is supposed to kind of plug into that last column,
but that is somewhat outside of the hierarchy in that sense.
Excellent. Thank you. Ali?
Ali? Well, yeah, I was, when I was reading about G-theory, I thought it somehow relates to Rolf Landor's
principle, which basically says that if an observer loses information about a system, the corresponding
entropy in non-information bearing degrees of freedom of the information processing system or its
environment is increased. Because, you know, Landor believed that information is physical. So he somehow
put it in terms of a kind of thermodynamical point of view. But how does it fit? Or can G-theory
theory be viewed through the lens of Landor's principle, which I think is not a completely non-controversial
principle as well?
Yeah, that's an interesting question. I think insofar as it does give you some technology to talk about
entry production at non-equilibrium steady state. So it does give you a way of saying, okay, if I'm exchanging
with my environment, if information is flowing out and flowing back in, then there is some increase in
the entropy. And with respect to things like control theory, this is pretty interesting, because it allows
you to talk about, okay, if the system is observing something about its environment, if it's constantly
maintaining a steady state, so engaging in control,
then you can talk about that entropically, and you can talk about the irreversibility of processes,
even at steady state. And there are, you know, there are things that connect to that, like the Crookes
fluctuation theorem, or Yarsinski equality, and things of that nature. So my guess would be,
it probably covers something like Landau's principle in that context, talking about the energy required to
erase a bit of information, say, is ultimately the energy required to insulate yourself from the
environment. That minimizes your surprise. It means the environment does not offer information to you,
but that does take energy, and sometimes quite a lot. So that's probably where that connects to
Landau's principle, is talking about and quantifying the kind of cost of maintaining a Markov blanket,
in probably entropic terms.
Landau's principle, is talking about the energy expenditure of the brain, compared to, say, a
neural network operating on traditional computational architectures, using many, many light bulbs,
many, many calories of energy, versus a brain, which is able to carry out some tasks with seemingly low
energy expenditure, while other tasks it does not seem to be able to perform at all.
I want to pull back, before we go into the three non-Bayesian mechanics, and ask, what is Bayesian?
What does it mean for something to be Bayesian?
Yeah, in my mind, Bayesian is about inference. It's about a particular method of doing inference
that gives you consistent, unbiased results, and fits in very nicely with the rest of probability theory.
In the context of Bayesian mechanics, it is the idea that the physics of material systems,
or the material physics of complex systems, maps into a physics of beliefs. So you can talk about
the parameters that are doing approximate Bayesian inference, or you can talk about approximate Bayesian
inference. You can talk about, okay, what are the beliefs parameterized by that mode doing,
and how does that reflect something about the dynamics of the system?
The reason why this is interesting is not just because it's a different approach to the problem,
and dealing with interacting systems and systems out of equilibrium is an area that does need new
approaches because it is a very poorly understood area within mathematics and physics. It still is, it has been for some time, I think.
But it's also interesting because complex systems are informational, so there's some sense in which this
brings us closer to the metal. So it's not just a new view, it is the right new view, because complex systems are systems that compute and capture data.
They are systems that have memory. So it's not as simple as even, here's a new way of writing down
the dynamics of random or stochastic processes based on the parameterization of some action function.
That's valuable, because that's a new thing, but it's also, it fits very nicely into our understanding of complex systems as things that have an informational physics.
So, understanding the dynamics of things like the brain is contingent upon understanding what the brain is doing, and the brain is capturing and computing over data. It is storing memories, it is learning and sensing and inferring.
So, it's not just that it's a new view, it's really the right view, because it gets to the idea that complex systems do things physically,
because they are doing something in informational space. And the brain is a wonderful example of that. The brain is a coupled random dynamical system, it's coupled to its environment.
So you can talk about this parameterization thing, this synchronization thing, but it's even more insightful than just that, because the brain is doing approximate phase and inference.
So, I suppose it's no coincidence that the synchronization of coupled random dynamical systems gets you back this idea.
Because I think that is empirically just based on observations, I think that is as close to a physical law as one might be able to get at this stage in complex systems theory, is that things that synchronize do perform approximate phase and inference.
Because things that synchronize are things that are controlled systems or computational systems.
So, in that sense, I think it's right on the mark.
And as I said, you know, it's interesting that this goes way back to trying to figure out things about the brain.
It goes way back to Carl Fristen's original work on generalized filtering and SPM and these kinds of algorithms that were designed to make sense of what is the brain doing physically based on what we think it's doing inferentially.
Right, the relationship between structural and functional connectivity and the relationship between neural representations and neural firing patterns.
But it has become something massively more general because it is the right kind of maths to talk about these sorts of systems.
And that's in turn because these sorts of systems do this kind of approximate Bayesian inference.
So, when you ask, yeah, what is Bayesian about Bayesian mechanics?
It is about the relationship between Bayesian beliefs and Bayesian inference and physical parameters representing something about the information available to that system or the statistics of a system coupled to that system.
Awesome.
Just a few notes before we then go into the non-Bayesian mechanics.
One is from ecological psychology, where many of our terms are drawn from, such as affordances.
People have long pointed to the way that we use language like, can you grasp it, optimal grasp of ideas, and so tangible and peripersonal spatial ways of talking about ideas and cognitive processes.
And then, well, what is the first thing you want to know after you get optimal grasp?
How much does it weigh?
And you said, it has become massively more general.
Well, is that in grams or in what?
So, I see this as part of the development of the physicality of cognition in that the ecological psychology brought in relationality and action orientation, the pragmatic turn.
And then, now what about those objects?
If we drop the idea, what happens?
If we drop it from the discussion, what happens?
And then the second piece is the very interesting historical note about the development of complex systems and about the appropriateness of this kind of a formalism.
Because at the very least, standing as extremely on the instrumental spectrum as we can be, we're going to need to bake relationality into our analysis of any system, whatever it is that it is doing.
Absolutely.
So, great points.
Let us go to the non-Bayesian mechanics.
So, the non-Bayesian mechanics are classical, statistical, and quantum.
So, however you'd like, maybe just on each of the following three slides, just what are classical mechanics, statistical mechanics, and quantum mechanics kind of steel-personing the argument?
And just what do they explain?
What will they continue to be useful for?
And how can we see them as special cases or adjacencies or however you'd like to frame it with respect to Bayesian mechanics?
Sure.
Sure.
Yeah.
So, beginning with classical mechanics, I think is probably the simplest example.
You have kind of the physics of very large, very slow things.
Large is kind of a relative term, large compared to atoms maybe, and slow compared to the speed of light.
But nonetheless, this is a broad region of physics that describes things that don't have relativistic effects, things where observations commute.
So, it's non-quantum, things that are not noisy, so there's no probabilities, it's not statistical, and things that do not require relativistic corrections, so things that are below the speed of light.
When you have all four of those ingredients, I think I listed four anyway, you have classical physics, or at least you have a classical object, and the physics of that thing is classical mechanics.
So, this arises from, you may have inferred, four limits of other kinds of physics.
So, you want to be now infinitely precise, so this is the kind of no-noise limit of statistical mechanics, it's the slow speeds limit of special relativity, and it's a very interesting limit of quantum mechanics.
So, yes, but until then, I'll say, there is a classical limit of quantum mechanics, that you take a quantum field theory, and you can produce a classical theory out of that in a relatively well-defined way.
And again, I can talk a little bit of quantum mechanics, and again, I can talk a little about the nuances to that statement.
There are some, but regardless, classical physics is about large things, really.
The interesting thing is that all four of these limits kind of coincide to some extent when you have a very large system.
So, very large systems allow you to use the law of large numbers to kind of sharpen your beliefs about a system.
So, you can imagine this as placing greater precision on the measurement of your system, and that recreates sort of the no-noise limit, because you get more and more precise in your estimate of the dynamics of the system.
Many body systems with very small objects are systems where you start to see quantum corrections.
So, particles, like atomic particles, for instance, you begin to run into a regime where things are small enough that quantum physics becomes relevant.
And also, large systems tend to move pretty slowly, as just a general rule, in what's called effective field theory, which talks about how one theory is a limit of another theory.
And in particular, it talks about as you increase in scale, you get simpler theories.
So, I think we would probably all agree classical physics is a lot simpler than quantum physics, and that's because effective field theory says that large things have simpler physics in very rigorous senses.
One expression of that is kind of the momentum scale is inverse to the mass scale.
So, larger things generally have lower momentum, lower energy.
Very small things whiz around at very fast speeds.
They have high momentum.
So, once you start to talk about large systems, things begin simplifying in such a way that more often than not, you run into classical physics as a sufficient description of the scale of observation that you're at.
So, classical physics, that's where it comes from.
It is about Newton's law.
Classical mechanics, Newtonian mechanics, as we might call it, is about Newton's law.
It says that, well, Newton's three laws, I suppose, I should say.
They say that every action has an equal and opposite reaction.
So, this is the idea that things that make, so contact forces have, at the classical level, an equivalent force in the opposite direction.
You can think of this as a kind of, if you're familiar with sort of exercises in school in this area, you're often asked to calculate the normal force of something.
The normal force is just what pushes up on me when I push down on something else.
So, this is why I don't phase through the ground when I stand up, is because there is an equal and opposite reaction.
I'm not only putting a force on the ground, but the ground is acting on me and keeping me up.
So, that's one of them.
The other one is the very famous F equals MA.
It says that the force acting on a system is the mass times the acceleration of the system.
And likewise, you can deduce the acceleration of a system by taking the force acting on it and dividing out the mass.
So, this tells you, okay, how do we generate dynamics out of some boundary conditions like what is the mass, what direction is the force acting in.
And classical mechanics comes from a, what we call, least action principle.
And there are a number of equivalent ways of writing this.
But this generalizes to what some people call Lagrangian mechanics.
And that tells you, imagining what are the energies that those forces came from, how does the system behave with respect to its energies?
And if you talk about stationary action, you talk about minimizing energy, then you can recover Newton's laws as a system accelerates along force gradients.
And it doesn't waste energy by going any faster or going any slower.
It does exactly what it's told to do.
So, it uses precisely the energy budget available to it.
There's a very nice, well, maybe I shouldn't say it about my own paper, but there's a very lengthy exposition of this in the Physics of and by Beliefs paper that we've talked about once already.
I think it's section two, where I run through why is the analogy to classical mechanics even useful here?
And it's because of the stuff that we talked about previously with the very nice dichotomy or trichotomy between principles, mechanics and dynamics.
But anyway, more broadly than that, classical mechanics is a very good example of a least action principle.
Because it's the idea that the dynamics of classical things comes from a particular scale-appropriate limiting least action principle.
Excellent.
Ali or Jakob, anything to add or we'll move to statistical mechanics?
Okay.
Classical descriptions.
On to statistical.
Statistical.
Yeah.
So, statistical mechanics is a bit of an interesting one.
Statistical mechanics is a lot broader than I think one might initially think.
Because at the end of the day, it is to some extent just about systems with, as you've written here, probabilistic degrees of freedom.
And that covers a lot of things.
You know, you can, probability theory is just maths.
So, anywhere you can use probability theory to describe some system, you can use statistical mechanics.
And we know that this is, this generality does exist because you can talk about quantum statistical mechanics.
So, you can take the physics of very small, very fast things and use statistical mechanical methods.
You can use probability theory and entropy in these things.
And you can also go all the way up to black hole thermodynamics and you can do the same.
You can talk about, so black holes are very large things.
But you can still talk about the thermodynamics or statistical mechanics of black holes.
So, it's worth saying that we can talk about the no noise limit of a particular kind of statistical mechanics.
But then we need to be a little bit more precise about what that generates.
In this case, I'm thinking of classical statistical mechanics.
So, it's the statistical mechanics of interacting particles or systems with microstates that relate to macrostates via some kind of Gibbs relation.
And things that have free energy and, in particular, Shannon entropy.
So, this is a little bit more of a narrower idea of what statistical mechanics is.
Just because we need to constrain ourselves a little bit, even to get off the ground.
Otherwise, we'd be covering way too much.
But it is the case that if you take statistical descriptions of ensembles of objects,
and you become more and more precise and you get rid of the noise,
then you can reproduce kind of classical equations of motion.
And there are ways of doing that.
One such thing is called mean field theory.
So, in mean field theory, you get rid of the noise in a system.
And you just say, okay, here is the trajectory of the system in the same way as we might do with classical mechanics.
I'm skipping some details there.
And the analogy is a little bit more nuanced than that.
But it's kind of a useful mental picture, I think.
And one of the interesting things to note, I think, is what you've written here,
is that there is a principle that's relevant for statistical mechanics.
Because StatMech is very general, it's very mathematical.
It requires an equally mathematical principle.
And so, in probability theory, we have what's called the maximum entropy principle,
which is just a way of designing probability densities around inferences that satisfy some mathematical desiderata.
So, they should be consistent.
They should be unbiased.
They should lead back to Bayesian inferences under suitable conditions.
And Maxent is that thing.
And we know, due to, well, work by James, but more recently, work by people like Ken Dill, also here at Stony Brook,
that, and before him, mathematicians like Markowitz and Vilani,
all of this is a large body of work that points to the idea that if you maximize entropy,
you get the mechanics of diffusion.
So, you get the mechanical rules that generate mass action, like diffusing particles.
Excellent.
I just want to ask about one word, which was unbiased.
So, what does unbiased mean here?
Unbiased, I think you can think of it as avoiding overfitting.
So, one of the things that you can consider Maxent to be is a recipe for doing inference that maximizes ignorance subject to some constraints.
So, if you have some known unknowns, then you want to incorporate those.
But if you have unknown unknowns, you don't want to risk overfitting for those things that you're not aware of.
So, if you're not aware of something, you don't want to falsely incorporate it into your inferences.
You could consider this as avoiding overfitting, or you could consider it as kind of optimizing for subclasses.
If you're thinking of probabilistic stuff as a problem of classification, then you can think of it as optimizing for subclasses that you don't have information on.
But either way, it is the idea that you don't want to introduce extraneous information into your inference, because that extraneous information biases you in a direction that the data doesn't support.
So, that's really the idea behind unbiased.
And one of the things that Janes did, and not only Janes, but also Shannon before him, who worked on the probabilistic aspects of this.
And then after Janes and Shannon, Shore and Johnson, who also were probability theorists and worked on Maxent axiomatically.
Not like Janes, who took it more as a physical rule for a long time, and then got into the probability theory of it.
Either way, all of these people are able to justify with rigorous proofs that maximum entropy is the best way of making unbiased inferences.
And there's lots of literature on this.
Those are three useful names, but there's a lot more due to Ariel Katicha.
I already mentioned Ken Dill, Adam Giffen.
Lots of people have taken an interest in this area.
Rightly so, I think.
Awesome.
We're going to keep moving to now quantum.
And then already many of the seeds that bring us to Bayesian are planted.
So, quantum.
What is it?
How did it come into play in your work?
Yeah.
So, quantum mechanics is, I think, qualitatively different from classical and statistical physics.
It's about very small things or very fast things.
And as I was saying, effective field theory tells us these things usually go together.
And it talks about kind of when you get things that are not classical.
Well, at least it started as when you get things that are not classical, what do you need to add to your theory to make the right predictions?
So, quantum mechanics began as a kind of modeling effort.
It grew from what we might call semi-classical physics, which is just about quantum corrections to classical stuff.
It grew from semi-classical physics to its own genuine branch of physics in and around the 20s, I suppose.
Certainly the early 1900s, anyway.
So, one of the things that becomes relevant is probability theory.
Because quantum mechanics, you may have heard about Heisenberg uncertainty.
It's about the fact that measurements do not commute.
So, the order that you do a measurement in matters.
A consequence of this is that there is always some inherent uncertainty when you measure so-called conjugate variables,
which are just things that fit into the theory as non-commuting pairs.
So, you measure two non-commuting pairs, there is some uncertainty.
You can measure one precisely, you can't measure both precisely.
And moreover, there's a trade-off.
If you measure one with infinite precision, you know absolutely nothing about the other one.
If you try and play half and half, then that's what you get.
You get kind of blanket uncertainty about both measurements.
So, because of the non-commuting of variables, and this is kind of an empirical fact, this doesn't come out of nowhere,
but it is one of those things where it just happens to be right because it's so elegant that it wouldn't make a lot of sense if it weren't.
Much like, I guess, the coincidence of synchronization and Bayesian inference in complex systems theory.
Because non-commuting variables gives us all of the rest of quantum mechanics, the stuff that we really know and love,
and also is a relatively well-defined way of getting back classical physics.
Because all you have to do is take the theory and make things commute, and then you get classical physics back.
I'm brushing some difficulties under the rug.
As you might imagine, it's not that simple.
And technically, it doesn't work, but it sort of does.
And if you're interested, I guess, you can look into what's called deformation quantization,
which is exactly the idea that if you take a classical system and you deform it in such a way that things no longer commute,
then you get back quantum physics.
But you can't really do it the other way around.
There's a bit of subtlety to the other direction.
Nonetheless, that is one route to making quantum stuff, classical stuff.
Another route is just focusing on the probabilities.
So because of this inherent uncertainty, quantum particles, their equations of motion,
have what we call transition amplitudes, which gives the probability of moving from one state to another.
But again, nothing is certain in quantum mechanics.
If you, however, make it certain, mathematically, you can go in and just take the no-noise limit.
But more properly, you should do something called wick rotation first, which just allows that limit to make sense.
Although, well, yes, yes, you should do that first.
If you do that, you take the kind of no-noise limit, then you get certain state transitions.
And this just gives you back a classical dynamical system that you know where it's going once you have the equations of motion.
And this is the route that I take in the paper because it fits very nicely into the path integral formulation
in a way that kind of just makes things make sense.
And one of the nice things that I then go on to say is if you have a parameter sitting inside that path integral,
then you can make sense of why classical physics comes from the no-noise limit
by writing it as a Bayesian mechanical problem.
You can write about synchronization and get back the Bayesian mechanics of classical stuff
just by doing this very well-defined procedure.
Like, this is something that already exists in physics and is fairly uncontroversial.
So that's what you get in quantum mechanics.
It's about small stuff.
It's fundamentally probabilistic because there is fundamental uncertainty.
And again, this traces back to empirical facts.
I think that about covers it.
I don't know if I should have said more or if you have other questions.
I think that's sufficient at this benchmark for that slide.
Oh, it's great.
Jakob?
Jakob?
Yeah.
I realize the paper dealt mainly with Bayesian mechanics for classical objects,
but do you see Bayesian mechanics being applied to non-classical phenomena
like quantum tunneling or entanglement,
which cannot really be explained in the limit of large numbers?
And then also a second question,
which is kind of on the intersection of quantum mechanics and statistical physics.
Is there any change in the formalism when you introduce the notion of indistinguishability
between particles?
Sure.
Well, those are really good questions.
I think, yes, there is probably an idea of quantum tunneling that could be achieved, maybe,
because quantum tunneling, if you're a physicist,
this is something that you're familiar with on the nose.
If you're a mathematician, this is what you would think of as an instanton.
So instanton solutions to the equations of motion of a quantum field theory are
tunneling dynamics.
So the idea becomes, okay, can we describe instanton solutions using Bayesian mechanics?
And the answer is I don't know, but it seems like it should maybe be possible,
because there is at least an understanding of where points A and B are,
if not how to get from A to B.
But that is something that would be interesting to do more work with.
And more generally, it would be interesting to think about quantum physics
through the Bayesian mechanical lens,
just because you do get this,
you do recover this classical limit of the path integral.
And morally, path integral quantization should be equivalent to things like defamation quantization
and geometric quantization and other methods even.
And actually, one other one is worth saying.
There's a thing called stochastic quantization,
which begins from real valued probabilities,
and then makes quantum stuff out of that.
And the Bayesian mechanics as it is construed today is very close to stochastic quantization
in a few very key senses.
So one supposes it should be possible.
And that would be nice.
So that's the answer to one question,
is should be, but I don't know.
It would be cool.
As far as entanglement and other kinds of information theory,
I actually don't know very much about this.
Quantum information theory is something that is relatively new,
and a lot of people kind of in and adjacent to things like condensed matter theory
are very interested in this.
But I am behind on the literature, I think.
One of the things that does kind of lend itself to information theory in general
is the fact that Bayesian mechanics has these connections to maxent and Bayesian inference.
And these are, of course, ways of talking about information and information theory.
So, yes, my thought is something like entanglement,
which has information theoretic undertones, should also be possible.
But again, I don't know initially what precisely that would look like.
There is some literature out there that has to do with the free energy principle
in the context of information theory.
I am thinking of work due to Carl James Glazebrook and Chris Fields.
They've published a lot of work in this direction,
which is also something I'm not totally familiar with.
But again, it seems like a very rich area to eventually pursue connections in.
Great. And then the second question was about indistinguishability of particles.
And then Ali.
Ah, yes. Okay.
Yeah. So I suppose you're thinking of passing to these kinds of bosonic field theories
where you just pack a whole bunch of equivalent field states into your fox face
and see if you can make that make sense.
I think you may notice this when we get into the supersymmetry results,
is there is a conceptualization that, yes, things do change when you introduce bosonic looking things
as opposed to fermionic looking things.
So it does become important to keep track of the statistics of these particles
because that recovers things like BRST charges relating the two genres of particle.
And that is what gets the classical chaos in the last section.
So there is, yes, there is a reason to distinguish between the behavior of the particles in each theory.
I think the precise nature of that will become clearer once someone actually
knuckles down and does out Bayesian quantum mechanics
where we'll be able to couple directly to that kind of idea.
Awesome. A lot of fun topics.
The tunneling.
Do we have to visit every belief on the way from A to B?
Or, as it sometimes can seem, are we in one position
and then we are in a different cognitive position?
All different kinds of experimenter, experimented questions in cognitive science,
even potentially collective thought and ways of communication
in terms of these formalisms.
Yeah.
And the instanton question is pretty interesting as well, right?
Because it talks about if we have a system with multiple classical minima.
So if we can say, okay, you know, there are multiple optimal Bayesian beliefs
and instantons are the things that zip between those minima.
So it's a qualitatively different way of thinking about dynamical systems.
It's not a single minima and it's not a single classical trajectory.
It's multiple minima and it's almost like phase transitions between the two.
So certainly that's interesting from the point of view of physics,
excuse me, from physics.
But tracing it back to something like cognitive science,
thinking about, okay, what are the sort of phase transitions
between our beliefs?
And can we actually access other phases, right?
Do those instanton solutions actually exist?
And do they describe some kind of zipping between maybe generative models
or perceptory regimes or something of that nature?
It's very kind of nebulous, but it's a provocative question.
Excellent.
Oli?
Well, I was on the understanding that as we go from classical to statistical
and ultimately to quantum mechanics, the role of information and uncertainty
in describing and formulating the dynamics and mechanics of the physical systems
becomes more explicit.
So is it a correct assumption to say that Bayesian mechanics somehow aims to put information
back in the game and make it equally explicit through all of those mechanics?
Yeah, absolutely.
I think that's a good way of thinking about it, right?
The reason why Bayesian mechanics is so general, much like statistical mechanics is very general,
is because it's just about information.
And lots of things have information, even at the classical level.
We just usually neglect it because we don't need to think about it.
But it becomes very apparent, and this is part of the explanatory power of doing something like that,
it becomes very apparent that classical stuff comes about when that information goes away,
or rather when those probabilities, that uncertainty goes away,
that information becomes sort of limitingly large or infinite.
So what Bayesian mechanics allows you to do is actually keep track of how does information change
between these different scales, which is one particular payoff that I think makes it very valuable.
But not just bridging scales, also applying to many different scales,
because lots of things do have information.
Information is just a mathematical apparatus that we can use to describe lots of things.
So if that's all that your physics is built on,
then it will be, by consequence, something very general.
Awesome.
The way that it's coming to me today is in classical mechanics,
we get, especially once we understand these limits,
which classical mechanics is like a point within a broader space of physics or mechanics,
we get principles of least action and stationarity and laws of large numbers,
not unlike the central limit theorem in statistics and a lot of the esoteric Gaussian statistics,
in statistical mechanics, the probabilistic nature becomes formal.
For example, in the billiards case in classical mechanics,
you might want to do statistics across many slightly similar billiards games.
And so at that point, you could either do the plug and chug frequentist statistics,
or at some point, you're going to want to think a little bit more broadly about the distribution of billiards.
And then quantum especially makes the relationality and the modeler modeled dialectic formal.
Because just by doing statistics, you're already in an area of explicit relationality,
map territory distinguishing.
And then quantum takes that to another level.
And could it be said that with Bayesian,
we're even going a layer deeper into the modeler's approach to the system?
Where do you see this cognitive turn?
I think so.
I think so.
The idea would be eventually we introduce an actual idea of information,
which naturally kind of depends on the observer or the modeler,
because information is kind of modeler dependent, right?
Information has a context.
It has a context.
It has a, or is contingent on observation.
So when we start talking about surprisal and the dynamics of beliefs and inference,
all of these are very explicitly putting the modeler back in the situation.
And that may be in the very metaphorical sense of a system synchronizing with its environment.
It doesn't necessarily have to be a cognitive observer or a panpsychist kind of modeler.
I don't really think there's remit for that within the maths.
But the point is that the maths works with or without those assumptions.
So in a sense, it's actually agnostic to that.
And you can conjure an image of a modeler that is pure metaphor,
just talking about synchronization.
However, the language is pretty instructive.
And it does relate back to the idea that lots of systems have and can capture information,
maybe in a very trivial, not cognitive, not conscious-like sense.
But nonetheless, they do capture and synchronize to information,
and therefore they do model and they do inference.
Great. It's the classical, if a tree falls in the forest, does anyone hear it?
Exactly.
If a tree falls, does it make a noise?
Yeah. I mean, I think the answer would be,
it depends on what's synchronizing to the tree, right?
If the tree falls on, okay, this is going to be a pretty grim example, I guess,
but if a tree falls on some sort of small woodland critter, then yes,
I think the tree definitely fell.
Because the statistics of one thing synchronizing to the other one would say,
yeah, pretty unequivocally, the tree just fell.
But if you're not there, you're not synchronizing to the tree.
And so that information has no meaning to you whatsoever.
So it is very much about, as you've written,
modeler-dependent information in a very mathematically rigorous way.
Really powerful and also connects to a lot of qualitative and contemporary ideas.
So it's really exciting to think about where and how Bayesian mechanics can be applied.
This brings us, as we head into the z-score of plus one,
downhill on the Gaussian of the dot one, into the paper itself.
So we'll pause.
Ali and Jakob, if you have any questions.
Otherwise, we're going to go to the roadmap
and have some overview notes on the paper and its structure.
Does that sound good?
All right.
So pardon the meme.
But here's the roadmap of the paper, the sections and subsections.
So maybe just a general comment.
What did you include in the paper?
What did you not include in the paper?
Why did you structure it?
How you structured it?
Yeah, absolutely.
So the structure was kind of meant to reflect, I think, an unmet need in the literature,
which is both a single place for all of these results to be reviewed.
And then once that review has been done, an application of all those results.
So organize everything and then use it in a kind of insightful way.
And having all the rigorous stuff in the beginning makes the application make sense.
And having the application makes or provides context for all the very rigorous stuff at the beginning.
So to do that, it's kind of split almost down the middle.
So you have the sections one through four, all the foundational stuff.
And then sections five, six and seven are the actual applications.
So I began with a very brief introduction, just motivating precisely this.
Here are the questions that we're going to answer.
Here's how we're going to answer them.
Here's why it even matters.
In section two, I just very briefly review classical physics to set the stage for some of the stuff
that we've already discussed.
Then I talk about Bayesian mechanics itself.
And 2B through 2D are fairly long because this sets up all the basic machinery.
We begin with, I believe, to begin with, we talk about what does it mean for Bayesian mechanics
to be like classical mechanics?
What are the basics of it?
What is variational free energy?
What is surprisal?
What is least surprisal?
And then in C and D, these basic ideas can be used to figure out, okay, what does it mean
then to minimize surprisal?
How does that matter to Bayesian inference?
Physics of beliefs, physics by beliefs is then inverting the story and talking about,
okay, so we know now that systems, when they minimize their free energy, or minimize their surprisal,
they synchronize to their environment.
So you can write this nice story about parameters.
Can you do it the other way around?
Can you begin from the, no, I think I gave that in the wrong direction.
So when systems synchronize, they minimize their free energy.
So you can read this as Bayesian inference.
So then I ask, okay, can you do this the other way around?
Can you begin from Bayesian inference?
And can you get the dynamics of parameters?
Which is just kind of flipping the story, but it involves a bit of work to actually make it follow through.
In the end, however, it does.
And the relationship between the two, so I say physics of beliefs,
because one is taking the motion of parameters and relating it to the motion on statistical manifolds,
Bayesian inference.
Physics by beliefs is saying, okay, if we begin with some information theoretic idea of Bayesian inference,
do we get back the mechanics of systems carrying those beliefs?
That relies on some work that I did earlier this year,
which espoused a kind of duality between the free energy principle and maximum entropy.
So using that as a kind of technology, you can flip the story and say,
okay, if I start from an inferential principle, can I get physical stuff back?
Whereas the FEP is, I would think of it more as, if I start with physical stuff,
can I then understand the beliefs?
They are two sides of the same coin.
And on the nose, it's a very trivial symmetry between the two.
Of course, it takes a lot more work to make it formally make sense, but in the end, it does.
So that's section two.
Section three moves us into the first idea of actual results in the paper is to say,
okay, so if I have a classical system doing Bayesian inference or approximate Bayesian inference,
what does that look like?
And does it look like the free energy principle?
And then conversely, if I have an inferential principle, or if I have an informational physics,
can I use maxent as the dual to the FEP to get back the physical mechanics of this classical object?
And in both cases, the answer is yes.
And at the end of that section, I give an equation that does precisely that.
It takes the idea of mode matching and says, okay, here is how probabilities behave when you do mode matching.
And conversely, here is how modes behave when you minimize the free energy of those probabilities.
So in section four, I then talk about, okay, does this actually make sense in a physical setting?
Does it tell us anything insightful?
Or is it just a tautology that if you build in a classical mode and then take the limit to the mode,
then you get classical physics?
If you phrase it just like that, it doesn't seem very remarkable.
But for the reasons that I described about path integrals and the classical limit of the path integral,
it becomes a little bit more subtle.
And so we can actually derive something kind of interesting from the idea that classical stuff is the mode of quantum stuff.
So in the classical limit of quantum mechanics, systems that do approximate Bayesian inference exhibit classical physics.
I think that's really the payoff of that section.
And so it kind of justifies the rest of the set of questions that I ask,
because it becomes not just a worked example, but it does say something interesting about physics more broadly, I think.
Now we get into the application section.
So once that's done, we cool off a little bit and we just do an example of what does it mean to do mode matching.
This is simple enough to formulate.
And you can see the, in this case, the mode.
So mode matching is about stationary modes.
And it makes sense to talk about the classical physics of something at rest.
Now things that are at rest don't move.
So synchronization in this case is matching a mode to a stationary environment.
When a force is not acting on you, you don't move.
And this requires very little maths.
And at the end, one of Newton's other laws pops out that objects in motion stay in motion.
Objects at rest stay at rest.
So you get that back from section five.
From section six, you can talk about modes that move.
Well, you can talk about systems that move.
And there's actually a finer distinction in there that I precipitated just saying,
which is in one case, you can talk about a system that moves towards a mode.
So a system that tracks a mode, but eventually finishes in a stationary place.
And you can also talk about a system that chases a mode.
So we call this infinite mode tracking, or what you could think of this as mode chasing.
You could think of this as a primitive form of path tracking.
It's just the idea that things that go around in a circle,
you can look at it one of two ways.
You can look at it as an object.
And the example I use is satellite motion.
So the classical physics of celestial bodies, say, one thing orbiting around another.
You can either talk about this as a mode that is being tracked,
that is constantly in motion.
So you get infinite mode tracking.
Or you can talk about this as path tracking,
where the path is the circular path around the object.
And what we track is just that path.
And that is what is in 7a.
So I say in 6b, you can talk about this example as infinite mode tracking,
but it's kind of ugly.
It doesn't work very well.
So this justifies going to path tracking instead,
which is a much more elegant picture.
Conceptually, it makes a lot more sense.
And one of the problems specifically with 6b is that the idea of minimizing the surprisal of a mode
becomes kind of difficult,
because this system is non-stationary.
The mode is constantly moving.
And so the surprisal is constantly fluctuating.
But when you talk about the surprisal over paths,
it's much easier.
You can say, okay, we are actually genuinely minimizing the surprisal of paths,
because we are picking the path of least surprisal.
One thing that I didn't include in this section,
which is possibly interesting,
and I don't know, one of the nice things about preprints
is they are to some extent living documents.
So I could come back and add this in if I was so inclined.
In fact, I might.
Is the idea of moving centers of mass.
So path tracking combined with some kind of moving frame of reference.
The reason why I didn't include this is because the maths for that is not quite worked out yet.
But since then,
Lance D'Costa and others,
in a paper that is probably about to be released,
it's co-authored between myself,
Lance D'Costa,
Carl Friston,
Thomas Parr,
Connor Hines,
and Greg Pavliotis.
So all of the big mathematical minds behind the last few years of the FEP.
I think I named all the names.
If I forgot anyone,
then you'll have to excuse me.
There's some work in that preprint,
or that paper that's about to be preprinted,
that formulates path tracking in the context of moving frames of reference.
So not just moving modes along the path,
but also moving paths themselves.
So one extra kind of layer of generalization
is now you can talk about,
okay, what about when the path that I'm tracking
is itself moving?
And there is probably the machinery to handle that
in this paper that's about to be released.
Again, it's Lance, it's Carl,
it's Greg, Thomas, Connor, and myself.
So keep an eye out for that,
because there will be something about
moving frames of reference in that paper.
And I may decide to go back and add something like,
if I'm orbiting a body
that is itself in motion.
So if the center of mass that I'm orbiting
is itself orbiting around something else,
what does that look like
from the perspective of the thing in orbit?
That's an interesting case.
It's something that I didn't include
because it was still,
I think there wasn't an elegant way forward with that.
Now there probably is.
But carrying on,
7b is now relating
the idea of path tracking.
So the idea of a surprisal over paths,
relating that to the path integral approach
to Bayesian mechanics
and extracting some insights
from what it means to be a path integral.
And one of the things that one is allowed to do
in that context
is to then develop
a story about classical chaos.
And I think
we have
probably some slides later about that.
That deserves a much longer conversation.
But the idea of that section is to say,
okay, so we've done all this
arguably pretty trivial stuff.
Now, what about interesting systems
like systems that exhibit
chaos?
Can we actually describe those things
using Bayesian mechanics?
And the answer is we can.
And it comes out of the path integral description
in the nice way that
we have gestured at
with the name G-theory.
Nice.
Thank you.
Jakob?
I was waiting to ask this a bit later on,
but since you mentioned reference frames,
I'm wondering
what different sorts of reference frame
Bayesian mechanics deals with,
especially in connection to
recovering classical mechanics
from Bayesian mechanics.
The way I understand right now,
reference frame is basically imposed
by the Markov blanket.
So when we're talking about
the tree,
the tree branch performing inference
over its environment
and being shaken by
the incoming wind,
that's from the
kind of,
from the reference frame
of the tree.
How would that be different
if we considered
a,
our own reference frame
looking at the,
looking at the tree?
Would that,
could that still have a formulation
within,
within Bayesian mechanics?
And also,
how could this relate to
multi-agent systems
where we have
the classic example
that comes to mind
is clock synchronization
where clocks,
pendulum clocks initially
start out of phase,
but over time
go,
again,
in phase?
I think there's
a lot of different ways
to partition that system.
One clock
is performing inference
over the other,
is performing inference
over the other,
but then maybe
we can also treat it
as a,
as a coupled system
altogether
where we consider
both at the same time.
So,
I'm thinking
there may,
might be
some equivalent
of like a non-inertial
reference frame
in Bayesian mechanics
versus an inertial one
given by the Markov blanket
on that specific system.
So,
we'd be interested
to hear your thoughts
on that.
Yeah,
that's also
a good question.
So,
one of the things
that you can begin
to talk about
in this setting
is that
to some extent
the precise placement
of a Markov blanket
is a bit arbitrary.
And this is,
this kind of flexibility
is actually a good thing
because you do want
to be able to
nest blankets
within blankets.
There's reason
to believe
that that kind
of multi-scale
self-organization,
well,
that,
that multi-scale
patterning behavior,
that,
that multi-scale
separation
and,
and being able
to infer
not only
what my neighbors
are doing,
but being able
to infer
what the scale
above me
is doing.
there's reason
to believe
that that is
where self-organization
comes from
under the free energy principle.
And one of the reasons
to believe that
is work by,
for instance,
Mike Levin
in the context
of the kind of
cognitive nature
of developing cells,
right?
Cells that are
in a kind of
soup of things.
How do they know
to develop
into tissues?
there must be
some kind of notion
of nested blankets,
not only knowing
what am I
in relation
to others,
but what are we
in relation
to a larger scale
other?
So,
that,
that's very important,
nesting blankets.
Another really good
example of this
is in a paper
by Maxwell,
Alec Chance,
some other people
that I don't remember
offhand,
so I apologize,
called neural
and phenotypic
representations
under the free energy principle.
And it's exactly
the same sort of thing
if you have a soup
and they know
something about themselves
and also something
about something
at a higher level,
then you get
self-organization.
So it's,
it's not just about
kind of
self-organization
at the constituent level,
but it's knowing
something about
the pattern
that one
is organizing
into.
And,
and these are
two good examples
of that.
There are lots
of others.
things.
So,
so one imagines,
you know,
the,
the arbitrariness
of the Markov blanket
is important
because it allows
you to nest
things.
More generally,
it allows you
to change context.
And,
you know,
the,
the context
of information
is kind of
observer dependent.
So,
in a way,
you do want
to be able
to introduce
kind of arbitrary
frames,
and get
different kinds
of context
for,
for a given
observation set,
right?
You want to be able
to reassign
self and other
and still get
approximate Bayesian
inference.
This is what
we would think
of as a
gauge theory.
It's a symmetry
at the level
of the system
that is
not reflected
in the
physics of
the system,
by which I
mean,
you can make
free changes
at the level
of the system
that don't
change the
physics of
the system.
So,
in this case,
it's the idea
that we can
change a
reference frame,
we can change
the context
of an inference,
but it shouldn't
change the idea
that systems
do approximate
Bayesian inference,
much in the same
way that we can
change the way
we label coordinates
in general
relativity,
but it shouldn't
change the idea
that gravitation
is the curvature
of space-time
in some suitable
sense that has
to do with metric
tensors that I
won't talk too
much about.
So,
something like that
is absolutely,
I think,
not only
kind of useful,
but is absolutely
essential
to not only
making Bayesian
mechanics make sense,
it would be
kind of suspicious
if inference
just fell apart,
if you redrew
the boundaries,
especially given
our conversation
about the
scale-friendliness
of the FEP.
It should
apply and
reapply,
but also that
application and
reapplication and
contextualizing
inferences within
inferences is
kind of,
right now,
what is reflected
in the literature
when we really
think about,
okay,
how does
self-organization
work?
in these
situations?
And how does
individuation work
in these situations?
Or how are
patterns formed?
And I think
there's lots of
work in this
direction about
reference frames
and the
contextuality of
information outside
the FEP as well.
And I happen to
be familiar with
very specific
literature about
this in category
theory,
but I'm sure
it's more general
than that.
So you can
talk about
how does
context shape
an observation.
So,
yes,
I think,
yeah,
on the subject
of reference
frames and
synchronization,
it's important
to be able to
redraw
boundaries,
so take new
frames of
reference,
and still get
inference.
In the case of
synchronizing
pendulums,
you can imagine,
okay,
maybe the
pendulums do
inference on
each other,
or maybe they
do inference
on the,
kind of,
if they're on
some sort of
table or
moving beam,
maybe they do
inference on the
beam,
and they
synchronize with
the beam,
and therefore
they synchronize
with each other.
That's one frame.
The other frame
is one kind of
looking at the
rhythmic motions
of the other
one,
and just
matching up
like that.
In both
cases,
you get
inference.
We probably
prefer one
reference frame
or another,
but both are
in principle
mathematically
valid,
even if they
tell kind of
different physical
stories about
what's being
synchronized to.
And the
example of
half-tracking
in a moving
frame of
reference is
interesting as
well,
because if you
think about
something like
the moon
orbiting the
earth,
you can zoom
way out,
and you can
look at it
as the moon
spiraling around
the earth as
the earth goes
around the
sun,
but you can
also pick a
reference frame
where the earth
is stationary,
and the moon
is just orbiting
around the
earth.
So this is
the relativity
of motion,
right,
or if you
want to
imagine sitting
in a train,
it looks like
the,
outside is
moving,
and you're
stationary.
So that
would be
mode matching,
you're not
moving.
But from the
perspective of
the outside,
the train has
just gone
past pretty
quickly,
and you're
in the train,
and so you're
moving,
but from your
perspective,
you're not.
So the
relativity of
what is being
matched to
is an important
consideration for
those reasons,
just to produce a
consistent theory,
we have to
acknowledge that
we can freely
assign these
inferences.
The important
aspect is that
we get the
same inferences
back, or at
least we get
inference.
They might not
be the same
inferences if you
wrote them down,
they might be in
different coordinates,
so to speak,
but at the end
of the day,
you should still
get Bayesian
inference.
Now, I don't
remember your
second question,
so you'll have
to ask it
again.
I'm actually
not aware if
there was a
second question,
but I do have
a follow-up
question to
your answer.
Since you
mentioned nested
Markov blankets,
I'm just
wondering whether
in the
formalism of
Bayesian
mechanics, we
can also
admit a
kind of
dynamics on
the topological
structure of
the blanket
itself, because
in the case
of cells
forming other
layers,
intuitively,
it seems to
me that it's
a kind of
discrete way
of thinking
about how
we're adding
an extra
layer of the
Markov
blanket, and
maybe the
Markov
blanket
initially
admits
some
non-integer
index
connecting to
your prior
work on the
weak Markov
blankets, and
then it
evolves over
time to
form into
actually
statistically
significant
Markov
blanket.
But perhaps
there might
be also a
way for
having just
one Markov
blanket that
evolves through
time, and
that might
also change
the
inferences.
So I'm
wondering
whether
mechanics,
whether the
dynamics of
particular
blankets can
also be
taken into
account in
the path
tracking
formulation or
any other
one within
approximate
Bayesian
inference.
Yeah, so
there are a
couple of
interesting
things there.
For one
thing, the
idea that
perspective
matters, the
idea that
you pick a
reference
frame and
carve up
your
environment
that way,
does kind
of go back
to this
question of
how do we
understand
blankets
forming in
developing
cells, say.
And the
idea would
be that
blankets
have
characteristic
scales.
The reason
why we
see something
like a
stone in
nature and
not a
lattice of
crystalline
molecules is
because at
our level of
observation,
the blankets
that allow
these molecules
to be
self-organized
is completely
meaningless.
But what is
interesting to
our level of
observation, our
kind of
canonical
reference
frame, is
the stone
itself, the
blanket around
the stone
itself.
It's the
stone's
blanket.
It's not
the blankets
that make
the molecules
that make
the stone.
So, yeah,
you know,
eventually we
would want a
much more
complete theory
of individuation
that covers
not just
dynamical
blankets, but
nested blankets
blankets with
perspective and
things of
that nature.
The
perspective-based
idea is an
interesting one
to me because
it allows you
to talk
about things
like sparse
coupling at
certain levels.
And if we
acknowledge that
the Markov
blanket is
coming to a
blanket store
near you,
yeah, exactly.
If we
acknowledge that
the blanket is
somewhat arbitrary,
then we're free
to say that
any system
with enough
couplings has
a blanket at
some scale
because the
kind of
multi-scale
systems in
physics that
we're interested
in at some
scale are
sparsely
coupled,
probably not
every scale,
and certainly
within a
blanket,
there's not
sparse coupling
given a
particular reference
frame because
given the
reference frame
of myself
looking at
the stone,
looking at the
stone's blanket,
within that
blanket,
I would want
to see the
stone's
molecules
cohere in
a way that
is not
sparsely
coupled,
right?
Otherwise,
I wouldn't
see things,
but then at
the level of
the stone,
it is
sparsely
coupled.
So this
kind of
arbitrariness
allows us
to actually
do the
carving up
in a very
interesting
way.
As for
dynamical
systems
perspectives
on Markov
blankets,
I think
this is
also
possible.
I am
working on
something
right now
that takes
the whole
story about
physical
boundaries
and
conditional
independence
and writes
it in
terms of
random
variables.
You have
a whole
suite of
possible
blanket
states,
and you
can look
at blankets
flickering
on and
off,
or blankets
that occupy
different
states over
time.
This is
not nested
yet,
but it's
one step
towards that
direction
where you
can think
about how
the blanket
at a higher
level turns
on or off
given the
dynamics of
its constituents,
whether they're
cohering or
not.
So yeah,
maybe that
answers your
question.
this is a
great topic
to chill
on for a
few more
minutes in
our final
bit of
the dot
one.
There's
really a lot
here.
I'll just
give a few
dots,
and then
Ali,
happy to
hear your
perspective
as well.
You even
discussed it
as scale
friendly,
but it's
almost like
a one and
a half
layer model,
and that is
actually preceded
by even
simple
Bayesian
hidden state
observed
variable
distinctions,
expectation
maximization,
just partially
observable
Bayesian
models in
general,
under an
interpretation
where
observables are
happening at
a given
scale of a
system of
interest,
and a
hidden
phenomena
or a
hidden
cause is
at a
higher
level of
organization,
connects
the sort
of
multi-scale
systems
approach
with a
self-organization
approach,
and we've
talked many
times about
that lateral
and the
vertical,
there's the
nestmates
interacting
laterally,
and then
there's the
real or
as if
colony
level
organization.
Another
point I
think it's
really
interesting to
pull out
and explore
is you
discussed how
important it
is to be
able to
redraw
blankets
and still
get
inference.
It made
me feel
that there
has to
be some
kind of
a locally
distributed
local
sense-making
process
such that
potentially a
vast range
of partitionings
can also
remain valid.
Like,
you can
think of
different
metaphors
there,
and that
potentially
the blanket
provides
exactly that
partitioning.
Surprise,
surprise.
And then
moving towards
all these
features
that had
been in
the
spectator
seats at
the math
conference,
dynamical,
nested,
multi-perspective
systems,
and the
way that
some of
these
formalisms
are pointing
towards an
integration
that's
quite far
out in
some ways,
yet also
may bring
an intuitiveness
to a lot
of the
ways of
talking about
different
physical
systems,
including
the physics
of cognition.
and as
far as
nature at
the
joints,
perspectives
would be
one,
not the
only one,
but one
of those
joints or
sparse
connectivities
or factorizabilities,
various ways of
thinking about it,
but multiple
entities
engaging in a
multi-perspectival,
multi-scale
inference
question,
it's like
two people
looking at
the boat,
they might
disagree on
how to
partition
different parts
of the
boat or
the boat
from the
water,
but at
least their
perspectives
and their
communication
interface
with each
other and
their observation
inference
interfaces with
the boat
could be
specified.
And so
then it
could be
like my
map of
me,
my map
of you,
my map
of the
boat,
your map
of you,
your map
of me,
your map
of the
boat.
And then
there's a
conversation
with all
six of
those
features
instead of
us only
looking at
the boat
and you
did it
one way,
I did it
differently,
and that's
the end
of the
discussion.
So I
think it's
going to
open up
degrees of
freedom
in
perspective
harmonizing
that
wouldn't
be
classically
understood.
And that'll
be seen
as extremely
nonlinear
and
unconventional
behaviors.
And it
just remains
to be seen
what that
is.
I agree.
I'll take
this opportunity
to point
out there
are other
people in
the
Versys lab
who are
thinking about
that kind
of question.
How does
collaboration
and information
synthesis
and kind
of agreement
or goal
emergence,
how do all
these things
fit into
Bayesian
mechanics?
So people
like Maxwell
and
Maholt
are thinking
about if I
write down
these kinds
of problems,
is there a
way to talk
about agreement
as it
emerges
through
collective
discussions or
collaboration?
and it
is likely
something like
this.
It's agreeing
on a
reference
frame for
our
collective
observations
and agreeing
on not
just sense
making,
but it's
agreeing on
how to make
sense of
something.
So there's a
kind of two-step
process.
I learn
something,
figure it out,
I tell you.
You have your
own picture of
what this thing
looks like.
We agree on
a picture that
serves us
best.
We agree
on a
best reference
frame.
Yes.
Agreeing on
the sense
made is
deciding what
to order
after the
dish has
been cooked.
Exactly.
We need to
have a
conversation
about the
recipe and
so many
other things.
Ali?
Well,
I believe
this whole
argument
around
Markov
Blanket
and
especially
the
Nested
Markov
Blanket
or the
dynamic
nature
of them
can
potentially
be
connected
to
somehow
the
opposing
stances,
one of
which is
the
preformism
or
preformationism.
The other
one is
the
progressive
differentiation
mechanism
which
in the
preformism
some people
believed
that
the
topology
of the
whole
state
space
manifold
is
completely
preformed.
We just
don't have
enough data
to model
that accurately,
model the
state space
accurately.
But
for the
advocates
of the
progressive
differentiation
viewpoint,
they, on the
other hand,
believe that
it literally
goes, I
mean, the
state space
manifold
literally
undergoes
lots of
transformations
according to
some
inflection
points or
some
singularities
and it's
not
preformed
at all
and
the
dynamic
nature
of
the
state
space
manifold
is
something
inherent
to that.
It's
not
because
of
our
lack
of
enough
data
to
model
that.
So
I'm
not
sure
how
much
you
agree
with
that
viewpoint
something
that's
Yeah,
I think
sure,
I think
the
kind of
drawing
and
redrawing
of
Markov
blankets
is
probably
a point
in support
of the
idea
of
progressive
differentiation
because
at one
level
we think
of
drawing
and
redrawing
as
development
or
yes,
development
and one
of the
things
that
drives
development
is
something
like
fitness
pressure.
So
fitness
changes
the
constraints
on
what
sort
of
patterns
are
available
to
you,
what
ought
you
organize
into.
And
these
are not
things
that we
know
a priori
at the
level
of the
system.
It
may be
possible
that if
you write
down
a whole
kind
of a
world
model
of the
entire
universe
from
the
very
first
point
in
time
after
the
Big
Bang
or
maybe
even
at
the
instant
at
which
the
singularity
expanded
and you
had enough
computational
power to
trace it
all through
that you
could get
to
something
like
what is
it
preformationism
but that
strikes me
quite a
lot as
a kind
of
super
determinism
or
determinism
argument.
It sounds
a lot
like
some
kind
of
argument
that
there is
no
uncertainty
in how
you will
develop.
There is
just
uncertainty
in
what
you're
aware
of
as to
your
development
or
some
kind
of
hidden
variables
theory
that
says
there is
something
mediating
the way
your
state
space
looks
you
just
don't
know
it
and
so
you
have
the
illusion
of
free
will
so
this
becomes
a bit
of a
philosophical
question
I
myself
don't
really
buy
into
determinism
so
I
would
be
tempted
to
say
that
the
Markov
blanket
story
especially
dynamic
blankets
or
however
you
want
to
call
them
are
to
do
with
progressive
differentiation
as
we
live
our
lives
we
draw
and
redraw
individuate
ourselves
from
other
systems
and
the
environment
and
this
is
something
that
we
are
in
control
of
certainly
locally
in the
state
space
we're
in
control
of
it
whether
there
is
some
hidden
variable
guiding
our
own
actions
is
something
that
is
I think
strictly
speaking
a
different
question
the
nice
thing
about
it
is
whether
it's
true
or
not
it
doesn't
break
the
locality
of
the
Markov
blanket
construction
so
we
get
this
idea
of
locally
progressive
differentiation
as a
Markov
blanket
and
then
when
we
zoom
way
out
it
may
be
a
different
story
but
certainly
locally
it
works
as
a
dynamic
process
well
we
almost
got
to
the
paper
this
was
an
awesome
discussion
so
Ali
and
Jakob
if
you
would
like
to
have
any
closing
remarks
well
I
just
want
to
say
that
I
truly
enjoyed
our
discussion
today
and
I
very
much
look
forward
to
that
too
because
I
have
a
bunch
of
questions
that
I
didn't
have
a
chance
to
ask
about
some
of
the
sections
of
the
paper
so
I
just
wanted
to
thank
Dalton
for
his
time
and
also
for
Jakob
and
Daniel
for
organizing
these
extremely
fruitful
and useful
discussion
sessions
and live
streams
so
yeah
I'm
very much
looking
forward
to
the
next
one
thank
you
Jakob
yeah
this
was
an
amazing
amazing
dot
one
thanks
thanks
a lot
Dalton
for
all
the
great
answers
and
overviews
of
course
Ali
and
Daniel
for
doing
bulk
of
the
work
on
the
slides
and
yeah
looking
forward
to
the
dot
two
Dalton
any
last
thoughts
no
just
thank
you
for
having
me
I
did
really
enjoy
it
and
thank
you
of
course
for
all
the
background
work
that
you
put
in
it's
as
I
said
it's
very
flattering
to
see
such
detailed
working
through
of
my
work
so
thank
you
for
that
and
I
am
looking
forward
to
the
next
episode
excellent
well
next
week
us
and
anyone
else
who'd
like
to
join
just
get
in
touch
or
submit
any
questions
or
topics
so
thank
you
fellows
see
you
later
okay
cheers
thanks
to

## 2SuBJBEg9LI

Hello everyone, welcome.
It's ACT-INF livestream number 49.2 on October 12, 2022.
Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.
We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing
applied active inference.
You can find us at some of the links on the page.
This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve
our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for
livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about the kinds of projects and learning groups
you can get involved in.
And we're here in stream number 49.2 in the third video of our explorations of the paper,
a worked example of the Bayesian mechanics of classical objects in the .0.
Jakob and Ali and I provided some background and context.
Then last week in 49.1 with Dalton, we all convened and we had a great discussion and went through
a lot of that context again.
And that set us up very well today for 49.2 to be primarily going through the paper, which
is very exciting.
So we'll begin with just saying hello and anything else we'd like to add on this Wednesday, and
then we will head right in.
So I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California, and I guess I'm excited to get to the paper and understand
what points are touched upon and why.
And I'll pass to Jakob.
Hello, I'm Jakob.
I'm a student in the UK, and I'm excited to talk about the different faces of Bayesian mechanics,
how they are related, how they are different.
I'll pass it to Ali.
Hello, I'm Ali.
I'm an independent researcher from Iran.
Again, I'm very excited to be here as well.
Last week we had a truly amazing discussion with Dalton, and I'm very much looking forward
to continue our journey through this fascinating paper today.
I also have a bunch of questions I'd like to ask, especially when we come to the section
four on quantum ontology.
And I'll pass it to Dalton.
Okay.
Well, I'm Dalton.
I'm a mathematician and a physicist currently based at Stony Brook University.
I'm also at the Versys lab, where a large part of my research program right now is to
do with the maths and physics of the free energy principle.
So I'm pleased to be here.
Thank you for having me.
And I'm happy to get the conversation underway.
All right.
Well, we've looked previously at the roadmap.
So let's just take one last glimpse at our map before we go, you know, white knuckle on
the steering wheel.
Maybe just one overview, Dalton, if you could provide what sections are addressed and what
is the general anatomy and physiology of the paper?
Yeah, of course.
So as we were talking about last time, the structure of the paper partially reflects the environment
that it was written in, in a way that is or has come to characterize the free energy principle.
So there's, it's kind of funny in that sense.
One of the things that was a kind of unmet need was a nice paper relatively contained that
drew together some of the recent ideas that have been written in the past six months or
so about what we've called Bayesian mechanics.
And there are a few key papers that are then kind of summarized and put on stage in the first,
maybe four sections.
And then sections five through seven are actually taking all of that summary and putting it into
a worked example of what Bayesian mechanics looks like.
So we have a lot of rigorous development to begin with.
And then we actually use some of that in the wild and show, okay, so if you're actually
to treat this algorithmically and go and compute something using this framework, what would
it look like?
So in a way it's, it's kind of split roughly along mathematical and physical lines.
If you'd like to think of it that way, mathematicians really like foundational rigorous stuff.
And then physicists really like to be able to compute things and say something about models
of the physical world.
So in a way it's, it's trying to meet both of those kinds of metal logical needs.
And that's the reason why it's, it's structured this way.
So as we go through, you'll see at some point, there's a bit of a phase transition where we
go from here, all the basic ingredients here, what they mean and how they ought to be used
to here is how we actually use them.
Hmm.
We'll keep an eye out for that time post.
And we'll be paying attention to the equations as part of our preparatory work here.
It just, um, those on the live stream will see a subset of our coda page where we have
all of the equations and some awesome annotations by Ali.
So we'll be able to look at the paper and also bring in some pre screenshotted formalisms
and we'll, uh, journey forth.
So beginning with, uh, the introduction, what did you aim to set up in the introductions?
What did you, um, enter?
What did you want people to have, uh, prepared or their state when they entered the introduction
and leave it?
And also I'm a little curious about the acknowledgements at the end of the first section.
Mm-hmm.
Of course.
Yeah.
So if, if you go and it might benefit me to have a copy of this, uh, in front of me as
well.
So give me one moment to bring that up.
Um, but one of the things that I wanted to do with the introduction was really roadmap exactly,
uh, what I had just described, which is that in the last, uh, couple of years and especially
the last six months, um, there's been a lot written about this thing called Bayesian mechanics.
Uh, and it is a bit of a different take on what has traditionally been written as the free
energy principle.
So if you're in the active inference literature, or if you're in the, um, predictive processing
literature, this is probably new to you.
And likewise, um, if you are, if you're coming from conventional stochastic process theory,
uh, then you're probably not familiar with the specific technique or philosophy underlying
Bayesian mechanics.
So that's probably new to you as well.
So the idea of the introduction is just to set out, okay, here is Bayesian mechanics.
Um, we've talked a lot about it in these previous papers and, um, it was probably time to set out
in detail.
What is it and why are we interested in it and how do we use it?
Which is of course, later on in the papers, the work example.
Uh, so in the beginning of the introduction, I just lay out, okay, here is what we have called
Bayesian mechanics.
And here is under what circumstances is it useful?
Uh, which introduces the idea of synchronization, uh, in the first and second, uh, paragraphs.
Uh, and then in, in the third paragraph, uh, on the third page, uh, well, the third paragraph,
the first one on the third page, uh, I, I describe, uh, this idea that there hasn't really been a kind
of worked example of this yet.
Uh, so, so some of the, uh, theory, uh, has been worked out in previous papers.
Some of them mine, some of them, um, are, uh, co-authored with other people.
Some of them are from, uh, Carl's group at the welcome center at, uh, UCL.
Um, but, but in all of those, um, papers, they're primarily theoretical, uh, except for certain,
uh, kind of algorithmic papers, mostly out of the control theory literature.
So it is worth complementing this unified view that I try and describe, uh, taking in the introduction
with an application of that unified view, uh, if for no other reason than to, uh, give it some
concrete particulars.
Uh, so that's actually a phrase from category theory, which is probably, um, appropriate,
given that, um, category theory is, is very interested in the general and the abstract,
um, and, uh, and not so much in the concrete particular.
Uh, in fact, I think that was a phrase from, uh, Lovere, who's one of the, uh, most, uh, famous
well-known category theorists.
Um, so, so it is kind of appropriate then that part of the motivation for at least the second half
of the paper is to say, okay, we've done all this theory work and we've laid out,
here's precisely what this thing Bayesian mechanics is.
Um, and then to, to give it some, uh, kind of meat to grab onto if you're someone that likes to
actually write models or understand how to, uh, shuffle symbols around in an equation and really
work with things, then, uh, here is something for you that, that will actually kind of, uh,
make things make sense to you.
Awesome.
And yes, this is quite, uh, not an indictment, but just reflecting the very rapid pace of
development that much has been discussed around the role of Bayesian mechanics as a conceptual
integrator or unifier, yet the, uh, concrete particulars remained to be demonstrated.
Of course. Yeah. And as you say, it's not an indictment because there is a place for both.
And, um, of course I'm biased coming from a very, uh, strong mathematical background.
Um, but I think it is, it is better to go with the more general, um, more abstract, uh, and it's
better to build theory rather than just deploy it.
Uh, but it's, I mean, there's room for both and, and they serve different needs.
So doing exclusively one or the other is, uh, in my opinion and in my research, not the best way
to approach a problem, uh, because you need to be able to build the techniques that solve the problems.
Then you also need to use them to solve problems. Um, so yes, not an indictment, but, um, uh, maybe a
striking observation that there's been a lot of the abstract stuff and maybe something, uh, more
concrete has been missing historically in the literature.
Awesome. And then any thoughts on the last paragraph or the, uh, unusual positioning of the acknowledgements
paragraph? Um, no thoughts on the last one. I think the last one just, uh, draws all of those ideas
together and also says, um, one of the reasons why this approach is interesting is it, it recovers some
things of independent mathematical interest, um, which is, uh, what I gesture at in the last sentence.
Um, I put all of my, uh, acknowledgements at the end of the introduction. I think, uh, that's just
something that I developed a quirk maybe, although I think it's common, well, it's relatively common in
mathematical papers to put the acknowledgements, um, right after the introduction. Uh, so I, uh, I,
well, unusual maybe with respect to other fields that I think put it, uh, after the conclusion or
after the last section and before the references. Um, I, I like it there. I like it right after the
introduction, uh, because I think it gives credit, uh, more visibly. Um, mathematical writing is kind of
unique in that, uh, often you are writing alone, but thinking together. And so the, the end product,
the paper itself is not always reflected. And in fact, it's rarely reflective of the mathematical
thinking that went into it. So it's good to front load that information. It's good to say straight away,
um, here are the people that I thought about this problem with. And, and that's what went into this
paper's contributions, intellectual contributions from all of these people that I had conversations with
or bounced ideas off of. Um, and so, so the acknowledgement is right there in the beginning.
Awesome. Makes a lot of sense. Okay. So into section two on mechanics of reach section,
I'll just kind of start up a new page and we can bring in equations and quotations as seen fit.
So let's just begin with section two, a classical physics in one dimensions. Why start here? And what
does this section say? Yeah. So, um, section two, a is, uh, just a very brief summarization of, uh,
what is classical mechanics? Uh, so this is important for two reasons, really. One is it allows me to talk a
little about, uh, uh, the basic building blocks that I'm going to use in the second, excuse me, second half of the paper.
Uh, so, so we start off on a point of familiarity, uh, and, uh, if not, then, you know, all of that is, is built up so that, uh,
later on the rest of the paper is, uh, at least referencing something that has already been discussed.
Um, so I just, uh, in terms of layout, it makes sense to get these preliminaries, uh, done first.
Um, the other thing is of course, one of the points of the paper, or at least one of the motivations,
is that, uh, Bayesian mechanics is a mechanical theory, just like any other mechanical theory.
Uh, and so to really, uh, make that analogy come across, uh, it was good to investigate, okay, well,
what are mechanical theories? What does that really mean? Uh, so in the context of classical mechanics,
uh, what do we mean by the interaction of, um, stationary action principles and laws of motion and, uh, dynamics,
and all these things that we talked about in the, uh, previous episode? Um, what do all those look like
in classical mechanics? And then the kind of the metallurgical point of the paper in some sense,
uh, well, I don't know, you could argue that this is the point of the paper is to make the analogy
precise to point out that, okay, all these things that live in Bayesian mechanics are things that live
in mechanical theories that map onto something like classical mechanics and that you can prove this.
So really, in some sense, the paper is an extended exercise in proving that that map between something
that we know very well and something that we maybe don't exist. Um, but I, I would argue at least that
that's only window dressing, the real point of the paper being, um, proving stuff about Bayesian mechanics,
uh, and, and classical mechanics is just a useful analogy. Um, but I think the way it's shaped up,
it kind of does both. And you could argue that, uh, yeah, it does one or the other with, you know,
one in service of the other, but, but how that relationship goes, I think is maybe open to
interpretation just the way that the paper evolved. Uh, regardless, the reason why we start with classical
physics is to put all those pieces on the board so that later on, we can go and use them.
Awesome. So equation one and 1.1, just using a decimal point to reflect on numbered formalisms that
follow a numbered formalism. Um, where do we get on the first page with these equations one through two?
Yeah. Um, equation one is, is starting really from the, the very basics. Uh, so this is the action
functional, um, and in particular, it's the action functional for, uh, classical mechanics in the
Lagrangian setting. Um, equation 1.1 is the result of, uh, finding the, uh, path of least action or the,
the stationary action. Uh, so mathematically the way that is done is, uh, by finding what's called the
Euler-Lagrange equation. Uh, and, and that's what this is. So if you, uh, if you apply the Euler-Lagrange
equation to the action, uh, then 1.1 is the result. Uh, and what is interesting about that is that gives
you back, uh, Newton's second law, uh, F equals ma. And the reason why is because the, uh, derivative of
v with respect to q, so the, the gradient of a scalar potential is a force acting on something.
And the Euler-Lagrange equation tells us that, that that force is equal to the mass times the time
derivative of velocity, which is the acceleration. Uh, so the, the chain of reasoning goes that beginning
from an optimization principle, you get a law of motion and that, that kind of embodies, uh, a,
that embodies classical mechanics in the case when you begin from the classical action and you get
Newton's, uh, second law. Um, so the, the idea is, and the reason why this is mentioned is it calls back
the reasoning, uh, in, uh, the paper on Bayesian mechanics, uh, physics of and by beliefs, I think
is the full title, which, uh, tells us that, you know, in the same way that this exists in classical physics,
um, Bayesian mechanics has its own analogy to this. So if we want to regard this as a kind of
informational physics, then we can begin with some kind of action functional, in this case,
the surprisal or the free energy functional, depending on the situation. And then somehow, um,
the thing that optimizes that is a law of motion that, uh, describes some kind of dynamical system.
Uh, and in the informational or Bayesian case, that is approximate Bayesian inference. Uh, and then,
uh, once you have that law of motion, you can start plugging things in and get dynamical theories,
uh, based on certain, um, boundary conditions, uh, like, uh, the, the initial conditions or data
about what these symbols actually mean. So in the classical case, you're wondering, okay, what is
precisely the potential that I'm interested in? What is, what is the mass? What is the initial,
uh, velocity and position? Um, and in Bayesian mechanics, you might be interested in, okay,
where is the boundary for the Markov blanket? Um, what do my internal states mean? Uh, so what kinds
of systems am I actually interested in? Uh, what are they doing inference over? So what is the
environmental states they're trying to infer, or at least what do they look like to the system?
Uh, and, and so once you do that, you can start getting from this general law of motion,
this general approximate Bayesian inference idea. Um, you can get actual dynamical things, uh, and,
and models of real situations. Uh, and so the reason why, um, that's kind of nice is because then the whole
last half of the paper is, is exactly, well, what does it mean to produce a dynamical system out of this
law of motion? If I have this very general idea of approximate Bayesian inference, what does it mean
to actually start writing down models of things? Uh, and, and it is precisely the worked example
in the latter half of the paper that, that gives you that back. Awesome. Jakob, Orly, anything?
Or will continue to be? Well, not for now, but okay, I'll definitely have some questions later.
Okay. Classic. Section 2b or not 2b question. Let's go 2b. Uh, yes, that's always good, I think. Um,
in this section, uh, it is basically running through the same, um, reasoning at a very high level. Uh,
and so this subsection 2b, uh, is all about, okay, what is Bayesian mechanics? What do we mean by
uh, Bayesian mechanics? And in a way it is kind of, um, it plays on this theme of the, uh, paper I just
mentioned, this on Bayesian mechanics paper very nicely, because this gives us, okay, here are the
basics of what we're talking about. Um, here are all the important ingredients, and then the subsections
that follow, uh, are trying to build out, okay, what do we mean by it's a physics of beliefs?
And then what do we mean by it's a physics by beliefs? Because both of these are kind of imprecise,
um, terms, and so defining these phrases in a way that, uh, is a little more enlightening is a nice way
of, uh, fleshing out this section and the contributions of the paper. So, uh, 2b is,
is about, uh, the basics of Bayesian mechanics, and it just kind of introduces the idea. What do we
want from Bayesian mechanics? What is it trying to do? Um, how does it fit into the free energy principle?
Uh, how does it fit into stochastic process theory? Uh, and so you'll see in the, in this section,
a lot of it is just building up the idea that, uh, systems that minimize surprisal, uh, as the kind of
law or the optimization principle that they follow, uh, exhibit a kind of law of motion like, um, Newton's
law and its approximate Bayesian inference, uh, and that that follows from this reasoning about things that
synchronize and minimize surprisal, um, do approximate Bayesian inference about the parameters of the
probability density of the system to which they're coupled. Uh, so a lot of, a lot of this section is
just, um, the very fundamentals and, um, we can go through, I think, equation by equation and maybe, um,
clarify, uh, what those things mean. Uh, that might be a good way of extracting some insight from this.
So, so this is exactly the, uh, uh, what I was describing, you know, what are the kind of, um,
important ingredients? What's the basic setting of Bayesian mechanics? Uh, and you'll see on, um,
equation on, uh, what is it? Page five in equation three, um, we begin just from a stochastic
differential equation. So this is some, um, kind of random variable, uh, that evolves through time
according to, uh, not only a, uh, drift, so some kind of average path or, uh, vector field, uh, on the
value of the random variable at a given time, but also this noise term at the other end of it.
Um, so these, these are modeled on what we call controlled rough paths in stochastic process theory.
And it's, uh, so you can think of this as just an ordinary differential equation with, uh, an incoming
signal and the signal is the noise. It's this DW thing is, um, a, what's called a Vena process. It's just white noise.
Uh, so you have your, uh, your differential equation, and then you have some kind of random signal coming into it.
Uh, the idea of stochastic process theory is, okay, how do we make sense of the, uh, kind of equation that we're looking at here?
And in particular, you know, there are a couple of ways of making sense of it.
One of the interesting ones, uh, is looking at as this thing, uh, produces trajectories. So random sample paths.
Uh, how do we understand the statistics of those sample paths and thereby understand something about
what the system is doing at an ensemble level?
Um, one of the ways of doing that, and this gets into the, uh, next page and the following equations
is by understanding, okay, so what is the probability of a path?
Um, and, and that's equation five, uh, but that needs, uh, you know, some machinery. We can't just fabricate,
uh, kind of arbitrary probability over paths. So where do we get that from?
Uh, and that comes from a least action principle, uh, just the same as it did in classical physics.
So, so that's really the, uh, the, I think primary point of this section is, is just to begin with,
or at least one of the primary points of this section is just to begin with, um, already some of
the analogy is, is taking shape because we begin from a least action principle. So S
is again, an action functional, just like it was in the previous subsection. And, uh, Omega is, um,
a realization of noise. This, so it's, uh, you, you can imagine it as just being one of these, uh,
kind of incoming signals. So what is the, what is the noise that I'm putting into the system?
And, and of course that's, that's where your randomness is coming from.
So that's what we're interested in when we're interested in probabilities over paths is really,
how does a realization of noise or a configuration of noise affect the underlying sample path?
Uh, and that comes from this, uh, action. So the probability is just kind of the exponentiation of this thing,
uh, which, um, comes from stochastic process theory. Uh, the same thing arises in the path integral
formulation of quantum physics. So in, in, uh, that context, we're often interested in what is the
transition probability of a particle through space time. Uh, so that's nothing but asking what is the
probability that a particle moves from point A to point B, uh, given, um, a particular fixed, uh, initial
point, what is the probability that it takes a particular path from A to B? So, um, path integrals
are like, uh, path probability densities, or at least they produce these things. Uh, so the, it's,
it's interesting and it's not a coincidence that the same thing shows up there, that if you take the
action on paths and you just put E to the minus S, then you get a path integral. Uh, although I've, uh,
I've kind of left some details out, uh, because that's a path integral for a statistical, uh, field theory
in, uh, kind of, uh, what we call after wick rotation. And so the, in quantum field theory, we add an I,
it's an imaginary, uh, variable, but these things are mathematically, um, transferable. So it doesn't
really matter for our purposes, uh, in what context we talk about them. Uh, so, so that's, that's where
equation five comes from is if we have this action and we just do E to the minus S, then, uh, what we
get is a path probability density. Um, and, and as you've written there, uh, this, um, again, it doesn't
come out of nowhere. It's, uh, it's consistent with, um, stochastic process theory. Uh, so all of the
sample paths of a stochastic process, uh, if they're continuous, they live in what's called an abstract
Wiener space and the, uh, probability density over an abstract Wiener space is exactly this E to the minus
S, uh, thing. So, so that's where that comes from. And it's, uh, it's nice that that kind of falls out of
Bayesian mechanics, um, very naturally. So if you begin from the reasoning that we want an action and
the least action principle, and that, that tells us something about the, uh, trajectories of the system,
then there is a very canonical way to get back the, uh, Wiener measure. Um, it's not surprising in some
sense, but it's nice that it's consistent with that. So, uh, I, I talk a little about, okay, what is this,
what does this mean and how is this equivalent to a surprisal? Because I think that's important too.
Um, and, uh, so the action that I talked about previously, I guess we'll call it 4.1, um, does come from
the, uh, yes, so 4.1, uh, that S is equivalent to the surprisal. And, and that comes from if you just
put a logarithm on both sides of equation five, you get log P equals, uh, minus S. And, uh, so if you
put a minus on both sides and you get minus log P equals S. So the surprisal of a trajectory is
equivalent to this integral over time of the, uh, noise squared. Uh, so by the way, I don't know that I
defined, um, those brackets, but the, uh, brackets just means you take the two things inside the
bracket and you multiply them by each other. So, so really this is just the integral through time
of the noise squared. And that that is equivalent to the surprisal, uh, is more interesting for our
purposes because it means the converse also holds. If you start from the point of the abstract
Venus space and you write down the correct action, then you get, uh, Bayesian mechanics back as the
idea that something that minimizes its action in the right, in the Bayesian mechanical setting,
minimizes its surprisal. Um, so I'll let you write that down, uh, and then we can carry on, I think,
from page seven, because the rest of page six is just, uh, saying all of that.
Sure. I think surprisal may be more conventionally understood in a statistics framework, but what is
action and this, is this related to me moving my arm action or what do we mean by action here?
Yeah. Uh, so in the context of, um, physics and mechanics, um, an action is, uh, a functional,
so it takes a function and it gives you back a number. Um, and as a functional, what it does is
it gives you a kind of a weight or a cost associated with a trajectory. So if you write down a path
through space or through space time as a specific function, then the action takes that function and
gives you back the cost of taking that path. And so the, um, idea in classical mechanics is, okay, the,
uh, the cost associated to a path is based on, uh, how much extra energy does it take if you, if you take
that path from A to B. Um, and extra energy is kind of circular in the sense. It kind of presupposes
the, uh, uh, least action path exists, but then, uh, if you'll allow that for a moment,
then the idea is, okay, so there should be a path that uses the least extra energy to get from A to B.
Uh, and in doing so, it produces the least cost. So finding the least action path, the path of minimum
action, uh, is the way, the optimal way to get from A to B. Uh, and in, in classical physics,
paths of least or stationary action more generally are the only acceptable paths. Um, when you start
to introduce noise, it becomes a probabilistic judgment. So paths of least surprise are the most
likely paths. You have other ways to get from A to B as well. Uh, if there are like very large
fluctuations, for instance. Um, so, so in, in that sense, you can think of action as kind of a loss
functional, um, or, or something analogous to it in the machine learning world, because it, it is a
judgment about how good, um, a path from A to B is.
So before we go to the next section, Ali or Jakob, do you want to add anything?
Okay. That was page six. Now we're going to page seven.
Yeah. So then I, um, go on with this story about synchronization, uh, which is, is introduced here in,
in some greater detail than has previously been done, I think, which is one of the points of the paper.
Uh, so I begin by saying, okay, let's take two, um, random dynamical systems, uh, which I, I call
eta and mu. Um, this is kind of, uh, well, it's not kind of, it is an abuse of types. So just be aware
when you're reading this, um, eta and mu are states of the random dynamical system. But a random
dynamical system, uh, is a bit more complicated than that. There's more, uh, machinery going on in
the background. Um, however, just like we would write, uh, kind of a big capital X as a random variable.
Um, so we name the, uh, SDE after the values of its states. Um, we can do the same with the random
dynamical system. If we wink and nod and, and remember that that's not quite correct. Um,
but, uh, it's, it's also worth pointing out that a random dynamical system can be identified with an SDE
under the right circumstances, um, and that you do so very easily. Uh, so this, this is totally consistent
with the, um, previous discussion. Uh, and I, I have a paper forthcoming that does that in a bit more
detail. Uh, so it's, it's continuing along these lines and saying, okay, um, if we begin from this
Bayesian mechanical story of systems that are coupled to each other, do inference, um, and if they are
random dynamical systems, then that inference is, uh, meaningful and comes with a path probability
density and all this, um, that's in, uh, greater detail in this forthcoming paper. Uh, so, so anyway,
that's kind of technical remarks, um, but just keep in mind in that, in that first sentence, there's a
bit more going on there, uh, but I'm allowed to do that because it all works out anyway. Uh, and then
we begin with this thing about synchronization. So, you know, when you, uh, consider coupled systems,
then those systems synchronize. So, so there's some relationship between the statistics of those two
systems. Uh, and, and that is this, uh, sigma function that is given in earlier literature by,
people like, um, Carl and people in his group. Uh, so the sigma is relating the average, um, internal
state to the average external states. It's even called the synchronization function in that, um, literature.
Uh, and in this case, we actually also want to be able to say, um, not only a state at a given time,
but also that the paths of the system synchronize. So taking it a little bit more generally than has
been written, uh, before, you know, we now want to be able to say that, okay, so now, uh, the,
the trajectories of the random dynamical systems, um, synchronize. So how one evolves depends on how
the other evolves, which is, um, conceptually is, is fine. Um, and relates all to things that have
already kind of been worked out like active inference, you know, how an active inference agent evolves
through time depends on how its environment evolves through time and vice versa, because, um,
um, active inference agents can act on their environment and change it. Uh, so, and, you know,
control systems more generally are, uh, things that fit into this trajectory-based, uh, formalism.
So, uh, then I talk a little about, um, surprisal. So what does it mean that systems that synchronize
their surprisal, uh, and there's a lot of, there's a lot to detail in, uh, this section. There's a lot of
stuff that, that goes along with that statement, but ultimately it's just saying that systems that
synchronize with each other, um, almost by definition are minimizing the magnitude of fluctuations
away from whatever is being synchronized to. So this relationship means that you are minimizing
your surprisal if surprisal is defined as deviations away from the thing that is being synchronized to.
So that I think, um, again, that's, that's almost, um, a tautology, but, uh, that's, I think, kind of
the power of the framework is you begin from this statement that makes, um, almost, uh, trivial conceptual
sense. And then it's, it gives you some kind of actual useful model of what the internal dynamic
of some system are doing. Uh, and that's, that's at the end of, uh, page seven.
Great. I'll ask a specific and a general question from the chat. So first the specific question, and
just let me know which equation to look at. Martin Beal asks, what is the relationship between X of T
and gamma? Um, gamma is a path. So it's a realization of, uh, X T the random variable X of T is just another
way of writing gamma. Um, I do it in a couple of different ways, uh, just to drill down the point
that, uh, lots of different literature, lots of different ways of seeing this thing are all the same.
So for instance, gamma is used in the literature around maximum caliber, which is maximum path
entropy. Um, X of T is kind of consistent with this functional idea. So regarding a path as a function,
um, and then plugging it into the, uh, functional and seeing, okay, what is the surprise? What's the,
the cost associated with this path? Um, and you'll also see, I think Q of T later in the paper. And
that's interesting because Q is the, uh, the variable and Q of T is conventionally used in
classical physics literature. Um, just again, as a mathematical convention. Um, so anyway,
yes, to answer your question, gamma is just this X of T there, there are different labels for the same
object. Okay. And Martin follows up, is this synchronization an additional assumption to
Bayesian mechanics or is it part of the assumptions for it? And then is X of T gamma of T?
Um, okay. So the idea of synchronization is critical to Bayesian mechanics actually telling you anything
useful. Um, because the whole story about, uh, coupled things do inference on each other is something
that follows from, uh, this synchronization. So the whole story about a prox of Bayesian inference,
um, follows from the coupling. So synchronization is an important assumption. Um, one thing that you can
do, however, is to prove that things that synchronize, um, are coupled and vice versa, things that coupled,
uh, are synchronized. Um, and this is, uh, at least shown in, uh, paper I have from earlier this year
called towards a geometry and analysis for Bayesian mechanics. I, I believe that's in, um, lemmas 4.2 and
4.3 and maybe theorem 4.2. Um, so it's shown that if you, you know, if you write down two coupled systems,
then you can get the, um, statistics to synchronize. That's not really, it wasn't difficult to show,
um, and it's not really surprising, but, but that is something that you can show. Um, gamma of T,
I don't think I use gamma of T in the paper. Um, maybe I use gamma sub T, so gamma T, like, uh, sort of
offset from, from the main line. Um, gamma sub T, uh, is, uh, again, the same notation that's, um, used
elsewhere. Uh, so it just means a, a path at a particular time point. So it's just a state,
a realization of the random variable, um, at that time. Okay. And then the more general question
before we head on was from Dave who wrote, what does using energy mean? For example, is that extracting
potential energy and transferring that withdrawal to kinetic energy or the relevant analogs?
Yeah. Um, in the context of an action functional, that's exactly what it means. Uh, so this transfer
of potential energy to, um, energy of motion, uh, which is kinetic energy. Um, yeah, I think, uh, there is a
discussion of this, a kind of conceptual discussion of this in the, on Bayesian mechanics paper, um,
somewhere in section two, I think. Uh, and it's, it's the idea that, okay, when we talk about minimizing
action, it's about, you have some energy budgets, your potential energy, um, and you want to know,
okay, what is the most efficient way of using that budget? What is the most, uh, what is the way that
transfers potential energy to kinetic energy with the least accumulated, uh, loss over time? Um, and
physically that is just following a force gradient. Uh, so if you, if you try to do extra, if you try to,
um, wiggle your way through the force gradient, you now need to invest more potential energy,
um, but you're getting to the same spot. Uh, so that's not necessarily what you want to do.
Uh, so this is why the Euler-Lagrange equation is kind of interesting because it tells us what we
intuitively expect is the, the most efficient way of transferring an energy budget to actual motion
is just following along a force gradient. And that's why we see things like, um, Newton's law that,
uh, the acceleration of the system is always the force acting on it, um, or is in proportion to it
anyway, because you also have this mass constant. Awesome. On to page eight, equations six, seven, and eight.
Yeah. Um, so this is setting up the, uh, the variational free energy. So we have, uh, in six and seven, um,
we have the kind of traditional, uh, factorization that, that we've seen in a lot of this literature,
uh, which is here is the free energy functional with the, um, joint density, the kind of generative model.
Um, and then if we take out this extra surprisal term, then we get the variational free energy, um,
in a kind of reduced form, uh, which bounds the actual surprisal of the internal states of the system,
the, the blank or the particular states of the system, the blanket and the internal states.
Uh, so then this, this, um, kind of sets us up to say, okay, then if the system is synchronizing well,
so if it's minimizing its surprisal and it matches the, uh, mode in the, uh, the first, um, log term,
then that bound vanishes and we are putting a bound on the surprisal of internal states.
Uh, and then equation eight, uh, just states it again in the setting of paths and not, um, states.
So you have these, uh, these functions, eta of t, mu of t is about the evolution of the system through time.
So, all right, Jakob or Lee, anything you want to add there?
Okay.
Now we get to the physics of and by beliefs.
Mm-hmm.
Could have completed the constitutional trifecta with the four beliefs.
Also some very interesting connections that Jakob and I and others have explored with grammatical case.
For example, the physics of belief being the genitive case.
Mm-hmm.
Whereas the physics by belief might be like the instrumental case.
Mm-hmm.
And that might point towards natural and semi-natural languages to describe beliefs.
But just broadly, what is happening in these sections and how do we get towards equation nine?
Yeah.
So in this, uh, section, which is two, the, the, you know, at the end of the previous section,
um, synchronization gives you surprise minimization.
Um, and in section C, I'm, I'm using the building blocks to actually, uh, make that statement.
So approximate Bayesian inference is about how a system's beliefs behave, given that they need to match
some, uh, kind of density over, uh, the environment.
And where match means not necessarily equal, but synchronized to.
So, so this is what we mean really by physics of beliefs, uh, is the, um, context for Bayesian mechanics is, um, certain kinds of systems that are coupled to, uh, their environment or that are coupled to another system synchronized to that other system.
Uh, and as a result, um, we can understand the statistics of one system as synchronizing to the statistics of the other system.
So any kind of, um, belief updating or any kind of large deviations principles or anything that we can use to understand the statistics of one are done implicitly in the context of the statistics of the other.
Um, and, and this, so again, again, this is what we mean by physics of beliefs is suddenly we have now formulated a kind of law of motion for the beliefs of the system, which is to do with synchronization and approximate Bayesian inference.
Um, so, so the idea that, uh, we can understand, um, sometimes literally motion in the sense of motion on a statistical manifold, right?
Movement in a space of beliefs.
We can understand that as being a response to, um, the pressure to minimize surprisal given whatever you are or the system is synchronizing to.
That's really the, the main thrust of this section.
Uh, and I, I talk a little about, you know, exactly what does that mean?
Um, and what is the point of synchronization?
I don't think there are a lot of equations in this section.
Um, but, but this is about, it's about that.
It's about, okay.
Synchronization is a thing that we've talked about a lot.
Um, and we've caught, we've talked about it in the context of minimizing surprisal, but, um, it's important to set up.
The idea that, uh, when we talk about Bayesian mechanics, it is partially about the system itself, but what makes it kind of special is it's about the beliefs of the system.
And it's saying, okay, here is a way of understanding coupled systems by forgetting about the systems themselves and going into synchronized beliefs and understanding how to synchronization affect the, uh, probabilities, uh, that we assign to system states.
Hmm.
Hmm.
Great.
So that's of beliefs.
And now we go to by belief.
Oh, first, Yacob.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Um, I'm just wondering how, uh, how would you say that active states are formalized within Bayesian mechanics?
Because I, I feel like sometimes it, um, there's this kind of duality where we can say that systems can be described by Bayesian mechanics.
And we say that they act as if they're performing Bayesian inference.
Then there are also systems which, uh, in this kind of conventional sense do perform Bayesian inference through some active states.
So just wonder, uh, just wondering how do active or even sensory states fit within Bayesian mechanics?
Yeah, that's a good question.
Um, because as you said, you know, sometimes, uh, especially for very simple systems, this is a kind of mathematical technique.
It's, it's even a trick in some sense.
Um, that's not to say that it doesn't work, uh, but it's, it doesn't have the kind of epistemological sense of belief.
Um, or, or if it does, you got to do a lot of work to make that make sense.
Um, and I, I am kind of, there's a lot of philosophical debate about this in, in the literature.
And I know there's a corner of literature that is specifically about do things actually minimize their free energy?
Or is it just a useful model?
Um, I'm kind of agnostic.
I, I think the whole question is basically irrelevant.
Um, because the, the reality is whether or not it is true in a literalist sense or is just a model or, or whatever.
At the end of the day, the maths works.
So yes, you have to be careful about acknowledging the limitations of the maths to describe the actual physics and the biology, but you should be being careful about that anyway.
Um, and, and I acknowledge that maybe I'm, I'm being a bit unfair because I'm saying the question is irrelevant.
And then going on to say, you do have to be careful about the question, but, um, the, at the end of the day, it is just maths.
And, uh, so whether the maths is a true model of a system or is a model of what we think the system is doing is kind of a silly question.
Um, that being phrased that way.
Uh, and the reason why is because the maths is always just a model.
Um, I think, I think something like that point was advanced in a paper by Mel Andrews, um, where it's said that, you know, the, the FEP is just a model of a system.
Um, and whether the model is any good or not, uh, is strictly separate from whether the model is true or not.
And in general models are not true in the sense that, you know, no system is actually sitting down and calculating, okay, here is the root of my free energy functional.
Here is what, um, nature says I should be doing.
I'm going to go do it.
Um, so anyway, that was kind of a digression that wasn't directly your question.
Uh, the, the reality is yes, it is a kind of a mathematical trick and the maths works, but it doesn't always tell the satisfying conceptual story that we want to hear.
So I think, um, you're right.
The big difference is, um, to do with how active the system is because, uh, systems that can actually do actions do have a use for storing representations.
Um, and, you know, we think about, uh, things like controlled systems in this sense, uh, which are systems that aren't just minimizing their surprise or as a mathematical truism that unsurprising systems do unsurprising things, but they are systems that exist in an environment that is trying to dissipate them actively because they are very far from an equilibrium point.
And they need to know, you know, know what the environment is doing in order to know how to respond to it.
So active states do draw a pretty clear line between, um, and I should say as well, sophisticated active states.
Because you can think of things like the active states of a stone, they're not very sophisticated, but a stone does kind of, uh, for instance, irradiate heat back into the environment.
So that is an action.
It's just not a very interesting one, but sophisticated active states draw a pretty clear line between, um, genuine Bayesian inference and just kind of, and like applied statistics, so to speak.
Um, and, and it's something that I haven't really thought deeply about except to note that this is a place where there is a distinction to be made.
Um, I talk a little about this in the geometry and analysis paper that I, I just mentioned.
Um, and it shows up, um, quite a lot in the forthcoming paper, uh, that I mentioned in last session, um, which is, uh, by, um,
uh, by the, um, Lance and myself and Carl and a few other people, uh, and it's called path integrals and particular kinds, um, in that paper, uh, in, I think I mentioned in the context of an interesting calculation to do with moving frames of reference.
Uh, but, but additionally, um, there's quite a lot of work, uh, in that paper.
And one of the key deliverables of that paper is here are a number of different kinds of free energy functionals, which are defined by different kinds of, um, partitions.
So a partition that has active states and a partition that doesn't, um, and what are the, the qualitatively different kinds of behaviors that we're able to describe.
Um, and, and one thing, one case that that paper tries to make is that, um, there are interesting systems and non-interesting systems, and there are lifelike systems and not lifelike systems.
And that they exhibit very different behaviors when they minimize their free energy, um, including, you know, lifelike systems are able to minimize their expected free energy.
So they're not just, you know, it's not just a case of applied statistics.
They're actually, one presumes holding a model of the world and making predictions about the world and taking actions now that minimize free energy in the future.
So that's, that's a bit more sophisticated than just, um, a tree branch shaking in the wind, because it would be kind of surprising if it didn't, you know, that's, that's a law of physics.
It would be surprising if the tree branch didn't shake in the wind, but to say that the tree branch is doing Bayesian inference over its environment is only true in this, I guess, instrumentalist sense.
Um, I don't know if that's actually the right word for it.
I think that's a word from the philosophy literature that I'm not qualified to use properly, but it is, it is true in the instrumental sense that that is an instrument that we can use to describe the dynamics of the system.
It's not true in the kind of literal cognitive sense that the tree is now, um, forming a model and making predictions about its current state and the state of the environment.
And then maybe panpsychist types that would disagree with that.
Um, but that's, that's the view I take anyway.
So, uh, this is a very interesting question.
Um, I hope that answered at least part of it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, it definitely did.
Um, just also wondering whether, um, on your point where we have sophisticated actions and not sophisticated actions, whether that could also be a consequence of the complexity of the environment.
Um, and I think that's, uh, in the case of just a tree branch, uh, being shaken by the wind, we just have one type of, one type of mechanical force that the tree branch is synchronizing to, but in a more complex environment with living systems, uh, there are many more of, of maybe not explicit forces, but maybe cognitive forces or biological forces that the systems might need to couple
to, so I'm wondering whether the formalism could also, uh, not be, uh, adjusted to the complexity of just the individual entity that we're interested in, but also to the, to the complexity of the, um, influences of the environment that the system couples to.
Yeah.
I think there's definitely remit to say that, um, simpler systems, uh, can only infer simple things.
And so they do best in very simple environments, um, more complex things in a way.
And, and there are arguments that this is why structures like the brain evolved.
Um, actually, uh, I, I believe, I suppose he's listening.
Um, Martin Beale has an interesting paper about this, uh, and, and I forget the title, but the point of the paper is, um, there's a very neat hypothesis that the brain evolved because it's very good as a biological structure at handling, uh, what's called counterfactual information.
So the brain evolved as a prediction generation, um, mechanism.
And, uh, so, so there's, there's remit to say that, you know, complexity of an individual scales with the complexity of the environment.
Um, because something like a human that wants to, um, self-organize very far from equilibrium, suddenly there's, there's a lot more to keep track of.
Cause there's a lot more, um, acting on you to keep you down, so to speak.
And so, um, you not only need complex, um, sensory motor loops to respond to all that complexity, but you need a complex, um, processing hub to actually deal with all of those variables and categorize all that information and decide, okay, what are my sensory motor loops doing in this situation?
Um, how am I actually responding to the things that I'm observing?
Um, so yeah, definitely, uh, there is an interesting story to be told with how, uh, the complexity of the outside, uh, determines the complexity of the inside.
And it is kind of, again, a very nice, um, meta application of the FEP.
Cause if we think that, you know, if we want to say that things that self-organize are things that mirror their environment, then it is precisely, um, the claim that, uh, if you want to be a complex thing and you are subject to very complex environmental forces, um, then you need to be a complex thing.
Um, then you need to be a complex thing to self-organize.
Um, so, and, and this is the kind of good regulator type theorem that has come to characterize, um, discussions about the FEP.
Uh, so yes.
Yeah.
Another interesting question.
Great.
Well, just to carry forth and get a first pass and everything.
Although of course the door is always open for dot threes and beyond in section 2d, the physics of beliefs, we have equation nine, 10, 11, and several more.
So where do we get to by the end of section 2d?
What's the key piece here?
Yeah.
So I, uh, in, in the previous subsection, I spent a lot of time, um, building up the idea that, uh, Bayesian mechanics is a kind of a special way of thinking about, um, laws of motion in the space of beliefs.
So motion on a statistical manifold, which is one really interesting thing about it.
Um, and, and that's of mathematical interest maybe because it's now saying, okay, here is, here are some kind of new dynamical, uh, systems theories on statistical manifolds.
Um, which is, is quite cool.
And it does, um, kind of, uh, I think it's, that's interesting on its own.
Um, but if you are into physics or biology, um, that's not quite enough.
The, the nice thing is, uh, that there is this idea that, okay, it's not only about, um, laws of motion in information geometry, but it's about, uh, mapping a system which has some kind of physics in the real world into a ideally simpler physics in, uh, statistical manifold.
So, uh, in, in, in virtue of talking about synchronization as a law of motion, uh, for beliefs, we are now saying, okay, we don't need to talk about the material physics underlying the synchronization.
We can go into this space of beliefs and we can say, okay, synchronization tells me that, um, the system's beliefs are changing this way.
And that reflects a physical change of this nature.
So it's, it's an equivalent way of talking about real physics.
So we have a physics of beliefs and that this maps back and forth between a real physics.
Uh, so we should then be able to, uh, make inferences about real systems using Bayesian mechanical laws.
Uh, and this is what is meant by a physics by beliefs is if we invert the story and say, okay, now I want to know, um, what is this?
What is approximate Bayesian inference saying about the, uh, mode of the system, about the parameters that are doing, um, approximate Bayesian inference?
Uh, and, and you can do that.
You can make inferences about the system itself.
Um, and if your inferences are good, then you, you learn something about the system.
Uh, so that's very general and that's also subject to surprise minimization.
So if you are unsurprised, then you have a good model of the system.
So, so now the whole story applies to itself in some sense.
If you minimize surprisal about your beliefs about a system, minimizing surprisal, then you can get a model of how that system is self-organizing.
Um, and, and you hope that the loop kind of closes.
Uh, so, so this is, I think, um, quite an important point.
Um, it's the subject of a duality relationship that I, um, gesture at and write a lot about in, uh, the geometry and analysis paper.
It also shows up in a paper called the map territory fallacy fallacy.
Um, it has fallacy twice in the title.
Uh, and that's, that's, um, by, uh, myself, Maxwell Ramstad and Carl Fristen.
Uh, and it investigates the idea that you can, you can actually turn the story on its head and make a model of a system making a model of its environment.
Uh, and that that's insightful for various reasons.
The, the interesting thing about that is, um, it now gives you a physics by beliefs in the sense that now my, um, my description of what the system is doing.
Uh, so my description of the material physics is inferential.
Um, it's based on my beliefs about what the system, um, is synchronizing to and how well is it minimizing surprisal.
And it's also based on, you know, how good my model is.
So it's based on whether I can minimize my own surprisal, uh, and make good inferences about the system.
Um, and, uh, this calls back to, um, the principle of constrained maximum entropy, because what that's saying is my model of the system is an inference of the system subject to the constraint that the, um, model of the system reproduces surprise or minimization.
So any model that I have of the system must say that the model is itself, uh, or that the system is itself holding a model of its environment and is minimizing surprisal.
Um, so that, that's where the constraint comes from.
It's that, you know, this is something that we know a priori.
So it's something that we should incorporate into our model of the system.
Um, this surprise or minimization, uh, and that just working out the maths of that is, um, all of these equations.
Um, all of these equations.
So it's showing that if you put a constraint that your model of the system includes, um, surprise or minimization, then you get back exactly approximate Bayesian inference.
So there's this other route to Bayesian mechanics that just says, okay, if we begin from, and, and in reality, and the point I try and make is that it's not actually a different route to Bayesian mechanics.
Because all this is saying is if my model of the system begins from the point of view that systems that synchronize minimize their surprisal.
Then I get back the minimization of, uh, free energy and surprisal, um, in the context of the system.
So kind of, um, nuanced, I think that there's a lot of moving pieces.
Um, but ultimately that's all that that means when we say physics by beliefs is it's the application of the constrained, um, maximum entropy principle to create a model of a system which is minimizing its surprisal.
And what's interesting is that that model itself is subject to, um, the laws of Bayesian mechanics because it is a probabilistic belief.
Um, so it's, it's like saying I'm sitting in the environment, um, and I'm synchronizing to the system, which is synchronizing to me.
And if I make a good model of that system, I incorporate the knowledge that it is doing approximate Bayesian inference that shapes my own approximate Bayesian inference about the system.
There's this, there's this, uh, the symmetry to the problem that falls out of very first principles considerations.
Excellent.
On to section three, a general equation for Bayesian classical mechanics.
So it'll be helpful for you to situate where it begins and then how we approach equation 15.
Yeah.
Um, so this section is, uh, kind of taking those building blocks.
Okay.
So we have a way of, um, modeling systems that model their environment and it's this kind of dual
survival minimization problem.
So how do we actually write that as a problem, um, that we can solve?
How do we do computations with this thing in the context of classical physics, especially?
Um, and also this analogy that we talked about previously, um, does that go through?
Uh, to this case.
So, uh, you can build up this idea.
You can build up, um, the idea of a classical physical system that couples to its environment.
Um, and it is, uh, in this case, a force that acts to separate the thing from its environment.
Um, so again, there's a bit of, uh, an abuse of types in the sense that we would usually consider,
um, a sensory state, uh, experiencing or measuring that force.
Um, but we, so instead I just plug in the force itself, um, under the assumption that it's not a noisy sensor, maybe.
Uh, and that proves to be again, um, not a taxing assumption, uh, because it, it tells us the same story.
Uh, at the end, uh, you can, you can, you know, deduce everything that you'd need to.
Um, so you can set up a synchronization function in that case.
Um, and it, it just tells the system, uh, what the environment is probably like given the force acting on the system.
Uh, and, and already you have the ingredients for, um, approximate Bayesian inference because you have a conditional independence.
So, you know, the system doesn't need to know what the environment is like if it knows the force acting on it.
So you can argue that there is a conditional independence there, or at least a sparse coupling.
Um, and you have an inference problem because the system does need to know what to do given the force acting on it.
So it does need to know what is the environment like, um, given that force.
And it can only, um, do what it needs to do if it is, uh, minimizing surprisal.
So all the ingredients are there.
And you can also talk about, um, the fact that the, uh, classical action, um, is the Bayesian mechanical action in the limit of no uncertainty.
So you do get surprisal minimization as equivalent to, uh, classical action minimization.
And, and that's, um, ultimately the chain of reasoning that gets us down to equation 15 is that the, uh, the path that minimizes the classical action, uh, is the mode.
So it is the most likely path.
So the, uh, path of least surprisal.
Uh, so you can, you can structure classical mechanics as a least surprisal, uh, problem.
And that, that gets us down to equation 15.
Excellent.
While I bring 15 in, Ali or Jakob, any thoughts?
So maybe, could you read equation 15, um, with the variables and or the natural language, um, semantics?
Yeah.
Um, I'm, I'm a big fan of that.
I think that's a, um, a useful way of breaking things down is, um, explaining the objects being involved.
And, uh, there are people that, uh, that really, um, take that philosophy to the extreme, um, to the extent that I've seen talks where, uh, you're not allowed.
The chair of the session says, okay, you're not allowed to just tell me the name of the thing.
You need to explain to me what the thing is and what it's doing.
I believe, isn't that a case of the chair doing inference on you?
Yeah.
Well, maybe, uh, I, in fact, probably it is.
Yeah.
How, how do I best fit this into my world model or tell me in terms that I understand?
Yeah.
Explain it to me.
That's really what it is.
Um, yeah.
So, so here, um, we have the path probability density.
So it's, it's the probability of a, a classical position Q at a time T.
Um, which is a joint density in this case.
Uh, it equals the, um, exponential of the minus of the action that we saw in the, uh, basics of Bayesian mechanics section.
So it is the normal path probability density.
Um, and the only question is, okay, what is S?
Uh, excuse me.
So we, we've plugged in something interesting for us.
It's the integral over time of the, uh, deviation of the classical path Q from the, uh, path of least action, where the path of least action is defined as the double integral of the force divided by the mass.
So the double integral of an acceleration, which is just a position.
So, um, given that we know the initial conditions, what is in the, uh, the vertical bars.
So what is being squared is just the deviation of Q, the classical path from the expected path or the path of, uh, least action.
Excuse me.
So, so this is precisely the, uh, classical action, um, in the sense that it, it gives you back the path of least classical action.
It gives you back the path that follows Newton's laws.
Excellent.
So to, uh, bring it closer one level, what variable might we be talking about?
Like what kind of data set or variable might Q be?
In, uh, in classical physics, we're mostly interested in, uh, spatial positions or at least, um, generalized coordinates describing those spatial positions.
But, uh, more generally, um, we could talk about a lot of things.
Q could be really anything.
Um, one of the nice things about, uh, random dynamical systems and random variables is there is a, uh, great generality in what that state could represent.
So in, in general, it's just a label for something.
Um, here in, in classical physics, yeah, we are interested in, uh, positions.
Uh, spatial positions.
Okay.
So it could be, um, how excited I am about a song or my belief about the temperature or what this person's next sentiment is going to be.
Yeah.
Yeah.
All right.
Anything else on three or it'll be great to move to four?
Um, no, I think that's, that's really the story about, uh, three.
Awesome.
Well, four.
Ali, would you like to set up or introduce how you see section four and what you wanted to ask?
Uh, well, yeah.
Um, actually, if you permit, I wanted to make a somewhat lengthy comment here.
Uh, if I may not too long, I promise.
Uh, we're going to need a point three, I think.
I'm following that, uh, with a question.
Um, you see, as we know, there are numerous approaches proposed for driving, um, classical properties from, um, quantum matter, uh, so to speak.
Uh, but I wanted to mention, uh, two among which, uh, which to my mind are particularly Congress with Bayesian mechanics, uh, view on quantum quantum physics.
Uh, I'm not sure if you're familiar with, um, causal fermion systems, uh, approach, uh, developed by, um, Felix, uh, Finster and others, because it's not a particularly well-known theory.
Uh, but in any case, uh, it's basically, uh, another variation, a variational approach, uh, for explaining the emergence of a structured, uh, space-time with all of its associated, uh, phenomenological properties, such as the flow of time, the chain of causal events, and so on, uh, from an optimal configuration of self-organizing, uh, quantum wave functions.
Uh, but instead of defining the action functional as, uh, the surprise, uh, uh, to be minimized in order to achieve the, uh, optimal inference, uh, as we saw in Bayesian mechanics, uh, they define the causal action as, uh, the action functional minimizing, uh, which leads to the optimal configuration of wave functions, which in turn, uh, results in the structured, uh, space-time properties.
Uh, and, uh, and, uh, the other approach I wanted to mention is, uh, uh, quantum Darwinism, uh, proposed by, uh, Wojciech Zurek, uh, inspired by the principle of natural selection, which attempts to explain, uh, how the most stable, uh, pointer states, uh, which are are favored, uh, among, uh, the many possible quantum states and, uh, thereby resulting in the classicality
classicality of our everyday observations.
Actually, this approach is also alluded to Fields et al's paper, Free Energy Principle for generic quantum systems, I guess.
So do you see Bayesian mechanics as ultimately unifying all these different approaches somehow into an M theory like integrated theory?
Because in your recent paper on the map territory fallacy fallacy, which you mentioned, FEP is already shown to be the ideal modeling tool for generic systems in statistical physics.
So can this statement be potentially extended to encompass all the other physical systems as well?
Yeah, that's a good question.
I'm not familiar with this causal fermion systems work, although it sounds like it fits into a kind of spirit of question that exists in condensed matter theory asking about, okay, how do things emerge that have a given structure from things that don't have structure?
And especially the idea that the word causal seems to interesting because a lot of condensed matter people are very interested in information theory very recently.
But anyway, yeah, so there is there is similar work in condensed matter by people like Michael Levin, who's not the Mike Levin that does developmental biology at Tufts.
It's it's which is kind of interesting.
It's a different Michael Levin.
And Levin and someone called Wen have developed things like string net condensation, which is all about how do well, I guess at a high level, it's about how does structure arise from the application of constraints to I guess you might call them self-organization.
You might call them self-organizing field theories, although that's not the language that Levin and Wen use.
And I think that's kind of telling the wrong story, maybe.
But there's something there definitely something to be generalized.
And likewise for quantum Darwinism, there is this idea that, you know, the things that we measure as the most certain or the classical states arise from a spatial interaction component.
So things that couple to other things have well defined measurements.
So, you know, pointer states because of this localized interaction.
I apologize.
It's so, you know, this is as a as a resolution of, I think, the decoherence problem.
This is one interpretation and it just remains to kind of make that more mathematically rigorous.
And, you know, people like Sean Carroll have written about this at length.
So in both cases, there is kind of a.
A yeah, an intersection of ideas and they both seem very basic mechanical.
I think one of the nice things about basic mechanics is it's very general.
It's just a story about how constraints and surprising minimization and statistics interact to get you a model of a physical system.
So yeah, in principle, that is very general.
And you start to add, you know, extra constraints and things like the Markov blanket and and whatnot.
But there is probably remit to generalize this even further to something that is purely about how do paths that synchronize behave probabilistically.
And that is very general.
And that probably applies to more than just conventional classical statistical physics,
but maybe other aspects of quantum mechanics and condensed matter theory and and so forth.
Great.
Thank you.
Well, in our last 30 minutes of the dot two, with of course the dot three on demand, let's get to those worked examples.
Mm hmm.
And we will look forward to a thousand notebooks blooming with people simulating and making interactable visualizations and extending some of these examples.
It'll be great though, to hear what are the real world situations that you are applying Bayesian mechanics to.
And then what do each of these equations do on the path towards application in each of these settings?
Mm hmm.
So previously we discussed the three faces of Bayesian mechanics.
So could you just review the three faces of Bayesian mechanics in light of where we're going to go in the coming applications?
Yeah, of course.
So the the kind of pyramid that you see here is at the bottom layers, all of these, I guess, boundary conditions, specific applications of the FEP,
where the boundary condition that we're interested in is whether the the mode being matched, whether the thing that we're synchronizing to is a state.
And then you have states and paths.
That's the first split.
And within states, you're also interested in, OK, is that state in motion or is that state fixed?
And this corresponds really nicely to a story in classical mechanics about forces in equilibrium, forces being applied and kind of continuous forces,
which the examples I used are an object at rest, an object that is moving to a point at which it would rest and an object in constant motion like something in orbit.
So and specifically for the middle one, I think I use a ball thrown in the air.
And so eventually it comes back down to Earth and rests on the ground.
And then the celestial body, a planet in orbit is your path tracking.
Yeah.
OK, so we have the analogy very clear and we can say rigorously supported the left side.
We're talking about synchronization to states like parameter values that are instantaneous, whereas the right branch is the density of a path.
So the synchronization is to a path.
Mm-hmm .
On the left side, we have fixed and dynamic mode mode, the mode mode fallacy fallacy.
And that is matching to a ball at rest and a ball thrown in the air on a parabola that will come to rest.
And the satellite motion is the infinite chasing.
Now, we're talking about cognitive systems.
So what are the cognitive analogs or the real world cognitive settings where we're talking about some cognitive entity like a computer or a person or an ant colony rather than perhaps a ball on a hill?
Mm-hmm .
Yeah.
So this is a good question.
I think in the path tracking case, at least it's pretty obvious that this is active inference.
This is a very general blueprint for what it means to be in a dynamic environment and to constantly be synchronizing to an environment that's changing and that maybe you yourself are changing.
And that's maybe something that's worth commenting on.
It's only this last case that is the kind of stuff that we're interested in, in terms of worked examples when it comes to genuinely cognitive systems.
And it's this last case that we know the most about in terms of worked examples.
So it's the case that, you know, hasn't been really worked out in terms of rigorous maths, although that's in the last six months or so, that's what's been being done, not only with this paper, but also with the path and tools paper that's about to come out.
And the free energy principle made simpler, but not too simple.
And also, Lance and Carl and Greg have a paper called geometric sampling methods in optimization and adaptive agents, where this is also talked about.
So, so in a way, this is the case that we know the most about.
And it's the case that works the best.
It's the case that actually explains the kinds of stuff that we want to explain.
But the rigorous maths hasn't been done in that case.
The simpler density dynamics formalism is much less useful.
And, and to some extent suffers from its own problems in terms of edge cases and maybe mathematical confusions.
So, so there is some cleaning still to do with the density of the states formalism.
But, but again, ironically, that's, that's the formalism that we care the least about.
And, and what we're most interested in is making the path tracking make more sense and, and making it more complicated and generalizing even past it to explain things that synchronize two paths in a more complex way.
So, so, so, so the path tracking is about these kinds of things.
And, and, and, and one way to think about them is in terms of expected free energy.
So, you know, not only minimizing my free energy right now, but minimizing my expected free energy along the path.
So, you know, that's, that's, that's one way of thinking about it.
And another way of thinking about it is minimizing the surprise or other path.
So, you know, that's mathematically that works nicely, but it kind of, it gives you a bit of a different story.
And, and the expected free energy is a, is nicer in the context of cognitive agents, because it gives you this idea of prediction and action back.
And, and the density over states formalism is much simpler and it doesn't apply, you know, much, doesn't apply very strongly to very complex agents.
You can think of it as an instantaneous approximation to the path tracking.
And so in that sense, there are things that are cognitive and do fixed mode tracking, or what we call mode matching.
But if you think about it, that is, again, an instantaneous approximation to the, the path tracking setup.
So if you think about something like you or I, we're usually not matching a mode, because that means we are staying completely still, and our environment is staying completely still.
And that happens mostly at death, which is, it is something that we can talk about, we can talk about a system at total rest.
But even then the analogy breaks because the environment still isn't at rest, only on very brief timescales.
Can we approximate it as being at rest? And it's also not the story that we're looking for about cognitive agents.
So the, the fixed mode and the dynamic mode are mathematically interesting.
But I think when it comes to the biology, and to some extent, even the physics, they're not very interesting.
Very interesting. So maybe as we scan through these equations, just what are each equation doing within the example.
So we're in terminal mode matching section 6a, and we see equation primarily 17.
Yeah, so equation 17 is just giving you, I think we skipped section 5, which is the mode matching.
So maybe I do want to just quickly mention that when you have forces at equilibrium, and you have an initial condition of zero, this is in equation 16.
Then the path of least action is not a path at all. It's a stationary object. It's an object at rest.
And so you can do this very easily. You'll see I write q minus zero squared equals zero.
So this surprisal, that is the surprisal, right? You're not integrating through time because you're only at one time point.
So the integral goes away. And the double integral of the force over time is just the, is just zero, because the forces are at equilibrium.
So the surprisal is minimized when q equals zero, when there is no motion and the system is at the mode.
In this case, you can imagine q as a generalized position corresponding to the height above the ground.
So when q is on the ground, not moving at that time point, you're minimizing your surprisal.
And that's, that's what we call mode matching. And again, you see, this is a very simple setting, because nothing is, literally nothing is happening.
And that's not really fit for describing cognitive agents. But it is a good, simple case, just to make sure that all the maths works in the simple case.
Yep. I'm imagining this to be our belief about the room is that it's 37 C and the thermometer is giving us 37, 37, 37.
So the mode instantaneously is not being updated. And that's kind of like a balloon is being inflated and it's pressure matching or the ball is on the ground.
So the forces are canceling out on the statistical distributions. The Bayesian surprise is zero. The prior and the posterior are the same.
We're in no static possible situation.
Yeah, exactly. There are no, if you want to imagine again, this physics of belief setting.
There is, there are no forces acting on me between observations. There are no probabilistic forces changing my beliefs about the system.
So the mode is stationary. I'm always matching the same mode. So nothing, nothing's happening. No movement on the statistical manifold.
And therefore we get mode matching. It's a very trivial case.
Now we introduce some forces into the picture with mode tracking.
Yeah. So, so mode tracking is a little bit more complicated because you have an actual inference.
You're interested in where something is and also how to get to it.
And, and there's kind of an open question in somewhere in this section, which is about, or maybe in the following section, which asks, is a least surprising path to a target mode?
So, is that a mode also a instance of mode tracking? Right. And I actually, I don't know that. That's something that is open for me. I think we'll encounter it somewhere.
Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. Well, we will stumble into it anyway.
But anyway, it's the idea of, okay, so we want to do inference about where is a mode that I'm not at and how do I get there?
So, in this case, the example is of a ball being thrown through the air.
So again, thinking of Q as a generalized position corresponding to the height above the ground.
I start at some initial condition above the ground and gravity is the force acting on me, telling me the mode that you want to be at is at rest on the ground.
So, in some sense, you can read this, you can read a ball being thrown through the air and then falling to the ground as doing inference about what gravity tells it to do.
And if you, if you write this out, you have, there is an equation of motion, which is a path of least action.
And it's just this parabolic path to the ground.
And if you plug that in and you minimize the surprisal, then you get a system kind of goes like that.
And, and what's more, you can write this as a gradient ascent on surprisal.
So it's a gradient ascent on the probability density, a gradient descent on the surprisal.
So it is literally a minimization problem, because you can get back the equation of motion from a gradient descent on the surprisal.
And that is, I think we will call it 17.2.
So it's the, the third equation in this section.
Yes, that's the one.
Right after the, the first labeled one, which is 17.
So, so this is this gradient descent, this minimization problem gets you exactly the equation of motion that you want.
So you can prove that surprisal minimization tells you something interesting about this case of mode tracking.
Cool.
Cool.
I'm imagining a cognitive entity, a physicist, a Bayesian mechanic modeling in their perception implicitly or in their notebook explicitly the path of a ball.
Mm-hmm.
And the cleanest situation would be if their factorization and understanding of the sparsity of the territory, if their map resembles it.
Mm-hmm.

But no matter, even if it does, it still is a different thing and will be treated under the Bayesian mechanics as a being by and about beliefs rather than by and about mass.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that's definitely one way of thinking about it.
We talked a little last time about what it looks like to collaborate and to converge on a belief.
And it's a little bit like that if we assume there's no uncertainty about where everyone is headed and you just want to figure out how to get there.
So if you're like a bunch of people collaborating on an idea and you know where at A and I know what B is, then this says that the best way to get to B from A is just to minimize your surprisal.
That's the path of least action from A to B. And in this case, that means that it is precisely the most likely path that is the path of the classical object from A to B.
Wow. Very interesting since sometimes it seems like we're discussing in a value and preference-aligned setting how to do something, policies as inference, whereas there's also a discussion of where to go and all of these other pieces.
We'll just touch on each piece as lightly as possible in a few minutes so we can have a closing round. In B, 6B, we have tracking of mode, infinite mode tracking.
Mm-hmm. Yeah, this is the kind of precursor to the idea of path tracking, which is saying, okay, if that mode is constantly in motion, what does that look like?
And you can do the same thing if you write out the equation of surprisal minimization.
You can get the idea of continuous motion as well, but it's slightly more complicated and it is slightly less conceptually satisfying because it's not surprisal minimization.
It's sort of surfing along level sets of the probability.
The probability. So it's the probability isn't minimized and the surprisal isn't minimized.
The probability isn't maximized. So you're not choosing the most likely path, which is one of the reasons why I then go on to talk about path tracking in the next section is to say, you know, okay, so we tried to do this thing with a continuously moving mode.
And it kind of worked, but not really. So what if we said something about minimizing the surprisal of paths?
You know, so instead of continuous mode tracking, what if we just talked about continuous motion tracking a path?
Do these things coincide? Do they tell the same story? And this is where the initial stuff in the basics of basic mechanics section comes into play, because now we're talking about path probabilities and minimizing action functionals.
And at the end of the story, you say, okay, so the whole thing does go through.
You can talk about selecting the path of minimum surprisal.
And in this case, it is following along in a satellite orbit based on the continuous forces that are being applied to you.
So at every turn, you have a kind of circular force, you have not only a tangential force outwards, but also centripetal force inwards.
And if you write this down appropriately, you can get the equation for a circular orbit.
And so that's what this is doing is saying, okay, if you have this continuous force acting on you, then can you match a path of least surprisal?
And you can.
Excellent.
And just one last note on the first idea of G theory before we take a breath in our closing round.
Yeah.
So this is kind of a complicated section.
The point of this section is ultimately to say that two things really.
One is that the case for classical physics is a nice playground, but it's kind of a simple one.
And the aspirations of Bayesian mechanics are to talk about non-equilibrium complex self-organizing systems.
So can we pull something more interesting out of the maths?
And it's also to make the case that the path based formalism is the right thing to look at when we want to pull something interesting out of the maths.
And so the answer to the first question is yes.
And implicitly that supports the second aid because it says, okay, not only can we actually get a description of, in this case, chaos versus integrability or ergodicity versus non-ergodicity, but also that it comes out of the path based formalism very naturally.
And, and in a way, Bayesian mechanics is a little bit special in this sense, because the idea of a path integral approach to classical physics comes out of Bayesian mechanics very naturally.
And the results in this setting come from that path integral approach.
So it implicitly has this kind of third aim that because of this path based formalism in Bayesian mechanics is what did the job that Bayesian mechanics is the thing that we maybe want to look at in more complex systems.
So, so that's the, the aim of this section.
So, what this section does is it just writes down the path integral for a system in classical physics, given that it does Bayesian inference as per Bayesian mechanics.
So approximate Bayesian inference, if you'd like.
So if, if you write down a system in classical physics, doing some kind of synchronization, you, you get a path integral with a particular kind of form.
Uh, and then you can transform this a couple of different ways.
Uh, I, I do detail the derivation there, um, but they're all very standard transformations and you get out of this, uh, something called a supersymmetry.
Uh, now the idea of supersymmetry goes back to, uh, I think the seventies, um, is an observation that in, uh, certain, uh, quantum field theories, you get a symmetry that relates different kinds of particles.
So, uh, what that means is if I write down a, um, quantum field theory, uh, with, um, two different kinds of particles and, and in general, um, they are fermions or bosons, but it doesn't actually quite matter what.
Um, at least you can get specific kinds of fermions and bosons.
So, um, the story doesn't have to be totally general.
Uh, then sometimes you can exchange the different kinds of particles and you get the same theory.
So you can freely swap them and nothing about the physics changes.
Uh, this is called a supersymmetry.
It's not a usual symmetry, um, in the sense that, you know, when we think about symmetries, we think of geometric things that relate, say, two different sides of a shape.
Um, so it is a symmetry in that it relates to different things, uh, in such a way that nothing changes, but it's a supersymmetry because it's, it's about particles, not, not shapes, say.
Um, the, the, the interesting thing is, uh, supersymmetry breaking, um, always leads to mathematically interesting observations and physically interesting observations.
Uh, so if we have access to a supersymmetry, uh, then the, the thought is immediately, okay, um, what can I say with this?
I should keep an eye out for something interesting happening when the supersymmetry breaks.
Uh, and in this context, uh, the supersymmetry breaking, uh, is about having two or more different constants of motion.
Um, and what that means is the system is non-ergotic.
Uh, so ergodic systems have one constant of motion.
It's just the, um, energy or the Hamiltonian that you'd put into the probability measure.
Uh, but in, in non-ergotic systems, in integrable systems, you have multiple constants of motion.
So it's not just the energy, but it's, it's some other thing.
Um, you don't know what necessarily, but, but you have additional variables.
Uh, and what's interesting about that is then we can make the observation that supersymmetry is about, uh, or is analogous to chaos because, um, ergodic motion is chaotic.
It's about things that mix and things that fill their state space, um, in sometimes unpredictable ways.
Uh, whereas integrability, um, non-ergodicity, uh, is about systems that are very predictable.
You, you just integrate them and you say where it will be in a future time.
Um, so after all this derivation and conceptual work, what we end up with is a way of saying Bayesian mechanics has an accounting mechanism for, um, chaos and not chaos.
Uh, and, and that's where I leave off.
If I say, so, so this is something interesting that we can do with Bayesian mechanics and it comes out of the path integral formulation very naturally.
Um, and, and this is a very trivial case of just classical physical systems.
What can we get when we just start to describe the complex cases of more interesting systems like biological physics or self-organizing, uh, field theories or, you know, things of this nature.
Uh, and that's the end of the paper.
Well, like paper, like stream, as they say.
So let us spend our last several minutes with Ali and Jakob.
Any just closing thoughts or questions or directions that you want to continue on?
Well, uh, it was an amazingly illuminating learning journey.
So, uh, I wanted to thank, uh, again, Daniel, Jakob and Ender for organizing the discussion, discussion sessions leading to these live streams and especially Dalton, uh, for his time and, uh, for, uh, for sharing his, uh, brilliant insights and expertise with us.
And, uh, on a more personal note, uh, Dalton, your work has rekindled my long forgotten deep passion for theoretical physics.
Uh, and I know I'll certainly continue to explore, uh, this fascinating area of Bayesian mechanics a lot more.
So, uh, I'm truly grateful for that.
Uh, yes, that's it for me and I'll pass it to Jakob.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, also thanks to everyone, uh, Daniel, Ali, under, uh, who participated in the discussions.
I think, uh, your input, Ali, on the, um, different equations, uh, was really invaluable.
And, of course, thank you, Dalton, for, uh, firstly writing the paper and then, uh, spending, spending the time with us, uh, going through it.
Um, I'm really looking forward to future work.
I would have, uh, many other, other questions about how Bayesian mechanics is related to other areas of physics, such as, uh, relativistic mechanics or, or, um, kind of known, uh, the non-classical results within quantum mechanics, which we touched on last time.
Uh, and then the actual applications to computational models as well.
Uh, I think, uh, so I'm looking forward to exploring these more and, uh, yeah.
Awesome.
Dalton, what do you think are some of the best ways for someone to catch up to the frontier of Bayesian mechanics learning and application?
Um, yeah, well, first let me say, um, it's been a pleasure.
I've, I've really enjoyed, uh, the discussions and, um, you guys came in very well prepared.
So, uh, that made it, uh, even richer.
Um, so, so thank you for all your hard work and thank you for having me.
Um, I think, uh, Bayesian mechanics is, um, becoming, uh, very, a very technical side of the free energy principle.
Um, and I think that speaks to how ecumenical, um, the FEP has been and how interdisciplinary it has been, um, because people come to it from many different backgrounds, uh, including mathematics and physics like me, but also computer science and machine learning and also neurobiology, uh, and also philosophy.
Um, so there's, there's something in it for everyone.
Uh, and, and if you are interested in this, um, kind of more technical side, um, one thing you, um, you, one thing you can do and to some extent just have to do is read.
Um, there is a lot of literature being published at a very fast pace in the, in the last, um, few months.
Uh, so it can seem like a lot to, um, wrap one's head around.
Uh, but I think one thing that I, uh, have started to be better about, um, and certainly my co-authors have been, uh, good about is, um, road mapping things.
So it's, it's, uh, easier and easier, I think, to get a handle on, um, what all is being said and how it relates to other things being said.
Um, papers like this are a good example of things that draw everything together really nicely.
I think anyway, um, it's, uh, I don't know if I can say that, but I will anyway.
Um, and there are other papers and, uh, things that kind of break things down and explain things in a more accessible way
than the highly mathematical, highly technical work that's also being published.
Um, I, I write, uh, blog posts summarizing some of my papers sometimes.
Um, so if you're interested in those, you can find, uh, them on my website.
Um, also on my website, I have a kind of Bayesian mechanical bibliography, where I organize all of the, uh, recent papers in this area and what their contributions are.
Um, that's not on my blog.
That's under a, uh, page on my website called research.
Um, but nonetheless, you know, that's, that's something that you can look at as well.
Um, and I think, uh, everyone involved is also fairly accessible via email.
I think in my experience, that's been the case anyway.
Um, I'm always, uh, available, um, at my email.
Um, Carl is a very, uh, generous person with his time.
Um, and people like Maxwell and, uh, Lance and, um, Thomas, uh, Connor, uh, you know, all the people that have been involved, uh, are in my experience, um, people who are willing to, uh, take and answer questions.
Um, so that's, that's also something to do, you know, if, if you're reading something and it just doesn't make sense, um, you know, do get in touch with someone.
And in my experience, uh, people will be very charitable, uh, in terms of, um, taking and, and answering, uh, those questions.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, and there's, of course, the, the, the one thing that is, is tough is, is kind of building up the background, um, for these, but I think, uh, like anything, um, it is something that you can develop on the fly, um, so to speak.
So as, as long as something makes sense to you at, uh, some level, uh, and maybe you're not an expert on the topic, uh, maybe it only makes sense in isolation and, and you don't have the, the whole, um, picture in your head.
I think in general, that's all right.
Um, so yeah, maybe, uh, it's, it's not a very, uh, satisfying answer, but, but at least part of the answer to your question is, uh, we'll just start reading.
Um, and if you do get stuck, then, uh, people in this area, uh, are pretty nice people.
So, uh, don't hesitate to contact one of them, uh, if you, uh, do get stuck or if you want to bounce ideas around.
Well, as stated, it's been an amazing series and I know it's not the end of 49.
There are decimals to come.
Um, so Dalton, thanks again.
Jakob Ali, Ander, thanks for all the amazing work.
Till the next gradient.
Okay.
Thank you.
Yeah.
I'm looking forward to, um, whatever comes next.
Yeah.






















































Thank you.