## 0x3TIoZal9Q

All right. Greetings, everyone. Thanks for joining. It is August 15th, and we're in our final discussion, recorded discussion for Cohort 3.
Next week, we'll have a kind of unrecorded discussion. Also, this will be the day of the symposium, so a very auspicious day to have been concluded upon.
But today, we're going to talk about 10 and probably anything else.
So, Ali or Neil, want to leave with anything? And or we can go to Esmails' question first.
Right. I've quickly put in the last three questions, but I think we can get through those.
So, we can start with Esmails.
All right. I'll just read it. And then happy to hear anyone's thoughts or more details.
Since I believe in Occam's razor, I deny the meaning of awareness.
My suggestion is accessible cognition and inaccessible cognition.
It looks like we have an operating system and implicit memory that's not available, such as the procedural memory and emotional memory.
I have some doubts about the rest of the words like consciousness and awareness.
And this is about the question, the opening quotation of the chapter.
Beginning of the end.
In general, we are at least aware of what our minds do best.
Neil or Ali?
That touches on my last question, which was what is sentient about Active Inference.
That's put in the chapter title.
Well, I've suggested as a teaser.
The chapter's really just summarising.
uh it's it doesn't doesn't really say anything about consciousness I don't think
and where Carla's it all seems to be getting more involved in discussions of consciousness but I
think he always maintains a distance between that and and works with with uh people who are concerned
with that but it's it's more something where active inferences is a framework for um well to help
people who are looking at sentence and consciousness uh but doesn't really say anything specifically
about it and so it seems to me
awesome
Ali want to add anything on that
uh well yeah as far as I know sentience um inactive in principle literature is used uh in a rather
technical sense in which um sentient beings are just uh are they're they're the beings that are
responsive uh to the external stimuli so that's as simple as it gets uh and uh because of its simplicity
uh it uh encompasses a whole array of things as being sentient and uh it's not necessarily uh restricted
to biological sentience or uh I don't know uh any thing akin to uh to the level of human intelligence
for human sentience and so on so uh it can basically be applied to uh include artificial sentience and
uh everything even uh virtual sentience such as I don't know the kind of thing that's just been
implemented algorithmically in the software and stuff so uh as it it it was a subject of a rather
repeated debate a few months ago uh I mean the meaning of the sentience is used in active inference
literature but in all honesty it's not a novel use either because uh this the same very definition of
uh sentience that's used in active inference is almost exactly the same as uh one of the definitions
uh from Oxford English dictionaries so uh it's not as controversial as it seems but about the other
uh terms such as awareness and consciousness well uh I don't believe we have any sort of consensus around
those words yet in active inference literature although uh in recent papers around um um or mum model of
active inference uh Maxwell and others are trying to converge um a consensus um on the word on the notion of
consciousness in terms of active inference
um
yeah what great topics and also how cool with chapter 10 published about a year and a half ago maybe
written in the previous months leading up to one and a half years ago how how there are certain
similarities and continuations of the discussion um
yeah
Neil I really like the um
the point about having us how how um
active inference how it stays it's unopinionated to the extent that it's composable
as a describing system
those properties are kind of like convex concave
and there's a lot to say probably about why certain uh expectations are around
certain kinds of x of accounts scientific accounts or just certain kinds of rhetorical accounts like
what why that why some are some way and some are not that's the that's the active inference for the
social sciences um but that's a whole thing
having the descriptive framework

cartography
compositional cognitive cartography
as per
the category theory work and and that whole area especially coming into play and the mechanics and the dynamics
it's like
newtonian mechanics whatever you say about it within the system it doesn't have a preference for something moving
left or right or
up or down or something like that
that's just a bizarre
feature to bake into a measurement framework
so

when we look at act implicit really is presented in this textbook
whether as a behavioral researcher like the figure 9.2
metabasean
so whether we approach it from this kind of like classical behavioral researcher or just researchers
perspective
perspective
or we approach it from the constructive perspective
with uh chapter six and and all of that
from six or from nine
uh science and engineering

science and engineering
eventually
maybe
uh it'll come to be seen as an account
of the cartography
so
hence that that divergence with how the the book lands of course this isn't a policy
politics
it's not to say that there's like a perfect text or anything like that
but i think that's kind of the area
i know it's a bunch of random thoughts but it's chapter 10.
these are the funny things about the book that we only really
come into
relation with when we really
stay in the game and and compare how it actually was
so we can look at some specific parts of 10
with the kinds of perspectives that that people
um mobilize today
based upon like for example only the last few days
um
different experimental studies
i'll bring in one link
just as an example of
of course only only in for educational use
this linkedin post
pristen's ai law is proven
fvp explains how neurons learn
anonymized to protect the innocent
um
pristen's
or everyone's slash no one's
ai
law
proven
is
is
explains how
what
and if you think about this in light of of how we've been thinking about 10 then and now
how does this new artifact
from
today
seem to you
yes
ali
well actually i haven't uh read the article in its entirety but uh from uh what i've seen uh
it's not fundamentally different from uh the previous work done in establishing a kind of empirical basis for active inference but i'm not sure why it gained so much attention now because uh to my mind it's just a continuation of the previous work done by the same group of authors uh establishing uh
these kinds of these kinds of these kinds of these kinds of these kinds of empirical basis for active inference but uh i can understand that it can seem as the kind of culmination of this trajectory of this line of research but uh i'm i'm not sure if the

if there's something fundamentally new or I don't know unprecedented explored in this recent paper
or it's uh it's a kind of um I mean as I said a culmination of all the previous uh efforts done
uh in this area uh but on the other hand uh of course because it's published in nature
uh it would attract lots of media attention and um as we we've seen in the past few days on Twitter or I
don't know X or anything uh uh it's the kind of uh you know um I I I'm not saying it's kind of
um uh it's reached the level of hyperbole or something but uh
again I'm not sure if it's quite beneficiary for active inference literature if these kinds of
um I mean this kind of news gets out of proportion and delivers I mean it it wouldn't be able to
deliver as much as it promises uh so as a case in point that Denise Holt uh image here seems to me a
little bit out of proportion I don't know what you think but um maybe it's just my personal opinion
that it's always better to be uh uh to to keep some restraint about these things and uh let let
everything loose and uh uh because uh it has it can have dire consequences for any future research if uh
um it it it it it doesn't get uh what it uh promises or it doesn't deliver what it promises or something
like that so that's just my personal opinion on that
excellent Ali very measured very diplomatic Neil yeah I'm I'm only just looking at the article now
um yeah you got anything to add
I'll just bring in one other um cultural artifact that that like uh back in the game I just remember
being like again everything everyone's base optimal so it's it's I'm not saying I would have done anything
differently I'm not saying anything like that I just want to point to these um historical um image meme and
everything this was the year that the alias interview with Martin Fortier and Carl had been um well all you
need is the title but what else a funny thing I just thought okay I know that it's the article is not
ever defined by the headline etc etc genius neuroscientist so okay speculative but singular
and then the generality connected to the requirement to understand a specific mind
which I think is the same um cognitive associativity between like Nate that's the whole Markov blanket
Laplace approximation Natoni mechanics like that we always talk about so that's my first take is just
like okay well yeah he may work here or there but um also Stanford doesn't say that it's
Gordon's law of collective behavior but also there's a lot of different norms around communication and
another adjacency to kind of explore to based upon how we're talking about active like to say the least
as at least instrumental and realist but also as I again um all of you have brought up in previous
discussions like there's so many other uh perspectives interpretation so if a statistical paper came out
some gene expression study from 1992 or some uh height blood pressure risk related study Pearson's
regression law is proven linear regression explains how something happens
that's also playing into this kind of like scientific positivism again not necessarily the place for the
whole falsificationism of science disproves doesn't prove but to to see here's the um what does science
do how is science related to law whose ideas are whom's what acronyms do you already have to know
an account of a natural process legitimizing
um or endorsing even applications of some similar technical method in a different setting
a lot of rich image meme and and uh media
fun ahead of us
yeah and just throwing in memes the lk99 i don't even know but what if uh someone's like this is a uh
you know room temperature super cognitive process
actually lk99 it was exactly what i had in mind
when i talked about uh yeah promising something that can be delivered
yeah i again there's so there's so much more to say on this like it's just the complex consequences
of different regimes of attention it's so so much more complex and like good or bad or for whom or over
what time scale and uh surfing the hundred foot wave with popularization and also connecting people
like just to be explicit to come to the textbook group and to volunteer be an intern at the institute
then there's an actionable path from going from like being enthralled by a podcast to working in that
that tradition
so
it's all happening in the ecosystem
and we're just
seeing it how we see it from the
a few of us who are here
just in this slash any given moment
all right neil which one of your questions do you think is most relevant
uh well perhaps perhaps the most controversial one is the how important is the theory of free energy
minimization so we could do that oh yeah really this is a question of qualitative versus quantitative
the notion of free energy is very quantitative but is it
uh how essential is it uh it's a way of formalizing and computing something so so useful from an engineering
perspective but isn't it just enough to say what the brain is it's uh a load of neurons in the brains
of working in a uh a self-organizing fashion with uh some what to use feyman's phrase ratchet and pull
mechanism to to always be or to be moving gradually towards a better solution
um so then then we have this this uh quantity free energy um that's in computable effectively uh
that's but we can say well that's that's a macroscopic um quantity but it's it's it doesn't get used
anything in any way um as as it does in some machine learning algorithms it's uh so i think i say it's
purely epiphenomenal it doesn't it doesn't actually do anything other than well to help understand
what's going on um so how how important is you know that whole uh quantitative side of things to the
to all of the uh the qualitative aspects of active influence
um implicit is is my my thought that it isn't uh it isn't essential
yeah this is a very interesting question it's a very jf claudia type point
like how different can it be than outside in variational bays contrasted with jf's constructed
lego symbolic implementation with no no equations no variational updating so i think that's a really
important area to explore ali go for it
um well actually um looking at active inference framework um i mean um superficially we can uh we
can see lots of similarities and even um i don't know probably some uh identical uh conceptual components
uh with some other frameworks such as predictive processing and uh predictive coding and so on uh but
in my opinion the main difference of active inference uh one of the main difference of active
inference from other related uh frameworks is exactly what fep enables active inference to do namely
uh it puts uh the optimization of surprise though as the main character of the whole scenario so you see
this is uh the novel perspective of active inference as compared to all the other frameworks because
of course in all the other perspectives we have uh the notions of i don't know anticipating actions and so
one and uh basing some decision making uh to basing the the decision making on the prediction and
anticipate the anticipation of actions and uh also perception uh but uh i mean the way fep reframes this
whole scenario and as i said puts the surprise optimization uh uh to the forefront as the main character
uh makes it much more elegant on one hand and on the other uh it makes it much more broader than all the other
frameworks because we know that predictive coding and predictive processing uh they're mainly restricted to
biological intelligence or biological i don't know cognition and whatever but uh we know from uh at least
2019 that the same mathematical technology can be applied to a whole range a whole array of um ontological
entities and uh it's not fundamentally restricted to uh biological sentience or intelligence so
uh uh this is uh the key reframing and the key novel perspective that fep provides uh to active imprints and uh
if if you look at it i mean these kinds of um fundamental reframings uh and uh somehow pivoting the whole
uh structure of a scientific theory based on just a single reframing of a of an essential component is
something that uh that can be witnessed throughout the whole history of science time and time again
and some of the most profound insights of um um that's been gained in throughout the entire um history of
modern science uh has been uh they they've been gained from uh this exact mechanism of changing the
perspective uh based on uh some redefinition and some reconceptualization of uh the established
facts and established theories so in that sense active inference uh and its um underlying fep
uh to my opinion can be seen as i mean it's comparable to all of these uh code unquote revolutionary
scientific theories uh in that regard
probably thank you great chapter 10 ism
super super super well said i think this helps differentiate us again while we're in chapter 10
which is essentially doing this exact work wrapping up and connecting non-technically without figures
just connecting the dots 10.3 it also connects us to the cybernetics
side it's non-contentious that cybernetic systems can be modeled input output
it's also non-contentious to do multi-agent simulation
and then coming from whether just a pure pragmatic perspective in a finite world or increasingly from the
holographic approach and the chris fields physics as information processing physics of boundaries
information processing and thermodynamics and boundaries also kind of converging on a
multi-agent thermo informational input output framework and when we're talking pedagogically
sometimes it could be like well it's like input output but you could have like just an oscillator
like just a sine wave or something like that now also i'm sure the sine wave can be understood
as doing the path lease action all of this that is the generality of the framework and it really does pivot
it or have a fulcrum as you described ali as the actual centering of surprisal in principle
in literally in principle and in fact slash practice slash deed the tractable bounded probably
approximately correct bounded rationality in this situation variational bayesian mechanics
but quantum hardware software could be used surely other kinds of computational computations can be
used but the centering of surprisal in principle with the bounded approximation of surprisal with all of
the work of the bounded surprisal being bounded surprisal about a given model can't talk like generally
about the l2 norm for some cohort of linear aggressions you haven't named yet that's just not enough
information to to say further so the theory takes an essential normative focus on surprisal minimization
and therefore bridging to the practice with a tractable tractable uh tractable optimizable bound
so no contention with other cybernetics frameworks they want to explain observables as a loss function
that's awesome perceptual control theory rl they want to have structured or unstructured or fixed or dynamic
cognitive architectures also all good um they want to include action and sense making and use a
variational auto encoder or a variational bayesian modeling imperative specifically that's an interesting
gray zone question is that implicit fep if it's literally already providing a particular partitioned
example that would be very interesting dark fep literature search but it's actually those works
which arguably are used every day in terms of statistics algorithms by reframing the scenario it's
like hey we don't have to reduce uncertainty slash bound uncertainty slash maximize model evidence on
the reward function turn the surprisal bounding on itself purely statistically
that doesn't mean it's going to be perfect because first there's the information computation bounds
chrisfields uh wolfram all of that and then just practically your implementation is going to be like
just realistically put together by you and however you actually put it together so you're talking about
in principle like exploring blueprints for buildings
in principle without even wondering if they can be built or anything like that or are we really in the
game talking about motor disorders in this context of this situation
very very very different waters fep and act inf though it can be uh assured as far as we believe
that there is a fundamental relationship that seemingly we learn more about brings in more pieces because it's a
pretty common
useful as well as converged upon forest utility already enabling a lot of the shorter term work
to be scholarly
and of course all pending etc etc etc but that's
as
as ali has pointed out as they call the structure of scientific revolutions
and so in that way that's an interesting and provocative uh area to explore
ali
um also on a related point and uh getting back to uh the previous discussion we had um about uh the
nature of consciousness sentience awareness and uh so on uh so uh philip paul has this recent book uh
called the book of minds uh which is a 500 page tome uh but uh he recently gave a talk to the royal
institution um it's titled uh let me see yeah it's what is a mind uh so in this talk uh he
he concentrates on just one uh chapter of this whole book uh namely uh the space of uh sorry at the
the space of possible minds so more often than not we think of all of these
uh concepts related to minds such as intelligence agency uh sentience and so on uh as a kind of
one-dimensional spectrum one-dimensional continuum but uh philip paul here the
shows that uh it would probably be more um i mean uh conducive to further uh development of the
development of further uh future theories if we conceive a kind of multi-dimensional space of
possible minds which can have uh the access such as agency experience intelligence and consciousness and
it uh it draws a kind of multi-dimensional uh space such as this and uh i was thinking active inference can
actually provide sufficient tools to traverse this whole uh space of possible minds uh if one tries to
put all of these different uh axes uh related to one of the uh key trade-offs that's been uh that unfolds
through uh through uh the central equations of active inference so basically uh i was thinking that
probably or perhaps the central equations of active inference or can be used uh as a kind of uh
mathematical tool to traverse this whole uh possible uh by using uh all the all the trade-offs
uh that we've seen uh that we've seen uh throughout the whole book uh such as explore exploit phenomena or
other kinds of dilemmas that we've seen before so uh yeah i just uh wanted to uh share
this connection with you because i believe there can be some potential
uh interesting uh connections between these two theories
that's great another kind of recent uh connection i was just listening to a little of this machine
learning street talk with stephen wolfram and he starts talking about yes the rulliad and and all the
other work and it's really also impressive how much he condenses it and how much they progressed
and then he's like talking about a physics of the observer and a framework for observation and i was
just like that's where we need to kind of like direct time stamps clear ontologically structured rhetoric
i mean we're in the farmers market phase still overall and how far away is it really from
processing and analyzing on one on one branch processing and analyzing speech
to develop appropriate paths and wayfinding and guiding and all of that even if it's stephen
wolfram giving him the most informative on ramps just like we would for anyone on the computational side
and also to neil's point and focus with what's the qualitative side and the true cognitive the
phenomenological side the social side and i think that's one reason why um with with
scholarly work like that of mel andrews and and mal and others that
integrates discussion around model building it also draws upon the pragmatic and the abductive and
the semiotic and a lot of other strongly process oriented we talk about process ontologies um all these different
different features uh being woven in at the very least compatibly but compatibly which is to say
open-endedly articulated in principle
that's
of course we're just having discussions who knows what's over under confident just just
saying how it strikes me at this moment we wouldn't really want a better imperative based upon
what we understand at least what i personally understand than something along those lines that sets the
stage for multi-perspectival modeling of diverse intelligences
setting that composability it's like if it doesn't have composability
and the unopinionated uh kind of nature collab as the collaborative project
project that's what we want collaborative project essential project critical infrastructure specific
project ryan smith used a stomach uh electrode to test this hypothesis about the vagus nerve and the
role of this like neuropeptide and this muscle uh pattern then we're we're in the standard
scientific scientific expanded scientific space in the process theory space chapter six chapter nine
did you look at the whole system did you consider systematic factors what what trade-offs did you make
as modeling is the process and pipeline reproducible do we have the code like in chapter nine can you make
a figure about the experiment just like connect it to the figures in the textbook like reviewer type
uh functions but as we often bring up reviewers are not going into whether l2 norm or l1 norm was the
statistically appropriate choice i know in ethology many times we just said we looked at this other paper
or just this is a commonly used approach for this statistical technique
uh
so
putting a lot of weight and focus on the last mile
and the specifics which
it's obvious
like pearson's not brought out every time somebody does or doesn't use an r squared to mobilize an argument
or make a decision that's so many levels away einstein's not brought out except in jest when the planes are late so
a lot of lot of um morphological and behavioral development
um
but one of the key practices
um
a one thing that wolfram was saying was like there are certain things about this or that that have to be the case like he was talking about our continuous time perception
even though it's the hypergraph like the discretized hypergraph
at the lower level
uh with that kind of like averages over all the computations i believe
um something like that
um and then like we're orders magnitude larger and slower we average out we coarse grain talked about that
than the theory of the observer
and he's like yeah there might be like other things about communication or about observation or systems
that also like must be the case
so i think there's kind of like in terms of the anthropic principle slash anthropic fallacy um
it's almost like
i believe that we will through chapter 10
and beyond like a minute hey how many careers
like this is not just hot takes on a podcast
these are many many careers in many many directions of many many academic departments
a lot of research programs startups a lot of funding cycles around what is or isn't plausible
ai winter
all the implications causes and consequences of cybernetics research
it's like this is the umbrella that
is on the table
connected only to other accounts
so barring things that we learn on a week by week basis
so at least scale the pragmatic value
to how relevant it is
and then calibrate your epistemic scalar
to
what and how you do and don't know
like we all do and don't know and only speak from our own experience
we can

have a cognitive modeling analysis
what happens when somebody who is not to pick on any field or any topic or anything like that
someone who's like oh i love that citation
or like that's my job
or like i know that really well or my dissertation was in that what happens
in the moment of um contextualization
not to get too meta but again whether it's artisanal farmers market status
and just like well anecdotally people who are um doing psychiatric work or who are interested in like
for example chronic pain as like several of our um very committed colleagues are
like they prefer this
that can be approached by kind of naively or expertly qualitatively and or quantitatively
so we're in in the end of this um cohort the of uh three of the textbook group
so what is it really about the textbook group
how do we really want to think about its role in the ecosystem
like impact on people's learning
production of different materials for different
consumptions and publishings
what do any of you think about that
um

just to give one other random take just kind of unstructured thinking about it is like um
um i was thinking of walking down the aisle at a bookstore and there's different frameworks
catching or vying for attention and i know it sounds obvious that it has to be differentiated
but pointing out that there's differentiation
on multiple axes
as a consequence
of
it sounds wild or weird or however you want to see it at first but the minimization of surprise
is as a central phenomena
and that
simple starting positionality or stance
along with some other core memes that i think needs to be worked out and understood the relationship
to like embody and all this other stuff
that rolls downhill differently
helps you rethink differently
see a lot of phenomena
maybe theoretical transdisciplinary synthesis is not your
um trajectory in life that's totally chill
obvious it doesn't need to be said but just to be clear
that this is
in that
just the where and the when and the how and the who
in relationship to
the
um
actual
which we saw
uh
at least the the movie poster for
earlier in our discussion
uh
and also one other point is
you see
given the rapid development of active inference literature since the publication of this book
i believe
it might not be a terribly bad idea if
beginning from the next cohort
uh
uh
uh
we somehow begin to
incorporate more
uh actively
some of the
findings of
recent literature into the discussions because
i mean
with this
the
pace of development that active inference is experiencing right now
uh
uh
it might sound a bit grandiose but i
think it's not
unlike
the situation
that quantum physics experienced
in the early 20th century
so
as we know
from the history of quantum physics
uh
uh
almost every year and even
uh
every few months
radically new
uh
understanding of quantum theory
uh
appeared which
fundamentally shaped
what
would be now as
quantum physics
and i believe active inference
kind of
taken a similar
trajectory
because
with
of course not
all of the
um
papers that's been published
since the publication of this book
but some of the
uh
groundbreaking papers that really
shifted our understanding of what active inference is all about
and uh
somehow refined
the more vague concepts
that we still see in this book
and try to make them more precise and
make it more coherent with the rest of the
theory
so
yeah
as i said
in my opinion it might not be a bad idea to
look at some of these
um
developments
from the next beginning from the next cohort
thanks a lot
Ali
Neil
yeah
well as
as the discipline grows
with any
new area it grows it gets beyond the point where
where any individual can keep track of things
um
um
i was wondering i mean
well maybe the active inference institute is
effectively doing this already but i'm just imagining
if if there was an annual report let's say the institute
produced an annual report
providing an overview of of what happened
the significant developments
uh in in the last year
um
so that's you were talking earlier about
there's so many different ways in
that it touches on
uh
that you know the people might
um
well have some involvement to do with active
inference but they only know this this tiny area
uh
how would you get them to have some
bigger perspective
where there's there's education such as this book
but how would you enable them to carry on

um

um

um
maintaining that
because
because they can't be reading thousands of journal papers
uh
a year
just on the active inference when
that might actually only be a relatively small part of their
their wider research
and
um
whereas the institute should be able to provide some
oath
is it it's not i'm not just thinking a review of um
some say said this and so said that but some
sort of bigger perspective on on where
on what's happening so like a whole load of new articles
new publications were in
in this direction say social sciences and
and that to to help people
thanks these are such good comments i really agree
ali and i and now actually kind of like pseudo-templated
a little bit like a research roundup
so it's a seed project that's just one possible mechanism not to not jump to a
solution or anything like that but like
i also totally agree like yeah we fixed some
errata and typos we aggregated some people's input
that's
that's local refinement and it's adding value and so on but
then
okay now jonathan and ali have pdfs on this equation that equation
that's like
and then you have
sanjeev's work
as all of you
know
and uh
the annotation work is infinite and i think we've in some ways laid out what certain paths look like
like for example using the ontology seriously
annotating equations with the verbal descriptions
getting all the figures boxes tables eventually even paragraphs into tabular form
like we have the massively collaborative possibilities and that's not to say they're even being underused at
all
by human and or non-human agents
it's just part of a co-creation
so it's not about just like um just like single dimensional perspectives on consciousness or anything like that
uh
are are limited if
if if not worse
um
multiple projects should speak to the bigger perspective
i think there's the important observational role
like here's how surprise was used in this paper at this time
i associate that with the kind of trust finder architecture like rhetorical search assertion not to get too technical but
different expressions are made in the ecosystem
ingressed and or intentionally
and
and
we have different strategies and approaches
and projects
that are anticipatory and maintenance oriented and historical
and
to improve our sense making
there are some interns who are doing such
amazing work
and that's only the fraction
some fraction of people
um
who are not just in their own way and in their own game which is everyone
so like
what we're
what we can really do
i'm i'm happy to have these fundamental conversations
i i just i
we're we're not gonna be able to enumerate or evaluate or anything like that but
par something you know keeping the par flame alive
maybe with a discussion changing the time ollie and i will have completed our background videos
and then we can kind of
assess like here's the roles
here's the first versions of the background materials
go through it
at these you know small groups so there could be a lot of decentralized ways to continue that or at
least just low preparation ways for different facilitators
and then
maybe we need cohort two of chris fields
maybe we need a special integration
units and projects
like that just having a reading group follow aval in social sciences
and follow chris in in the you're you're going to be intersecting and and
uh engaging and still on the fractal wave
and we're always going to be only using the systems that we have
can't be waiting for future tools but we will use them as they arrive
and just supporting the sustainability of that for the ecosystem is our focus
yeah
another thought just as we're in kind of last minutes of 10. so it's like all this theoretical scope
yeah it could just be another um node in the same space but the claim is kind of like it generalizes
a lot of them relates a lot of them formally um maybe even envelops all of them um
at least socio uh socio technically if not even way way way deeper and broader and and everything
like that so it's like however much theory scope you think this covers maybe you're super familiar
with literature you're for every single citation you're like oh yeah you know exactly why it's there
then this argument is poised to your adjacency because this is the perspective of the authors
or if you're not super familiar with these areas it may be sufficient just to understand them
as being like broad topics of interest if not addressing important systems in the real world
but when we really think about these as being the major threads of accounts and statistics for
cognitive behavioral systems it's not like there's some other like secret 11 theory
that's just being like censored in the citation literature i mean i'd leave it to a meta-analysis
to say more but but nobody reads this and says wow you're you're ignoring like this entire massive
thing yeah maybe go into more detail on adaptive resonance theory or go into more detail on this
on one given area but when the broad threads are represented and the arguments are made formally in
text based upon an implicit first principle the scope and the relevance of the learning has to
be this theoretical scope and the consequences on systems of interest doesn't mean that it has to be
overwhelming in the moment but people bring up real things in the textbook group and it is about real
things because education is about real things i would like to hear any of your all's
thoughts on chapter 10 now as we close cohort three
empathize with empathize with empathize with empathize with empathize with empathize with empathize with
not us.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Any thoughts?
Thank you.
Thank you.

Thank you.
Thank you.



Thank you.
Thank you.


Thank you.



Thank you.
Thank you.
It's a different system of interest.
It's not the same thing as learning.
Learning epistemic value, that's why it's sometimes fun just to learn about things for their epistemic value.
There's parts that we know has pragmatic value.
There's parts that we know have epistemic value.
There's parts that we know have epistemic value.
What other imperative are you acting and inferring under?
Are you acting and inferring under?
And then one route that Ali highlighted very articulately earlier was the central character, main character energy for surprisal.
And a kind of close in that nexus is the qualitative, but formal, potentially qualitative compositional about existence, existentials.
And that ties it to homeostasis and all of that, ties it to observation and all of that.
It opens up another degree of freedom, the axial constant, Mobius strip.
It's not about da-da-da, it's about how you got there.
Like, this describes systems with persistence.
Do you have a better descriptor?
But that doesn't mean that constructing it is a guarantee of future persistence.
You know, past returns does not guarantee future returns.
Or whatever they say there.
But you may be able to say certain things, but the existentialism is a natural fit in information landscapes because it kind of blurs.
And it doesn't actually blur, but it conceptually integrates the measurement and the existential on a kind of common footing.
Super general analytical representations, the exact same kind from like variational physics mechanics, information theory, quantum, category theory, dynamic systems.
All their notation, special case.
All the math that people are using to describe systems of interest.
Compensationality.
Recognition of new underlying special case phenomena.
Just as Buckminster Fuller always pointed to.
Recognition of special case phenomena.
Upon generalization.
Also related to the revolution model that Ali mentioned.
And that is the thing.
You just have a particular partition.
But then.
You have them fitting an L2 norm.
Which is not unlike what a structural equation model is actually.
And structural equation modeling is used in SPM.
And I'm sure there's all kinds of different variants and stuff, but it's like, that's like a kind of massively linear parametric.
Can include time series, just like all the Sarima methods and all of that.
And a lot of the same ability to describe like changing causal relationships.
Little known fact existed in SPM.
So a lot of the practice.
In principle.
Was totally, totally addressed by SPM textbook.
Various modules became increasingly recognized centrality of action, the pragmatic turn in neuroscience, all that.
Those.
Those.
Recognitions of were either articulations that were not understood to have already existed.
Like the idea that you could just extend.
The kind of Coleman filter like.
Predictive processing algorithm arising in video compression.
And then just like.
Pop action in.
And get active inference.
With all of these even immediately apparent philosophical implications for people who are studying those topics.
And the maintenance of the key feature with the physics based first principles singular imperative.
So recognitions of articulations that that suggested.
Also profitable and fruitful directions important critiques and and re understandings.
And developments.
Not just related to notation.
The.

Generative model and generative process, which as we've discussed more recently.
Is not the way that it's often being discussed.
So does that lead to an entire secondary discussion?
Or do we just continue forward?
Mostly with.
Such and such.
But the particular partition.
But the particular partition.
And the.
Over the last years.
The refinement of so many different aspects such that we're basically.
Like preparing to scramble.
Not really.
How to even synthesize.
Hence the ultra descriptive deflationary ontology.
And assertion based architecture that we hope is going to bring in a lot of.
Diverse ways of knowing and remodeling and sense making.
And.
And.
There will be a lot of different.
Angles and overlaps.
Like what if there's a statistics professor who's just feels a certain way about.
This.
How does that situate them in relationship to the theoretical apparatus.
As understood by any other given person.
Or by any other group of other people.
So how to really retain the.
The.
The.
The.

The.
The.

The.
The.

The.

The.
The.
The.
It's comforting to.
Expect and prefer that we have the framework that is on the path towards that.
Composability extensibility, et cetera, et cetera, all the phenomena that we discuss.
And what's the other.
Aspect to it.
and the textbook's not life
so how to emphasize that too
and really integrate it in people living and learning
make it what it can be
so we could definitely think a lot and uh no specific dates for
cohorts are set but maybe you know who knows social sciences cohort two
chris fields cohort two
par
it's people's attention slash nestmate level contributions that
actually embody those things and so after the acclimation of like the kind of woe
there's still so much work and it will continue to be
so
it's been a total
honor to neil ali and esmail and everybody else who contributed totally to this cohort
um any any last comments on cohort three
fascinating journey as always
so
the summary well summary chapter will always do that sort of throwing everything there is in front of you
but yeah there is so much to the whole to the subject isn't there i've brought in from so many different places
it really is



it really is
yeah it's been great listening to you
yeah we've all
we've all learned a lot it's been a very great end so i guess next week the the day of the symposium i mean
we can discuss more but we'll see what we may want to do or how we want to proceed in the coming um cohorts so thanks again see you all next time bye
thanks everyone thanks
bye
thanks