SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It's October 18th, 2023.

We're in the course Active Inference for the Social Sciences.

And today we're in the lecture by the course co-organizer and that will kick off the final leg of the course, which is Avel Gwinnon-Karlou's lecture, Social Constraints and the Existential Stance, What Makes Us Human?

So we'll be looking forward to a lecture followed by a discussion.

So if you have any questions, please feel free to add them in the live chat or submit to the course syllabus.

And also at the end, we'll talk about how we're going to conclude this course.

So with that, thank you to you, Evel.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello.

So I do see the slides correctly.

Everything is fine.

I will take silence as a yes.

So the role of this session is basically to show you the inspiring intuition behind the whole course and to

show very concretely well very abstractly but in my mind concretely why the specific formalism of active inference and social constraints is really wrong to understand the human species and the social cultural evolution of you know things that we do so we'll talk of uh social constraints of the existence of the existential stance and of what makes us human

Disclaimer, this presentation is closely aligned with an upcoming paper whose name is the same, I think.

It's tentative for now.

And whose man on job is a co-author.

So, first, let us ask basic questions about the topic at hand.

What is culture?

by psychologist Cecilia Heiss.

Culture is typically used in one of three ways.

Culture can be information or behavior acquired socially.

So like if I am an ant and I figure out that you need to go somewhere because of

Pheromones, this is culture.

It can be social behavior that is shared within a group.

So, for example, if I am a nape and I figure out how to open nuts with a stone thing and the group just everyone does it the same way, this is culture.

And it can be the adaptive evolution of socially acquired behavior, which is, if I remember well, we have evidence of it in the wild for corvids and humans only.

So the question is,

We know that culture is the human specific, like it is the case simply.

But depending on what we mean by culture, it can describe behavior that is very much shared with other species.

So the question, a question that needs to be answered is how specific are the human cultural mechanisms?

So one core thing to understand is that there is no such thing as the cultural mechanism.

The mechanisms of social learning in humans, they are culturally transmitted.

Whether you will listen to, I don't know, an elder, a rapper, a scientist depends on the cultural norms in which you exist.

And the specific way in which teacher-student interaction are supposed to go is, again, culturally embedded.

And the type of information that people will try to figure out is all transmit.

is itself culturally embedded so we can't just write the mechanism for human social learning this is like empirically there is none and conceptually i would don't i i don't think the notion is coherent to begin with

So one core element for this is we have basically explicit linguistic rules about who we should trust.

Like, listen to your parents.

And those are linguistic, and language varies from culture to culture.

So this changes from culture to culture.

Pretty straightforward.

And in general, the practice of cultural transmission of intentional teaching, they are varying between cultures.

And I do not want to get into it because I don't think I would say something that is accurate without notes.

And we can, however, take a look at a behavior that is, I think, nearly universal, which is storytelling.

When people tell a story,

they use stories to transmit norms.

And in the specific culture of the Agda or Akta, I have misspelled it at least once.

I think it is Agda.

You have a core role of storytelling in telling people what to do.

And you have specific

tails that were studied and that were associated to specific norms.

And these are very important because like, here we have laws that are written somewhere, and that

Like people in blue will come and hit you if you don't follow them.

But this is not something that is universal.

So in a context where you do not have states, you typically have no really other way to transmit norms than talk about it.

So, from there, everything is culturally embedded, like the way we're addressing the norms, the kind of norms can be transmitted given this way, the way specific cues will be understood given a specific niche, etc.

So yes, all this to say there is no big C culture, there is cultural transmission, there is cultural evolution, but there is no specific mechanism or, you know, natural type of culture in humans.

But there are categories of behavior that are very obviously human specifics and that are very obviously cultural, as in direct contribution to

to culture.

For example, fire.

It's obviously majorly important to culture, because if you have fire, you get a lot of calories.

If you get a lot of calories, you get a big brain.

Like, you can afford a big brain.

But fire, you know, doesn't produce culture.

That's not how anything works.

Things that do work directly to produce culture are language and role-taking.

So language, I think you are familiar with it.

You are using it now on the receiving side.

It is a practice that basically embeds communicative intents into a specific set of symbols that can be letters, that can be words.

Or rather, it would be a phoneme, I guess.

I don't know if the phoneme or the word is a symbol, but you have symbols, and they embed meaning, and people use it.

And what is critical is that each of these symbols has a public meaning, like semantics and pragmatics.

If I tell you chair,

Maybe we don't know precisely what specific thing enters in the chair category.

Maybe we'll press a tool.

The sensation of chair will vary, but we agree on the basics of the chair.

We agree on what we can do with chairs.

We agree with a lot of things implicitly by the use of this word.

And we can use the role of syntax to manipulate this unit of meaning in a specific way.

I sit on a chair.

I'm talking about an action that is related to a specific object that is a chair.

And you understand what I mean.

If I was trying to mimic it,

Maybe I'm getting through.

Maybe you would think I'm saying I'm crouching over a bed.

Why not?

And so the language and the fact that it has a publicly-instantiated meaning is critical in keeping coordination in the specific thing that people do and why they do it, which is unambiguously cultural.

And you have another more subtle mechanism process, I don't know, phenomenon, which is shared intentionality.

So by the work of mainly Tomasello, we know that chimps are not very social and they can learn.

They are as intelligent as humans.

Well, at least young humans.

But they usually are not really interested in what other chimps are doing.

And most importantly, they are not interested in sharing goals, trying to figure out what is the end result that some other chimp is upholding, and trying to mesh in this plan to help him.

While in humans, from a very young age, we are very streamotivated.

And we are very motivated to figure out what we, whatever we is, are collectively doing and figure out what one's role is in that and do that.

And this is likely not a bona fide cognitive function that stands on its own, but it's a behavior, it is a cognitive process that is anemic in humans.

very rare, if existing everywhere else.

And that is core to most theory of the tradition of culture.

So these two things we know are human specifics, up to maybe very small, important details.

And we know are critically embedded in what we call culture.

And so

What I will do from now on is to provide a specific theory of culture, the active inference of cultural landscapes that, in my opinion,

basically explains or at least meshes well with why those two specific phenomenons are so important from the appalling of culture.

But it also means that culture is not information per se.

It's something that is more organic and that evolves

more like you know biological system themselves evolve than population of genes and from this account we will go to figure out what it means about collective organization figure out why we have gods and taxes and from there we will go to a more physical and physical consideration and ask how basically this theory can be written within physics through the active inference formalism

So let us go.

First, I'm just presenting the theory of the active inference of clear landscape, and I'm presenting a core concept, the concept of constraints that derive from at least my treatment of that.

So active inference, probably a lot of you know what this is, but this goes on YouTube, so I will re-explain.

Active inference is a theory of cognition where, basically, agents enact expectations of the world.

They have a world model, and they make predictions over the world model.

And they strive for those predictions to remain coherent with what they actually observe.

And that means that the agent will update beliefs that are false.

If I hear meow and I think there is no cats,


SPEAKER_02:
I will then think that it is more likely.


SPEAKER_04:
And on the other hand, I will try to provoke, to realize a prediction that I kind of need.

So for example, if I really want to hear Mio, if I really expect to hear Mio, and I expect this to be a basic staple of my life, I will maybe figure out how to get a cat.

That works not too well with cats, but with drinking or eating, I expect to be a thing that has water in it, because else I die.

So when I'm thirsty,

I am thirst by drinking.

And we have this basically duality of predictive, like normal, what we call typically perception, just trying to figure out what there is outside and updating our belief when we don't.

So I said perception, but it's more inference.

And there is active inference, which is like the realization of this inference through action.

And the core

argument of active inference is that those two are the same process.

They are the same process that is entailed by an information geometry.

So basically a space of belief over which the dynamics of an agent unfold.

And the core feature of this approach is the dissolution of agency as we typically understand it.

We typically understand agency to be like, hey, I'm an agent.

I want to do this.

And I will reason about what I want.

And I will reason about how to get it.

And I will do the thing that I reasoned about.

Reason is important.

It's not the basic cognitive function that analyze everything we do.

I do not think this statement is controversial.

And in Active Inference, the model we have is that at multiple scale, in multiple contexts, we can produce prediction over our sense motor flow and then strive to realize those predictions.

So what that means is that our actions are not constrained by will.

In the general case, they are constrained by what looks more like a self model, a model of oneself and what oneself would typically do in contexts such as the one I'm exposed to.

Related concepts is the notion of skill and intentionality.

So this is this skill intentionality thing is a theory that stands at the interface between active inference and ecological psychology, which I will absolutely not get into.

And the core argument of skill intentionality is that when you are a skilled agent, so agents that, you know, understand how to do things in the world, you do not experience the world as like,

uh represented space in 3d with 3d models in it and each object is well defined and a lot of has a lot of properties that are embedded in a world model that like you have in a video game what you see is a landscape of basic opportunities for action i will see a computer i know i can mash the keys keys i think you say keys

And I know I can go to the internet, and I know I can do this or that.

I see a door, I know I can go through it if it's open, I can close it.

I can go through it if it's closed, and I can open it.

This is the basic opportunities that the door presents.

And I won't say a logical consequence, but a very coherent entitlement of Active Inference is that I will see

minimal model of things around me that are based on the opportunities for action that they present.

I will orient my attention minimally to grasp what I can do with things and what the fields, the perceptive fields that I live in is a landscape of those affordances.

So the picture is an extract from Fallout New Vegas, which is the greatest RPG.

Please play it.

This is important.

Only thing you need to keep in mind on this course.

And that shows you a radio, like 3DF radio.

And you have an action button that tells you whether you want to activate the radio.

And you have HPs and APs.

And I have no idea what AP is.

and this looks more like a naive feel than what you get into a really realistic presentation of like a picture photo picture of your environment because you have a perception of the uh object like you have a

to the array that represents your vision of an object.

But it's embedded in things that tell you where you're looking at, things that tell you what you can do with things, things that tell you what are your states, what are your basic states when you're engaging with this object.


SPEAKER_02:
And this is, I think, a pretty nice illustration


SPEAKER_04:
sorry avil could you repeat the last 30 seconds there it was just like it hung up okay just repeat the last 30 seconds thank you so this is a picture from fallout in vegas which is a good game and i claim that it is a pretty good illustration of what we talk

we talk about action-related perception because you see the object and with slash through the object you also see what opportunities for action it presents in this case activate the radio and you see it in a way it is embedded with your physiological states so the hp and ap and a core feature of that is that when i experience affordances i feel directly

through the perception whether the affordance is good or bad.

If I see, I don't know, a cliff, and I can fall off the cliff and die, this will cause fear.

The perception of that possibility of falling and dying will be negatively loaded.

If I see, I don't know, a hotbed in winter,

and I know I can now rest after a day of work when I was cold, I will be happy about it.

I will pursue the possibility in a positively balanced way.

And so this is the case for basic physiological thing.

But this is also the case for cultural norms and values.

We come to experience the world as a world of affordances,

And this is the same for the social world.

I will feel bad or good, depending on what possibility for action I will experience in a given context.

And this is a picture of a forest path near an archaeological site that is studied by the research group that funds me, Xscape.

And from a pure direct perception kind of way, there is a very complex statistical picture that are embedded in the picture.

But if you are a human, a thing that walks, what you will perceive, like feel directly, experience directly, is just a possibility to walk along the path and follow it.

And this is something that you feel is a property of the path, I think.

You see the path, you think, I can go through the path.

You don't think.

There is a 3D space.

And in this 3D space, there is a set of statistical feature, one of which being a flat thing in the middle.

And among the entire space of action that they have, one of them is to walk through the path, like just do this and this and this and this.

You just feel like you can go through there.

And the way humans learn about each other, the way humans cohabitate and come to expect things about each other, they can develop basically a sense of what is culturally possible or not possible in a given context.

And this sensation, this perception of cultural possibilities, it is embedded in the way we pay attention to things.

We will pay attention to different things,

according to like you know what is culturally relevant in a given context in a given situation and this is a core argument of the um thinking through the minds account of cultural evolution which was uh spearheaded by maxwell ramstad and this year forgot his first name and because of

everything that we saw before because of the dissolved agency that we have in France.

The cultural patterns in the flow of attention, they will not simply be experienced as abstract norms and value that one could or could not respect.

They will effectively constrain the thing you can pay attention to, the outcome you expect in a way that will drive reaction towards specific outcomes.

And so this cultural landscape of affordances, they embed intentionality and normativity.

As in the patterns that are relevant to explain normativity and intentionality, they are in the landscape.

They are not like only at least in your brain cells.

And a core argument I would say is that the engagement with a cultural landscape

It is due to existence of social constraints, where social constraints are understood as statistical patterns that will causally act over what you do or cannot do.

So when I talk about the social cultural landscape of forensics, I am implicitly talking about a set of constraints that act over behavior.

And this I've demonstrated by talking about metanomativity and the like.

You have, how to say, you have a nuance in the notion of constraints, which is that... Avel.


SPEAKER_00:
Sorry, again.

avel from your side is just i'm not hearing any audio mao or maria do you hear him no nothing you can't write okay okay over a collective behavior so there is a scale of one specification yes all right could you repeat could you repeat the last 45 seconds can you hear me now yeah okay


SPEAKER_04:
So what I'm saying is that the engagement with cultural landscape preferences, it is due to the existence of constraints which act over individual behavior.

Because when I engage individually with the landscape preferences that is a characteristic of my local material and cultural environments, the embedded normativity will drive my behavior, my intention, my presentation in a specific way.

And instead of looking at how each individual agent engage with the landscape, I can look at the constraints that emerge from this collective activity.

So is that, do you hear me now?

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Okay, good.

And so let us get back to the question of what makes us human.

We are told about human-specific mechanism phenomena that seem to be involved in culture.

Those were language and role-taking.

And those two phenomena seem to be pretty robust candidates to explain the coherence of a shared cultural landscape or set of circumstances.

Language, it provides a space of public representation, like representation in the classical cognitive sense, that you can negotiate that are actually out there in the literal sense.

They are sensory signals that are in the environment.

And that's structural and agent behavior.

So when you talk to yourself, it will constrain what you pay attention to implicitly, what you can and cannot do.

And when you talk with others, this will influence what you say and what you want to say and what you perceive to be relevant to say.

And so it will constrain your behavior and in a much stronger and more robust way than you could have to implicit intentionality inference.

And role taking in a more subtle way

brings an agent to think existentially, to not ask the question what I am supposed to do in the situation, but what an agent that is embedded in the specific cultural context where I am embedded is expected to do.

And so this basically forces you to have a synchronization between what you experience as possibilities for action and what you expect are cultural expectations of our behavior.

So these two mechanisms would be very, very strong mechanisms to enforce the coherence of cognitive landscape between agents.

And it just so happens that there are things that exist only in the one specie that has full-fledged, cumulative, open-ended cultural evolution.

So yes, I think this is interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, Avel.


SPEAKER_00:
You just unshared your screen.

Sorry?

You unshared your screen, or is that done?


SPEAKER_04:
No, I did not unshare my screen.


SPEAKER_00:
Could you just reshare it?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
There you go.

All right.

Looks great.

Continue.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So, yes, the question is...

As I said, there is a duality between each agent engaging with the landscape for dance and constraints that exist over the landscape that is shared, that is straightforward.

But in the set of constraints that is shared,

characteristic of a given landscape.

Basically, to account for perennial agriculture evolution, this must be a set of constraints that changes through time, that builds new constraints and new demical flow.

And it's something that you cannot get with a landscape in the sense of demical system theory.

That is not, demical system theory does not deal with

systems that do open-ended evolution.

So the question is, what relation can we make between the dynamics of enculturation, according to which agent integrates specific cultural expectation, and the dynamics of open-ended cultural evolution through which cultural landscape and the constraints construct itself through time?

And this is where we get to the more holistic side, where I think we can see why the specific construct of constraints is critical as compared to the simple cultural landscape approach.

Let us take a look at this.

There is a thing called biological autonomy.

It is a quite recent term in its formalization, the relevant formalization that describes the ability of a living system for self-construction, like maintaining one structure and changing it through developmental and evolutionary time.

And the best formalization we have had so far is from Montevill and Mossio, and it's a constraint closure.

A constraint is simply a relatively slow physical process that shapes a faster process, like canalized material or information or energy flow, without itself being affected at the timescale of the interaction.

And for Montevideo-Mossio, you get biological autonomy, where you get a set of constraints that collectively produce itself.

Each constraint is produced by other constraints in the set, and each constraint produces other constraints in the set.

This is a very simple idea.

This is a very informal idea, in the sense that it doesn't have dynamics, it doesn't have a physics.

It is just a formal statement of what we mean by autonomy.

And this idea basically is the best grounding we have to think about what is living and what is an agent, although in itself it does not entail agency.

And when we look at social systems or early systems as a set of constraints, what you can see is that systems such as the brain, multiscale organized system,

they can be read as basically a set of nested constraints.

Like your DMN, the activity of your default mode network, which is the basal activity of the brain in the absence of stimulation, it basically is constituted of chemical constraints over what the composite tissues do at a given point in time.

And this itself

is a constraint over what individual cells do through time, which itself is a constraint over the evolution law of an individual cell, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

So I can always look at a multiscale system as a set of nested constraints at nested scales.

And in systems that are autonomous, that are biological, cognitive agents,

Not only the smaller scale systems like CEL, they can enable, they construct and they enact the constraints that are higher scale agents.

But higher-scale agents can also shape back the behavior of lower-scale agents.

Of course, if I do something, which is something that I, as an agent, do, this will constrain the activity of my neural networks.

This is like heavy learning.

This is common to all models of learning.

Learning goes through change in network structure.

And so there is an opportunity to model emerging agents from collective network activity and to look at the interaction between description at nested scales of behavior.

And this is applicable very straightforwardly to the human species.

So this is a summary of these states.

And something that you can look is that it is very dense.

It has very dense buildings that are built in a specific way.

It is near a river, which enables the trade at great distance.

It has a bridge, so entry to the city is constrained to a specific point.

And it is essentially surrounded by several fields, very flat lands that are rubble, that are fertilized probably by water from the river.

And basically, all of these features enable the production of state societies, societies with a central administration that does stuff.

And these societies will robustly produce material contexts that favor their own survival.

For example, dance settlements that enable you to have everyone together to tell them what to do.

Temples which give a material grounding to the authority of the state.

bridges that allow you to move things around and to control what gets in and out and more cultural several fields that allow you to like take the food and bring it back to the city and the production of such settlements and such material environment by states is somewhat robust intercultural feminine at a more like

and science are multicultural scale.

You have a set of processes that are critical in the construction and action of norms in humans.

And most likely, common ancestors of those processes is dancing and singing.

Dancing and singing, they give you

embodied synchronization and this is shown to drive the development of group identity and this gives you basically emotional grounding of the norms that are shared within society because those norms they are not abstract expectations, they are embedded in your specific emotions, in your specific embodiments while you do things that are critical to your ecology.

And ritual activity and storytelling, they allow more complexity of normativity by using symbolism.

And the system of normativity, they are maybe less embedded in the one's direct experience, but they allow more complexity in the nature of the norms that are transmitted and enforced.

And these norms, by the simple fact that they are perceptible through material symbolism and through storytelling, they become a causal force in the cultural landscape that is shared by a group member.

So they become things that are the power

to produce or constrain the framing in which people will read specific situation and therefore constrain and produce software behavior.

And this is, like I've said this already, so this looks like a petition, but I want to hammer this because if this is the case,

then we can be interested in what complex tales in agency that emerges from the constraints embedded in complex tales.

So we know that people can perceive non-material agents under certain conditions.

This is common in schizophrenia.

You will hear voices that tell you to do things and that are not embedded in a specific body.

This is common in dissociative and anti-disorder because you will have agents that basically share your body while having an existing, while not being tied to a specific body.

one specific personality can exist while they are not in control of your body and so in a way that is not contingent on the direct material and action of what they want and want not to do.

And under a lot of anthropologically described conditions that are not considered pathological, you can basically have

regimes of attention that produce a non-material agent that you can talk with and that have motivation and that have embedded traits, which are often called tulpas, which is a term borrowed from Buddhist literature.

And so this emergence of non-material agents, how to say, if I consider an agent to be something, a closed set of constraints,

And I consider things like tales and ritual as mechanism that produce constraints in behavior.

There is basically no difficulty whatsoever at conceptual level.

There is no unexpectedness or no complexity to say that.

Specific systems of constraint that happen to be closed and that are embedded in those tales and rituals, they exist as biological agents.

And so we kind of have basically a model of gods,

non-material agents, which is a better, less likely way to put it, that relies on the systematic training of your regime of attention.

And of course,

When it's collective, those agents will be social agents.

They will be things that have power, that have the ability to frame the debate around specific things.

The painting that is on the right of the screen is a painting by William Blake that presents basically a late 18th, I think, notion of God, which is not really Old Testament.

which is a bit more New Testament, but which is a Muslim sensation of the clockmaker gods that was popular at the time.

And what you see on the painting is Urizen, William Blake's version of God that is in the sky, very powerful, very Zeus-like imagery.

And that is using this, his hand, to draw a compass that is considered a symbol of constructing things, of masonry.

The compass is one of the Freemason symbols.

For the same reason, it is a symbol

orderly creation in William Blake's paintings.

And so if we share a belief that there is a God somewhere, and he built the world as it is, intentionally, and this God is benevolent, or at least much too powerful for us to fight with, basically your option is a boil down to following the order.

Because if you don't, God will remove you from the order.

And you don't want that, do you?

So

even if you don't have the existence of materialization of this god, even if people don't really, really believe that there is actually a guy with a bird that does stuff, the shared ritualized belief in an entity that has this specific motivation and these specific traits

it will shape heavily the social landscape that is available to everyone.

And this is compatible with, although it does not entail, the existence of actual agency that is tied to this specific entity through the constraints that this entity concretely is.

And something that I find, again, interesting is that religions that are popular today, so Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, if you think of something as a religion, it will likely fall under this handle, are typically what White House call doctrinal religions, which are religions that are where basically you sit down

and you look at rituals, and there is a priesthood that is trained to do the ritual in a specific way that is supposed to mean specific things.

And this is basically optimal to build very robust notions of what gods are, what they want from you, what they do, what they are motivated by, etc., etc.

So I must insist that this is with a question mark.

But in principle, the social constraints model, it can produce a theoristic theory of gods and non-material agents as socially embedded non-material agents that are computed collectively through engagement with a specific cultural landscape where ritual

and doctrinal elaboration are important components.

And I can say with an exclamation mark that this model enables an actualistic theory of social agency that is not tied specifically to individual bodies.

if i consider a social system actual organization to be autonomous that is closed system of constraints as an agency or maybe non-trivial agency it simply reduces to the power to shape sorry shape this landscape and you can have

emergent social things do that.

You can have states which follow specific rules, so social constraints, and specific norms, so again, social constraints, that have autonomy and that are able to shape the landscape.

But in all of this, this part, in my opinion, shows that social constraints specifically are relevant to study the social worlds, that they correspond to

relevant social processes in humans, other agents that are institutions, and maybe, again, question mark, non-material agents.

Sorry, intelligence is an institution, so gods.

The question that needs to be asked is how we can model the position of constraints because all of these rely on the idea that somehow in the landscape that we experience there is such a thing as constraints and they are well-defined things that exist over collective behavior and that they have the property to construct itself.

For a reason we'll very shortly see

To frame this mathematically in a coherent way is insanely hard.

I don't know how to do it.

No one knows how to do it.

We have leads, but they are leads, nothing else.

And so we'll turn to the question of whether Active Inference frames a gauge theory for enculturation.

You should know what this is by now.

Gauge theory, we will see that soon.

So to explain Golgi theory, I need to explain explanation, which is fun, but mostly symmetries in physics.

In physics, we frame physical problem around symmetries.

Symmetry, it is algebraic, so something that has composition, like plus groups of transformation over the space of possibilities.

which are irrelevant from the perspective of the system dynamics.

It is very abstract, so let's look at symmetries.

This is the ceiling of the Lotfola Mosque in Isfahan.

What you can see is a symmetry under the C32 symmetry group.

If you shift this picture by 1 over 32 full turn, it does not change.

This is what we mean by a symmetry.

This is a transformation, a set of transformation that is closed, and that does not change

Well, not a picture, of course, in the context of physics, but the dynamics of the relevant system we are studying.

And for formal reasons I will absolutely not get into here, explanation in physics, it usually derives from the statement of symmetry.

For example, when I state that energy is conserved, this is the same formality as stating that my system is symmetric in time.

when I state that momentum is conserved, that reduced formally to stating that my system is asymmetric in space.

OK.

So most things in physics can be framed as simply symmetries over system dynamics.

And a gauge theory is simply an elaborate instance of this core ID.

So if your symmetry has two properties, first it is continuous.

So not like the set of small rotation, but like the set of all possible rotation that you can take around the circle.

And local.

So you can apply the symmetry transformation to every single point in space.

Your problem basically can be framed with a random degree of freedom.

So because the symmetry does not change the system, whether your system, where your stem is in the, for example, clockwork rotation, it is not important.

It does not change the dynamics.

So this random degree of freedom we call a Gauche parameter.

The core feature of Gauche theory is to take the geometry of that problem

and make it into a physical force.

So when I say gross parameter, so this is, you should see in the screen, non-trivial z over 2z possible bundle of a circle, which means basically that you have a circle.

It has two stages.

And when you are over it, you can be either on top or down.

And you can't know where it is.

So this is a...

Not quite to the degree of freedom, because you have only two choices to get to the degree of freedom.

You'd have to get a continuous space of choices.

But this is basically what we mean by Golgi parameter.

It is a geometric property of your system that you know mathematically exists, but that cannot possibly be observed or

how to say, corresponds to a choice in how you observe your system.

So this is why we talk of gauge, because this is a choice in how we inspect the system.

But I will not get into the details of this here.

And the thing is that because of its redundancy, the gauche parameter does not have to be the same in a specific trajectory at any given point in space.

And from that, you get curvature.

And curvature, if you are anywhere in physics and you know... Aval.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, last thing we heard was if you're anywhere in physics.


SPEAKER_04:
So about relativity theory, you will know that curve to the like naive embedding space.

So if you know vaguely about relativity theory, you know, yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Sorry, just if you're anywhere in physics and then continue from there.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

So if you are vaguely familiar with relativity theory,

you know that the curvature in a space, it corresponds to forces.

So in relativity theory, the curvature of spacetime, it corresponds to the gravity force.

And generally in physics, the curvature in other weirder gauge spaces translates in the other fundamental forces, weak force, strong force, and electromagnetism.

So yes, just stating that there is a space which has a gauche parameter in it, and this space has a curvature, it entails that you have a force that emerges over the, let us say, natural framing of the problem.

And this speaks very closely to active inference.

So active inference can be framed as a consequence of a formal result that is called the frangiprinciple.

Let us write a demical system, stochastic, which means that it has noise in it, and which can be partitioned between an environment E and a boundary B, such that the distribution of the agent and the environment are independent from each other

given the distribution of the boundary B, which kind of means that any information in E that is relevant in A and vice versa has to be in B. But it doesn't quite mean that.

But it's very close.

Then you have information geometry.

which is like a geometrical construct where each point in the agent corresponds to its version of belief over the space of external states.

And because of this information geometry, each possible internal state of the agent, it entails implicitly a belief over external states.

So this means that given the condition of partitionability,

I can write Bayesian belief over my environment as a simple geometrical property of the space we are working in.

And as I just said, when you have a geometry and it's curved, you get forces.

And so the FEP can straightforwardly be framed as a gauge theory

where the symmetries in sensory entropy technically, but let us say the space of belief I am evolving in, directly constrain my action in a specific manner to constrain Bayesian coherence between what I expect to be the case and what I experience to be the case.

And so, straightforwardly, this grounds active inference because, like what I just said, is what I said to explain active inference up to some technical words that were added in.

But yes, this result entails predictive processing and predictive control of behavior of the agent.

And to some extent, improves the possibility of this existing in their demical system theory.

But I do not think that the FEP can possibly represent enculturation.

So when I talk of a dynamical system, this is a system with dynamics in it.

You are.

I think you understand that.

I do not think you necessarily understand the formalism that we imply by it.

A dynamical system is a flow function phi, a time parameter t, and a state space x. So what that means is that to frame a dynamical system, I have to write a space.

But as I don't know, just the Euclidean space with three dimension.

I have to specify time, which is naturally in the occasion space what we think of as time.

And I have to specify a specific way in which my system will move in space in a given step of time.

So Phi gives from any position and any time slot where the system will be if it starts from this position after the specific timer.

duration.

This is what a dynamical system is.

But if you have noticed this, this entails that I define preemptively all other space of possibilities of my system.

If I have a system that is an open-ended system of constraints that can build new stuff, that can be language, that can build accounting, whatever, new states, this doesn't go.

Maybe you say we could reconstruct a minimal version of new stuff happening by working... Sorry, I'll ask him again.


SPEAKER_00:
Avel, again, repeat the last 30 seconds.

But your audio is still not there.

It's like a 30 to 40 second period where your audio just doesn't transmit.

None of us can hear it.

But the internet is fine.


SPEAKER_04:
Working over the dynamics of the system in the ecosystem theory.

So you can do that either.

So are you fine?

Yeah.

Continue.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, continue.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

so uh the medical system can be written as a flow function phi over a state space x and a time parameter t uh when you specify x you specify the total space of possibility of the system so if you're a system that has open-ended evolution in it well you cannot work with a fixed state space you could maybe uh like circumvent the issue by

implicitly having new things happen from a change in the dynamics of the system.

But in chemical system theory, the dynamics are pre-given through the flow function phi.

A chemical system theory system is a specific deterministic flow.

So you can't change the flow through time.

So you can't model the construction of new constraints.

And you can't model the emergence of new parameters that affect causally your system.

So the FEP, in and of itself, cannot present the creative evolution of either cognitive kinds, such as money, chairs, or social constraints.

And this is where we have to get in weirder spaces, formally, to get something that looks like a good model of an evolution.

Although I cannot say definitely it can, because we didn't yet.

By construction, when we work with set theory, which is the basic theory of mathematics, which is about specific objects that are predefined, we can't have what Kaufman calls adjacent possible, which correspond to new evolutionary possibilities that are brought about by the evolution and evolution of evolutionary system like living systems.

Simply, set theory forces you to define all of the possibilities at step one of the modeling process, so you can't have your system that builds new possibilities with activity.

This is not a coherent concept in set theory.

However, what we can do is to look at, rather than set theory, at category theory, which is

let us say, another approach to mathematics, which looks not at specific objects and their relationships with functions, but at specific spaces and their relationships to factors.

And this change in approach basically does not entail, at least not a priori, that when you write a system, you have to write all of the possibilities that are within the system preemptively.

You can write a space and then look at the relationship between the space and other adjacent spaces that could correspond to adjacent possibilities.

And one thing that is related to that, at least in spirit, is, I won't get into detail, but formal approaches that allow you to build quantum state spaces from the property of quantum observation rather than the opposite.

So simply speaking, we can look at the problem of how cognition brings about new possible, not as a space of possibilities in which there is a flow, but as a set of spaces in which specific events, such as observation, such as enculturation, such as invention of new concepts, can bring about new spaces.

And when we rewrite active inference in the language of category theory, we get things that do not quite say the same thing as chemical system theory, like actual active inference, actual French principle.

But we get things that are very, very complicated.

So the diagram that you see on the bottom left of the screen is a cone-cocoon diagram.

I could tell you what a cone-cocoon diagram is, but I don't know, so I could not explain.

That is meant to present the alignments in reverse frame, or the mutual active inference, between two subsystems.

So again, formally, we have no reason to believe this Kant model of an evolution.

But also, given the level of effectiveness of the math, we have very, very few grips with which to understand

what we're looking at and how this relates to specific cognitive and cultural processes.

So there is a lot of progress to be made in that direction before we have a self-standing theory of open-ended cultural evolution.

And the basic handle of self-constraints, I think, is a good bridge between the very concrete, very simple system theory and the very abstract problem of open-ended evolution.

So let us wrap this up here and try to take out a few snippets of actionable information that was included in the talk.

First, agents, by nature, they engage with the world, with their world, as a cognitive landscape that is defined by the modalities by which they perceive the world, that is defined by the intrinsic normativity that the agent experience, and that is


SPEAKER_00:
again sorry just go back 22 seconds but still the audio is not ready yet but it's okay we'll breathe before we jump into the conclusion okay

Still don't hear you.

No.

We can do the slide game where someone else presents the slide.

Any volunteers?

Okay, yeah, I heard that.

Okay, cool.

Please continue.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, we'll try to go fast because this is not agreeable.

So one, agents engage with the world as a cognitive landscape, which is defined by affordances, so minimal representation of the action that are possible in the landscape.

and the normativity that's embedded in the possibility of the action.

Two, the fact that humans collectively enact a relatively coherent structural landscape, it entails that we have social constraints over collective behavior.

And the existence of those constraints, they enable or do not necessitate the emergence of higher scale agencies such as institution, organization, and maybe godlike beings.

And last, the dynamics of constraints that entail a duality between the creation of meaning, so the way we, humans, create a way to understand the world, and the construction of physical possibilities, possibles, in the sense, specific, concrete, causally relevant possibilities that characterize specific sociocultural organizations, and maybe like physical social practices, but just don't worry about it.

And all of it is...

embedded in this diagram, the engagement and the duality with a system of constraints that produce itself in an opinion manner.

So a claim that I'm making on the record here is that if we understand correctly every arrow in this diagram, we understand cultural evolution, we understand what humans are, and we understand opinion evolution in the cultural world.

And here I'll go through the slides in case someone needs a reference and has the time to go through the video to find the reference.

So thank you, and sorry about the audio thing.

Did this go well?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

It gave some much needed silences, so it was all good.

Cool.

Well.

first Mal or Maria if you would like to give any comments or or reflections otherwise we can go to a few topics and then talk about how we want to conclude with a course but first Mal or Maria do you want to say or ask anything


SPEAKER_03:
No, I mean, this was a great summary.

I think you covered a lot of grounds.

I think ideally I would have liked to see how much we can do with gauge theory and how this can potentially link us to understandings of power.


SPEAKER_02:
I think that would be interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
cool thank you Maria all right see you Maria okay anyone live chat can ask a question or um let's first address the course question while people are writing questions live chat so what what do you see for the coming weeks as we kind of conclude this first round


SPEAKER_04:
So you're asking me, right?

So for a reason I do not understand, and Daniel also doesn't understand, no one came up at the Mao discussion session.

So I thought it would be interesting to push the presentation for the last session to have everyone saying their things, have feedback.

I have a current thing to move on from.

The question is whether you feel there is a need for a discussion that is specific for the session we have just now, because lots of things were covered, lots of audio problems were existing.

Basically, the two options are either next session is everyone present, we give you feedback, ciao, or we have a discussion session.

So at the time that was initially planned for the conclusion.

And then we have yet another session that will be the conclusion where you will make a presentation and you will get the feedback.

So we'd like to know which is your preference because both are very possible in my book.

But it doesn't change anything to me.

So what you want is goals.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Mao, also open to your thoughts.

And of course, we're sharing it so that people can write in live chat or let us know in the coming days what they prefer.

I'm down for a discussion of what we covered here, the slides being linked and going into some of these next steps, and then a form-based registration for a presentation only session so that we'll then know exactly who wants to present what and then we can ask how many minutes they want to do or something like that.

But Mao,


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think it would be good to get people who are interested in getting more active to come and make a small presentation, explain what they understood, describe the highlights for them, and potentially link it to some topic in social sciences we may not have covered here, but that they now see through a different lens.


SPEAKER_02:
I think that would be interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
okay all right i will uh look through the live chat while i was getting some water and then we'll ask any questions that people come up with is there ever symmetric information between or among social entities

Or maybe from the script's perspective, Mao, or from the, or however you see it in relation with the constraints.

I mean, what about asymmetric constraints?


SPEAKER_03:
I'm not sure I understand the question.

Can the person give a little more detail in terms, in the question?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Avil's back.

But there was a question in the chat about, can information ever be symmetric?

You talked about symmetries.

So are those symmetries in the information that two social entities have?

Or are they in the constraints that entities experience?

But what are the symmetries and what are the breaks?


SPEAKER_04:
I would say that depending on which space you model the problem, as an information it entails

symmetry because it has to be readable, so you have to be a conservation between context or time of something that is considered to be the content of the information-bearing thing.

But also it is a symmetry breaking because if you take any presentation format, let's say binary, a random string means nothing, and you have to break the symmetry of the uniform distribution to say something.

So it depends very heavily on how specifically you are modeling the problem.

But for fundamental reasons, any mathematical representation, it depends on the implicit model of the symmetries of the system.

Because you want to present things that do not matter, but you have to present things that do matter.

And then you have a very uncomfortable amount of freedom over how you want to present any single thing.


SPEAKER_00:
certainly this comes up in learning active inference and in talking about it like what you described how many ways there are to model a given thing which is related to which symmetries are preserved as you mentioned so how do we reckon with that space and with the different ways of representing the same social setting so um a reason why i'm not


SPEAKER_04:
quite comfortable with the notion of information is that in all possible settings where I define quantum information theory as not possible because very few people think about it, information will be a probability distribution.

It will be a functional probability distribution that is minus to the logarithm of the probability.

That is what self-information is.

This is defined over probability distribution.

Probability distribution is defined over state space.

So implicitly, information entails definition of a state space.

So if you want to work over things that are prior to state spaces, you cannot work with information like any coherent definition.

So basically, the one thing you could do

that is vaguely inspired from work in a quantum information theory, mainly by Christopher Furst, is to not look at the probability, but at the... Sorry, not to look at the information.

I'm using that term in a colloquial way now because I have to switch meaning.

Deformation not as a property of the dispersion, but a property of...

quantum operator that corresponds to observation and that embeds basically, we could say again in a very, very colloquial sense, something akin to an expectation or a measurement

or a synchronization event in the active inference model.

And this, for a specific type of operator, for a specific type of spaces, you can get basically the space that flows from the operator rather than the other way around.

And then information is

It's not Kolmogorov complexity, it's not Shannon Formation, it's not a variant of entropy.

It is basically what is hypothesized by the specific operators that you use to interact with matter and with cultural and material environments.

And maybe, maybe, there is a big maybe here.

I should say maybe one more time.

Maybe this can be adapted in some way to account for the process of punctuation, where basically the process of punctuation is considered as the integration of specific reference frames

like expectation, colloquially.

And this entails the evolution of a cognitive landscape and our social constraints, either defined over the cognitive landscape or defined as a self-standing mathematical object.

I do not know.

But if we have that, and if we have a decent level of understanding of what constrains the evolution of neural frames, we have a self-sustaining theory of the unfolding of cognitive landscapes and of open-ended cultural evolution.

This is a sufficient condition, I am sure of that.

But it is very, very hard to reach.

There are so many threads by which you could take it, and each one is a

like the level of postdoc in mathematics, and I'm not talking about 19th century mathematics, not talking about algebraic topology, I'm talking about weird category thing that people only figured out how to define 30 years ago.

So yeah, I'm not confident I will give you an answer to that within five years.

I'm not confident.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Very interesting there.

All right, some questions from the chat.

So first,

Upcycle Club wrote, do you think ritualized storytelling is driven by social constraints?


SPEAKER_04:
Everything is driven by circumstance.

We just define circumstance as the constraints that exist over behavior.

If we expect that every night we have to go around the fire and listen to someone tell a story, then yeah, this will happen.

If we expect that we have to go on YouTube and listen to talks about abstract things such as in France, this will happen.

So in this sense, everything, every single activity you have is embedded

landscape of cultural expectation.

And this is why it's pretty hard to talk about basic mechanism of cultural transmission because whichever cognitive mechanism you are looking at is uncultured and could, in principle, and likely has been a few times, changed by cultural evolution.

So, yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And that takes me back to the scripts.

discussion and papers the strong script at exactly this time here's the script that we're all gonna read from on through the spaces of weaker scripts like we tend to meet here or there happens to be a path here okay so then some comments from M Lennon 001

thank you I don't know if making a presentation to explain what one understood is an attractive invitation still two places I did not track as well as I hope was one dissolution of agency as we know it and two the informational geometry among agent environment and boundary went over my head thank

So dissolution of agency and agent environment boundary.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

I will get back to the slides.

Are you seeing the window?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'll bring it in.

That's fine.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

No, no.

So the dissolution of agency is basically the idea that when we think about agents, people, like we think as a system that has a body and that has a brain and that has the ability for discussion, like deliberating over what you do and not do.

And we place agency at the level of discursive beliefs.

So if I say I want to grab the water and I grab the water, I grab the water out of my agency.

If I inadvertently, I don't know, bump into something and make it fall or grab without thinking about it, is it agentive?

Not.

Most people would say yes, but that's actually not entailed by the most used model of agency.

Legally speaking, you

are held as not responsible or less responsible of things that you did not have the opportunity to debate over.

But from a purely cognitive perspective, and if the active inference model is correct, the bulk of the intentionality of your ability to direct your own flow that you have does not come from reasoning and deliberation and central executive system.

cognitive function that we associate with reasoning and agency, it comes from the basic expectation you have for yourself and the world, because your expectation over the world's constraint heavily implicates the opportunities for action that you perceive, and your beliefs over yourself constrain just as heavily the options that you will end up pursuing.

And so the agency, your ability to decide of stuff, it mostly reduces to proactive process over your self-model and your role model.

And this is why I don't see any problem formally or empirically with that picture.

As I understand it, that comes very well

for the neuropsychiatric and psychological literator and sociological literator.

This is good.

This works scientifically.

But this is counterintuitive because, again, most people will expect you to have reasoning and then to decide stuff and then to execute all the stuff you decide, which, again, I don't think this happens.

So our other question is the information geometry.

I kind of glossed over it because, yeah.

So the information geometry is a geometry that is defined within a physical system equipped with a partition, blah, blah, blah.

And so by a geometry, I mean basically a space of curvature that exists over your bezel space.

This is basically the same thing that I'm presenting.

in the bottom left of the screen here.

You have a space that is your normal space where you see stuff happen, which is represented here by the line.

And you have a curvature that is defined by some of the things that are defined over the space.

And by differential principle,

when you have this partition condition that is verified, then each state in the agent's internal states, like each specific point it can be, corresponds to a belief distribution over the states of the environment.

And so this is in this sense that we have information geometry.

We have a geometry, so a curvature over space, where the space is the internal state of the agent, and the geometry is belief over external states.

And furthermore, this matters because the agent is actually constrained by the image.

The agent is effectively constrained by the geometry in such a way that its internal flow optimizes the Bayesian coherence of the belief that exists according to the geometry.

So this is highly math.

This is straightforward, but lots of words, lots of abstraction.

No real visual way to put it.

So this is more something to read about and something to hear about, which is why I gloss over it.

But I hope going over it again brings a bit more of clarity.


SPEAKER_00:
How would you connect what you just said to the differences with written and oral culture?

Like what is hearable?

What is seeable?

How does writing in the printed or etched or digitized form relate to how you discussed culture today?


SPEAKER_04:
I see you as frozen, Daniel.

Can you hear me?


SPEAKER_00:
I can hear you.

Mao?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

So do I answer or do Mao answer?


SPEAKER_03:
I can give a little bit of an idea, but effectively we're talking about precision and temporality, right?

So writing and discourse, the discourse has to relate to pragmatics, and the discourse is likely to be interpreted because it has lower precision than, say, writing has over time.

So here you're talking about the ways in which the information geometry will be bent and shifted through the precision of the embedded normativity that is given rise to through these markers that you can point to over and over and over with high precision.

I think that's the link.


SPEAKER_04:
Basically, when I talk about role-taking and language, I claim that the core reason why this matters is because this enforces coherence between the cognitive landscape experienced by agents, and writing changes massively the scale at which it is possible, and it changes massively the level of emotional embodiment of language.

It is much higher in speech than it is in writing.

especially if you account for singliness of speech.

So historically, writing very clearly and very ambiguously powered the rise of administration, so states, so organizations that do a lot of accounting and bookkeeping, like book is literally the word,

and that enable the centralization of resource management.

This is explained in detail in the logic of writing by Goody, G-O-O-D-Y.

And yeah, basically, this writing is a core cultural innovation that enables centralized policies, city-states, things like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's very interesting.

So one topic that we've discussed and maybe you could unpack a little bit here is thinking of culture and these cognitive ecosystems leads to consideration of the cognitive security or of different information risk aspects.

So where does that come into play with the formalism or what you discussed here?


SPEAKER_04:
So from a cognitive security aspect, one thing you can read in formalism quite directly is that if you control the environment, as in the cognitive landscape experienced by agents, you control what the agent do directly.

so there are two things that are very very very um stereotypically associated cognitive security this is a russian uh propaganda not quite propaganda cognitive warfare campaigns pretty much around the world uh more generally the um

propaganda that is used by authoritarian regimes to get stuff going.

And the cults that historically are tied to the worry of brain control by evil cults that can control you from afar.

like you had a telecommand.

And so in both cases, actually, let us get back a bit.

When you are a state that does propaganda, and when you're a state, you can do a lot of material engineering, so producing the environmental states in which people live in.

And, for example, if you look at the city of Brasilia, which is one of the very few specifically built capital cities that exist in the world, there is one in Brasilia and there is, I think, maybe four others.

And those cities are basically very big glorified administrative centers.

And Brasilia in particular, it has...

neighborhoods for work, neighborhoods for leisure, neighborhoods for habitation.

It is extremely divided.

And because of this dividedness, you basically don't get to do stuff that are not work or hang out with your family.

That is not a possibility.

And of course, this changed massively the way people experience their life.

And this changed massively the topology of this network that can emerge.

Uh, but when you are doing a cognitive warfare, like in the sense that NATO defines, so you are a state or state-like organization, and you are trying to fuck with another state or state-like organization, you don't get to just build cities that are bad, but it's not a possibility that you have.

So what the, um, Russian do in a systematic way is to try to basically create doubts over what information is reliable.

so that people feel paralyzed.

The target, I must insist critically, is not the information that is available, it is the trust that people can have, the actionability that people can give to the information.

And so they tend to propagate a lot of conspiracy theory nonsense because it occupies a lot of space and it prevents the possibility for public debates to occur.

And another strategy they use is to manipulate the personal identity

that are embedded often in ethnicity are, in the case of the US, advanced countries that have

where political life is mostly decoupled for ethnicity.

And I understand the irony to say that this is the case in the US, but you don't have like ethnically specific parties or armed forces.

So this is less the case that elsewhere.

So in these countries, they will use political identity.

So they will use a political identity or leftist identity, but mostly Republican identity to just push complete nonsense

and get people to act in a way that overall destabilizes the grip of the US over their own population.

And so this is the basic

way that we do cognitive warfare.

And you can understand this in terms of social constraints.

Because, again, the target is not like information in and of itself.

It's the possibility that is afforded by the social context in which we evolve at an instant.

The goal is to create doubts and noise in the public setting.

It's right constraints that are not compatible with efficient collective organization.

And a way

Like a way where you do it is when you see it being done in a much more systematic and efficient way is, of course, with intrastate influence, where state administrators and state institutions, they try to create grip over a population.

And if you look at the birth of nationalism, like we have the notion today that nations are somewhat coherent political groups that, let us say, the French hang out together and take decisions together.

This notion, it's not quite recent, strictly speaking, but the fact that it is dominant, that it is just a standard expectation is very recent and it derives from the French.

That's somehow where a group of administrators somehow managed to convince

Everyone that they shared identity and they shared mutual obligation, responsibility in virtue of this identity.

And the way in which this happens is they sent institutors in villages and they sent soldiers and you had to listen, the children had to listen to the institutors explain to them that they were French and they needed to do French things like going to war for France.

And if you would not let the children do that, you went to prison.

And no one wants to go to prison.

So of course, I'm doing a very, very huge caricature here.

There is not a shadowy set of influence that sends.

This is an oversimplification.

But what happened is that the French state managed to create a social niche up in very, very foreign villages where Frenchhood became a basic condition of existence.

Most of your social thing, the fact that you were legally recognized as existing, the activities that you had, a lot of those were embedded in your perception of being French.

And so when this is the case, and when you see that the administration tends to be on top of things, and the administration tells you, you have to go to war in virtue of your freshness, then you go to war.

You don't fight against the administration.

You fight against whoever the administration tells you.

The fact that you have agreed implicitly that you are friends with France makes this a lot harder to resist, basically, than in France.

The state just sent soldiers at you and kidnapped you and gave you a sword and told you to fight.

This is not how you make things efficient.

Army U.S.

this way are unorganized.

They are unmotivated.

They are not good.

And if you want people to have stakes, you need to give them power.

Or you need to give them the impression they have power because they are French.

And here, French...

govern things.

And whether you are in a set of friends that actually direct things or not, bad question to ask.

Just, you know, go to the trenches.

And this type of things we would not think as cognitive warfare because we would not think as like it as a between

Like implicitly, when we talk about warfare, we talk about between states or between nation conflict.

And this is within a nation, within a social group.

But you can look at cults and how they create social influence.

You can look at, for example, one of the most famous cults that existed, which is the Moonies or the Unification Church.

They were widely accused to make brainwashing.

They were widely accused to somehow control people and make them do things they don't want to do.

That is not a possibility you have as an organization.

You cannot kidnap people and hope that it will be okay.

You will get killed by police if you do that.

Most likely in the US, in this specific country.

space where the Unification Church evolves.

What you can do is to create a context where you have a huge grip over what people can and cannot say, what they can and cannot think about themselves.

You can tell them that your leader is the coming of Jesus that is going to bring everyone in paradise.

And you can make people go to work sessions to talk about it.

And you can just physically cling to those people all the time until you are quite confident that they feel that whatever you are doing is important.

And you can have very big emotional ritual where everyone cries and become extremely embedded in the group membership.

And you can be extremely supportive of group members while being extremely aggressive to anything that goes away from group identity.

And when you approach these environments and people and go out in this environment for a long time, they tend to develop this group identity.

So when you tell them the big leader tells you to give us 20,000 euros for your ancestors not to go to hell, that seems reasonable.

That seems like a reasonable ask, which it would not unless you had a very tight control over the social environment of someone.

Because then it's not just...

giving money in exchange for a good.

This is about upholding your self-identity as someone who follows and believes the cult's teaching.

And yet again, this is something that is formalized directly in terms of constraints, because this is about what you can and cannot do in a given context.

This is not about abstract beliefs.

It's not about brain control.

It's not about anything but what you can and cannot do in a given social context.


SPEAKER_00:
Alright, there was a ton there.

Let me retrace a few of the pieces that I heard there.

Towards framing cognitive security under this cognitive constraint framework that you're discussing, for which active inference under the free energy principle is the process theory that gets it done.

First, you described how modern states have a lot of administrative capacity and affordances, especially through writing and especially again in the

last decades and centuries of information environment changes and then you pointed to two kind of patterns or genres or motifs of influence or cognitive warfare propaganda and cults discussed one example of them surely could have gone into more detail or there's other examples and perspectives and so on and um

As Mao alluded to earlier, precision modulation is a key aspect of constraint.

I mean, precision modulation of how tightly you're holding the baseball bat, the movement, its precision in wobble is going to be related to the grasp.

And so...

Increasing uncertainty can lead to anxiety and doubt.

All of that's very wrapped up in a narrative setting.

Then you discussed how there's a ratcheting of thinking and acting like a state, breaking symmetries like states do, and getting grasp over the subject, over the citizen.

That's a complex topic, but that's what you went.

And then there are asymmetries around uncertainty.

control of the environment, the information environment, ability to read, write, edit in the information environment.

And that leads to these engineered distributions of what is important or what means what, which justifies or even writes the blank check for requests of funds, whatever the narrative is around those funds.

But more fundamentally, those strategies can...

threaten sense making, which is to say the inbound perceptual component of active inference, and then also decision making, and action selection, which is the fundamental complement, the outbound aspect of active inference.

I'll read another comment.

Oh, God, do you want anything else?


SPEAKER_04:
Like, I'd like to point out a very, very specific example that is contemporary.

which is the campaign by Israel to remove people from the Gaza Bans.

So just, I don't know when people will watch it.

So on the 7th of October, 11 days ago, Hamas, which is a terrorist organization, Islamist organization that is dominant in the Gaza Band, attacked Israeli and slaughtered Israeli settlers that were nearby and slaughtered tourists that were nearby and attacked military bases.

They made, I think, 2,000 deaths.

And so the state of Israel, that is currently...

led by very far-right parties, things that we would not have equivalent of in Europe or the US, has decided to answer by blaming each and every Palestinian for this and trying to deport them elsewhere.

And so this is not itself what I'm trying to comment about.

What I'm trying to comment about is that every

single comment you will see about it on Twitter makes the confusion between Hamas and Palestinians on one side and IDF slash Netanyahu and the Israelis on the other side.

And so this produce a framing that says basically people are trying to decide whether the Hamas actions are justified or not.

And implicitly, in this debate, they create a context where whoever loses, whichever group loses the HVAC debate, gets to be killed to the last.

And so you produce very, very, basically the producer framing that makes the only possibility in the conflict explanation because each side, like there is no, like this is not a two-sided dynamic.

There is no Palestinian and there is the Israeli and there is the...

I will not make all the relation.

But by this framing, like the framing that either the Arabs or the Jew must prevail and kill the other, you give a lot of power for groups to just make this a genocidal war and justify things like cutting water to one million people because like 200 of them committed massacre.

And I do not know if there is a single actor that tried to get this.

I do not think this is the case.

But this is a very powerful instance of how propaganda does not need to target what you believe, but it does need to target how you frame problems.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, a lot to say on that.

Any last pieces you want to discuss?


SPEAKER_04:
No, it is good.

I've talked a lot.

I'd like to stop talking.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Well, thank you.

We will send out updates to people about the coming weeks.

So, thank you.

All right.

Bye.


SPEAKER_04:
Ciao.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks for your attention.

Goodbye.