## imPNfqsHbjI

SPEAKER_03:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

This is Active Inference Livestream number 31.0.

It's October 14th, 2021.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

At this short link, you can see some of the past, present, and future streams that we'll be doing in the lab as part of the .com's organizational unit.

And the first tab has the regular Tuesday discussions that are group discussions, .1 and .2.

Right now we're in a .0, kind of an ad hoc scheduled contextualizing live stream.

And then the other tabs have other kinds of live streams that can be scheduled at different times, different topics.

So just let us know if you want to get involved or co-organize an event with us.

Today in active stream number 31.0, the goal is to learn and discuss this paper, Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics and the Free Energy Principle in Biology by Patricia Palacios and Mateo Colombo.

Like all the dot zeros, you'll get the disclaimer that this is just an introduction to some of the ideas of the paper and the context.

It's not a review or a judgment or a final word.

In 31.0, we're going to start by looking over some of the key aims and claims and the abstract and the roadmap of the paper to get the big picture, then talk about some of the keywords.

Maybe you're really familiar with some of the keywords, maybe it's the first time you've thought about some of these topics, and then we'll walk through some of the figures and formalisms and just get set up in the coming weeks to be discussing this paper.

So we'll start with just some introductions and warmups.

We'll say hello and then maybe just mention something that we're excited to talk about or learn about or something that we noticed while reading the paper.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and

This is just an exciting paper and topic because it's at the intersection of chemistry and physics and thermodynamics, but also active inference.

And it's a nice starting point for a conversation about what are the precursors and the tenants and the principles of free energy principle and active inference.

And then what are the consequences and what does that mean for the big picture?

Luke?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

And I really was excited to see this paper bring up some of the points that I've brought up as I've been reading more about active inference, specifically with respect to ergodicity and what that means, the potential implications for that, and also just other minor topics, but things I've mentioned in the past.


SPEAKER_03:
It's cool sometimes to see how the threads of our previous discussions and things that a participant might have brought up, like, hey, this isn't making sense.

And it's like, don't worry, it's not just you.

These are open research questions.

And so we're seeing that and we'll be enacting it in the coming weeks.

some of the big questions in the paper kind of framed in non-technical or in not the author's words it's really asking what fundamental ideas from physics are utilized in the free energy principle and how are they utilized why are they utilized and then what are some implications or trade-offs associated with the use of these ideas either the ways that they have been used

are the pros and cons or what are the implications and what about the ways that they could be used so in the spirit of positive contributions to the literature how are we taking ideas from physics and other fields bringing it together in free energy principle and then what are the fundamental or just spuriously contemporary trade-offs

Let's first go to the aims and claims of the authors.

So I'll read it, and then Blue, you can give a thought.

Well, the paper is the Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics and Free Energy Principle in Biology on the PhilSci Archive at Pitt.

So check out the paper and read it if you want to.

And a few of their aims and claims that we can extract out.

The free energy principle has received a lot of attention.

but its foundations in statistical physics and dynamical systems theory have not been probed yet.

This lack of attention is unfortunate because the theoretical adequacy of the free energy principle, as well as its practical utility for the study of key biological properties such as homeostasis and robustness, depend on the validity of those foundations.

Here we begin to fill this gap.

So that's kind of one of their contextualizing claims and their aim.

And one of their arguments, a claim about their arguments is that as we are going to argue, the foundations in physics concepts allow models built from the free energy principle to achieve maximum generality.

But these assumptions also decrease the ability of these models to include enough factors to provide biologically plausible representations of the causal networks responsible for living systems dynamic equilibrium.

Any thoughts on the aims or we can continue.


SPEAKER_00:
i can't hear you i think that the aims are good sorry i just realized i was muted um i think that the these are good aims i think that uh one of the fundamental um claims is that in order to make the fep more generalized generalizable it's not as specific to biology as it could be i think that that was like the key trade-off maybe yes between specificity and utility and generalizability so


SPEAKER_03:
One mindset is that as we generalize, we're gonna be explaining more systems, different systems, explaining them better, doing more, and it's just all up, up, up with generalization.

Another contrasting opinion is that as we generalize, we, out of necessity,

abstract or average out over particulars and so we might actually lose utility or potentially and even disastrously lose the specifics of the system that we're talking about so all of a sudden we have this free floating generalization or abstraction that maybe initially was inspired by wanting to explain some sort of key biological property

like homeostasis and robustness in the author's view, but then we end up sort of throwing out the kernel or the essence of what we wanted to explain because we generalized too much.

So we'll be exploring that.

Okay, do you want to read the abstract?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

According to the free energy principle, life is an inevitable and emergent property of any ergodic random dynamical system at non-equilibrium steady state that possesses a Markov blanket.

First in 2013.

Formulating a principle for the life sciences in terms of concepts from statistical physics, such as random dynamical system, non-equilibrium steady state, and ergodicity, places substantial constraints on the theoretical and empirical study of biological systems.

Thus far, however, the physics foundations of the free energy principle have received hardly any attention.

Here, we start to fill this gap and analyze some of the challenges raised by applications of statistical physics for modeling biological targets.

Based on our analysis, we conclude that model building grounded in the free energy principle exacerbates a trade-off between generality and realism because of a fundamental mismatch between its physics assumptions and the properties of actual biological targets.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

And there's a lot to say.

That's just the opening salvo from the authors.

How do they make good on this abstract?

We can look at the roadmap.

there's not too many sections in this paper but there's a lot of meat within there's a general introduction and then a specific introduction to the free energy principle which is described in the context of self-organizing dissipative systems and then there's a little discussion on the explanatory scope of the fep and the introduction of the winged snowflake

thought experiment or idea which we'll return to soon section 3 talks about biological systems as random dynamical systems which isn't something that fep invented it's not something that actin invented this is a broader question about how to model biological systems and dynamical systems

Section four models biological active states as random dynamical attractors and talks about three big physics ideas that if we take section three, if we want to be modeling biological systems as dynamical systems, then we're using this physics ontology and what other key terms are relevant in physics for discussing random dynamical systems.

And we will go through them.

They are the idea of phase spaces in biology,

ergodicity, and random dynamical attractors.

There's then a discussion and a short conclusion.

So that's kind of the overall roadmap.

That's where we're going to go.

We're going to be exploring that trade-off or the implications of the introduction of physics fundamentals into the generalization of biological systems and maybe even non-living systems as well.

And just how's it all going to come together and how does it influence how we research going forward?

The keywords are FEP, free energy principle, dynamic equilibrium, homeostasis, phase space, ergodicity, and attractor.

And we can ask, where's active inference?

Not that it has to be a keyword for everything, but as we discuss, let's keep in mind, what are the differences between FEP and ACTIMF?

And what are the implications of these claims about FEP for ACTIMF?

All right, how about the first keyword, dynamic equilibrium?


SPEAKER_00:
So interestingly, like you said that you like how this paper brings together physics and chemistry and biology.

And I thought that chemistry was kind of blatantly omitted.

And in my heart, I'm a chemist.

Like if I hadn't studied neuro, I would have really like gone into OCHEM.

I just thought that like working in the lab was a little scary, like too much ether and too like, whoa, when I came out.

So really, when I look up dynamic equilibrium, or the context that

I'm familiar with dynamic equilibrium is in chemistry.

And so a dynamic equilibrium occurs when you have a reversible chemical reaction.

So it's not that the reaction is over, right?

Like here's an example of water ionizing into hydroxide and protons, right?

And so...

it's not that when you have the equilibrium that the reaction is still occurring, it's just occurring at equal rates in the forward and reverse directions.

So this is dynamic equilibrium and it only happens in a reversible chemical reaction.

So there's no other way that I know of that dynamic equilibrium happens.

It is an example of a system, particularly a chemical system at a steady state.

And so I looked through the paper, I don't know if you wanna flip to the next slide.

I looked to the paper and I looked like, well, how are the authors using dynamic equilibrium?

And I found this phrase, which I'll say here, the core of this account is a free energy principle

According to which, all biological systems actively maintain a dynamic equilibrium with their environment by minimizing their free energy, which enables them to avoid a rapid decay into an inert state of thermodynamic equilibrium.

And so then there's some citations, Friston and the Ramstad 2018 paper, and Parr and Friston in 2019.

And so even I looked back through these papers and looked for dynamic equilibrium, and it's not there in the references that I was able to find.

And so I was curious what the authors meant by dynamic equilibrium in a living system.

I mean, as far as I know, like maybe they meant dynamic coupling between the organism and the niche.

Or maybe they mean the non-equilibrium steady state of homeostasis, which is not a dynamic equilibrium.

It's a non-equilibrium.

So I just found this phrasing kind of curious.

And I'm assuming, just based on context, that they're referring to homeostasis.

But homeostasis includes plenty of irreversible reactions, irreversible chemical reactions.

And so that's kind of why this was a little bit confounding.


SPEAKER_03:
It makes sense.

Like if we think about instead of the water ionizing and the H plus and the OH minus coming back together and the overall values on both sides are staying the same.

So let's think in the biological case, like moment to moment, our mass is staying the same.

Let's just say, or some people might maintain the same mass for 30 years.

But underlying that stability is actually many, many synthesis of fatty acids and the breakdown of fatty acids.

And so it's like, okay, I get it that they're both going both sides at the same rate.

So there's a stable point.

but then also it's constituting its own irreversible thermodynamic reactions sometimes.

And so it's a good question.

Do Friston at all use the term dynamic equilibrium?

And are we talking about dynamic couplings, which might be at steady states, or are we talking about the non-equilibrium steady state of homeostasis?

Okay, brings us to homeostasis.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure, so homeostasis is the steady state of internal physical and chemical conditions that are maintained by living systems.

And there's a lot of variables that can be included in here.

Mass, I think, actually changes at night.

The carbon that you exhale, you actually weigh less in the morning from sleeping all night and emitting carbon, I heard.

I don't know if that's really true, but I guess it depends on what scale you're measuring.

But I think that pH has to be the same or within a pretty defined range.

Osmolarity, sodium, potassium, and calcium ions, blood sugar, body temperature is a huge one.

And we do things throughout the day like eat and drink and use the restroom and put on jackets to help with our homeostatic conditions internally.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, unless we're eating at night, we're losing water and some other molecules.

So definitely we're lighter in the morning.

And then one discussion that we've had in a few different streams is when do we think of homeostasis as reducing uncertainty from a set point, like sort of a desired temperature, and then we want to just reduce our discrepancy versus when do we see allostasis or almost like anticipatory

processes by which biological systems actually take excursions qualified excursions from set points and how do we think about that within the broader history of cybernetics and it's been said that cybernetics had some challenges with dealing with post homeostasis so it's easy enough to see how a cybernetic system seeks

a set point but then once you start thinking what is the process by which that set point is itself moved around all of a sudden that challenged a lot of historical cybernetics frameworks so that's definitely what we're exploring with actinf let's take another dip into a physics or a mathematical idea of a face base so

I'll read the yellow parts or you want to go for it?

I'll read the yellow parts and then you give any description.

So in a phase space, every degree of freedom or parameter of the system is represented as an axis of a multidimensional space.

So like every point on this spiral has two variables that describe it.

It's like its value on the X and value on the Y.

And then the phase space trajectory represents the set of states compatible with starting from one particular initial condition located in the full phase space that represents the set of states compatible with starting from any initial condition.


SPEAKER_00:
So just a quick comment or thought on that.

So even just in the maintenance of homeostasis, like where your, you know, osmolarity is the same and your blood glucose is the same or just intercellular glucose or ATP levels, or, you know, if you just want to look at, at just maintaining homeostasis, not even including like the potential possible actions that I could take in like moving in a three-dimensional environment or anything like that.

But, but it,

it becomes very quickly an expansive multidimensional space, like something that we're not even like here we have like a 3D ish visualization.

But, you know, in all these dimensions, it becomes very, very quickly computationally intractable because of the dimensionality of options that we're presented with.

And just even to maintain a homeostatic set point is is intense.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Phase spaces are just kind of the descriptive.

It's literally just the space that something can happen in.

And then there are trajectories through phase space.

Well, there's points, which just are static values like three comma four.

And then there are trajectories, which are like linkages amongst sets of points.

And then also out there in phase space are attractors.

So in the field of dynamical systems, an attractor is a set of states in the phase space towards which a system tends to evolve for a wide variety of starting conditions of the system.

System values close enough to the attractor values remain close even if slightly disturbed.

so a kind of mental model there is like a rubber sheet and someone pulls the middle down a little bit that is now an attractor because things are from near or far are attracted towards it and then if they're at the bottom of that well they're going to resist being moved away from it and so that's sort of a simple ball rolling into a bowl attractor state and

There's simple equations that govern that type of movement, but in higher dimensional phase spaces, there are different geometries of attractors.

And then also for biological systems, it is a challenge to model using attractors, but that's what this paper is really about.

Can we use that model of an attractor to talk about biological systems and how they regulate?


SPEAKER_00:
I just pulled this image out.

Actually, I think it was brought up in the paper, and I don't remember if the original author who outlined these four types of attractor, if that was Kaufman.

I feel like it was Kaufman, but it was cited in this paper as well about the four different kinds of attractors, and so that's what's shown here is the strange attractor, the point attractor, the cycle, and the torus.

So just in case you were wondering what those kind of attractors looks like, it's drawn to points in this kind of way.


SPEAKER_03:
It is also on another phase space of attractors with its own X and Y axis.

Okay, ergodicity.

this is a quote from the paper then blue any thoughts would be cool the ergodic density is an invariant probability measure that can be interpreted as the probability of finding the target system m in any state x when observed at a random point in time first in 2012. the assumption of ergodicity is important to get the fep off the ground since it ensures that organisms can be modeled as having invariant characteristics over time


SPEAKER_00:
So just to kind of relate ergodicity to the phase space.

So the concept of ergodicity is in a potential phase space that all of the potential points in that space are visited at one point or another, like that is ergodicity.

And then the probability that you can find a, uh, uh,

the system in that space or at that point in space corresponds to how much time the system spends at that point in that space, if that makes sense.

It's kind of a circular loop, but.


SPEAKER_03:
This is just one slide.

We're gonna return to ergodicity later on, but this is a topic that Blue and I like learning about.

However, if you know more about this, it would be great to have your perspective as well as if you're also just learning it and have questions to bring, because there's a lot you could learn about ergodicity and the ergodic hierarchy.

So take a dive and then let us know how the water is.

Also getting FEP off the ground.

I'm thinking, does FEP start on the ground?

Does it start underground?


SPEAKER_00:
Does it start- Is it a snowflake with wings?


SPEAKER_03:
Has it always been that way?

So, no, exactly.

It's like the water cycle.

Okay.

So, on to the FEP, which is, of course, the target, the system of interest of this paper.

And in Act-Inf Livestream 14 and before then and after then, we've had a lot of discussions.

What is the FEP?

How does it relate to active inference?

And...

It seems like we'll be working on those questions for a long, long time.

But a few pieces that we've pulled out as kind of being good sort of cues to bring up alongside free energy principle and just see them as like cousins or in a network together.

Multiscale systems, ensembles, like the collective behavior of multiple particles or other system subunits.

the nexus of information and thermodynamics, which is really like information, thermo, like heat and dynamics, dynamical systems.

So often thermo and dynamics aren't really separated, but we're getting at that delineation.

And then,

action policy selection as variational Bayesian inference.

So using information dynamics to study how policies are selected, and then there's sort of FEP as it is today, and then there's where could we go and develop with this framework, which is what we'll be exploring today.

Any general comments before we get into the paper?


SPEAKER_00:
Only that, you know, you we haven't thermodynamics has classically been one word.

So like, I'm starting to just use infodynamics as one word just to be like non discriminatory, you know, or just dynamics.


SPEAKER_03:
It's like, it's all information.

It's all thermo.

So yes, exactly.

Okay, here we go to the paper.

This is the first paragraph of the paper.

And it's very informative.

Life scientists use the term equilibrium in various ways.

And so we're gonna look at three different definitions of equilibrium.

And this is one reason why it's important to have ontologies and have ways of using terms that we can, if not distinguish, at least be clear about in their use.

So sometimes life scientists,

Use equilibrium to refer to an inert state of death where the flow of matter and energy through a biological system stops and the system reaches a lifeless state of thermodynamic equilibrium.

That's sort of the ultimate equilibrium.

Then there's more often they use it to mean homeostasis, which is the ability of keeping some variable in a system constant or within a specific range of values.

Going back to these old citations for where the term actually arises from.

so that's sort of a living system so there's parts of it that are consuming energy hence not at the ultimate equilibrium but there's also other elements of it at least over certain time scales that are invariant some other times

The term equilibrium is associated with the concept of robustness, which refers to the capacity of systems to dynamically preserve their characteristic structural and functional stability amid perturbations due to environmental change, internal noise, or genetic variation.

So it's sort of like a low bar, a medium bar and a high bar of equilibrium ranging from just, yeah, the molecules are not doing any motion and there's a carcass on the ground to the molecules are churning and there's something invariant about the living system.

going up into even the idea of robustness, which is that the system is doing something to maintain its sort of equilibrium, like its balance amidst noise, which is maybe seen as a type of homeostasis, but not exactly the same.

So any thoughts on why these distinctions are mattering or why start the paper this way?


SPEAKER_00:
You know, I'm curious, Daniel, like I, I mean, we've been in the life sciences for 20 some years, more maybe.

And I have only used equilibrium in terms of life sciences in the first way to like as death.

So I'm just curious, and perhaps this is the inner chemist in me, but are you familiar with all of these uses of equilibrium in the life sciences also?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
I think I've seen the second one.

People might not call it equilibrium, but like a buffer equilibrium.

Well, the carbonate and the CO2 in your blood, and it's maintaining a buffered, a pH equilibrium.

So that's not death.

It's a living system that's doing it, but it's referring to some chemical process that's being kept at a dynamic equilibrium within the scaffold that a living biological system is providing.

And I'd also be curious, I don't think we dove into it, this Kitano 2004, like homeostasis to keep something within a range of values, it sounds a lot like robustness.

So how are the second and the third definitions different?

Because like anti-fragility is something different where perturbations actually strengthen the system or cause it to develop, for example, but robustness is a little bit more like homeostasis, but open to anyone's thoughts, we'll see.

Now, on to Friston et al.

So, over the past 20 years, giving us some historical context, since the new millennium, theoretical neuroscientist Carl Friston and collaborators have developed an account of the conditions of possibility of a certain kind of dynamic equilibrium between a biological system and its environment.

The core of this account is a free energy principle, according to which all biological systems actively maintain a dynamic equilibrium with their environment by minimizing their free energy through inference and action, which enables them to avoid a rapid decay into an inert state of thermodynamic equilibrium.

So here's a few of the citations, 2012, 13, Ramstad et al., 2018, Parr and Frist in 2019.

So here are the PAPEs.

People want to dive into the references.

Those are always really good places to start.

But whether you take the authors at their manifold, dimensionally reduced word, or you go into these original papers, or you send a tweet to an author, or you come in a live stream and talk to them, what are the key claims of the FEP?

From a rhetoric perspective, what does the FEP assume and what does it claim?

Which papers are key to FEP?

Not what was important in 2005 from 2002, but today, what is important?

So how do we respect that different citations from the past might have a partial picture or use a different formalism?

And then which papers are contradictory, even if only temporary.

So somebody might make a claim in a 2010 paper, you can't explain situation X. And then like, you know, two weeks later, first in it all, write the response.

And then some people have, they bought the rumor, but they haven't heard the news.

So how do you keep a coherent narrative of the literature as there are errors, contradictions, disconcordances, all kinds of things that just make it less easy than it could be to understand what is happening with FEP, its proponents, and its detractors.


SPEAKER_00:
So just a thought on this and something that I was thinking about as I was reading the paper, and a lot of this is footnoted throughout the paper, but the FPP has evolved over the last 20 years.

So it didn't start off in the state that it is now.

It didn't start off like a completely elaborated...

And so it would be really cool to develop a timeline of the FEP, like first concept, you know, 2006 or whatever.

And then at what point in time did like the Markov blanket come into play?

And then when did active inference separate from the FEP?

And to kind of get like a good idea of the situation as it's gone through its several iterations now.


SPEAKER_03:
Great idea, Blue.

I'd hope that in Act-Inf Lab and other groups, we can collaborate to really make that happen because to have the timeline of developments and cross-link that with the core terms, which we'll talk about later today, and then also just who was involved and what were the contributions, it would just make it tremendously easier instead of just going back to square one

sort of a scholar search just when we're curious about hey has there been something written about free energy and x okay so that was sort of the neutral context or at least not so uh barbarous but here's where the authors uh bring in the the gap the free energy differential in the literature and their contribution what actions are they going to take to reduce the differential the free energy principle has received a lot of attention

no citations from whom a lot relative to what it's not I'm not saying it's incorrect in the paper just it would be awesome to learn what does it look like to have a lot of attention what does a Google Trends or a book engram viewer search result in are we on the up or are we going down from some period of time so what attention what regime of attention has the FEP received and from whom

but the foundations of fep in statistical physics and dynamical systems theory have not been probed yet that's a claim maybe some people will think that they have so we'll look forward to learning about that this lack of attention is unfortunate because two reasons one the theoretical adequacy of the fep and two its practical utility for the study of biological properties

depend on the validity of the foundations.

So it's like, we want the house to be beautiful and useful.

And if the foundations are not strong, it will not be beautiful and or useful.

So this work of the paper, as well as all the work around it is related to that gap.

So a few big questions like, what does it mean for a principal FEP?

And we can, of course,

have some subtlety with like what's a principle, a framework, a theory, a hypothesis.

So let's just kind of roll with it together.

What does it mean for a scientific principle to have foundations in statistical physics?

What does it mean for it to be grounded in dynamical systems?

Why does that matter?

Why does it matter how it's grounded or who thinks it's grounded in what for the FEP and in general?

And then always trying to connect the generalities with the minute particulars.

What does this paper actually do?

And then what work is still needed?

Because it's easy to get caught up in some of these big sweeping, multi-decade, many person research trajectories.

And it's helpful sometimes to just separate out what is the paper doing?

And then what is the bigger picture, like the grand synthesis that has to be done between FEP and some other field?

Anything here?

here's from a footnote and it's um to forestall any confusion okay great all my confusions are about to be forestalled i love footnotes like that our focus is on free energy theorists not principalists by the way theorists assumptions that all biological systems at any scale can be modeled within the framework of ergodic random dynamical systems and that homeostasis and or robustness can be defined and studied in terms of dynamical attractors

So I don't know if that's an assumption of all FEP colleagues.

I don't know if it's rather than an assumption, but rather a consequence.

Like there are assumptions that people use, but then actually they have come to this claim as a consequence, not as an assumption or an ungrounded axiom.

And while our discussion should suggest that concepts and mathematical representations from statistical physics and dynamical systems theory are sometimes abused in biology, it should not suggest that those concepts and representations have no use.

So it's saying, in fact, you can have good explanatory predictive models that involve dynamical systems.

So it's not saying math and biology is hopeless.

And then also this 2004 paper thought, who do you cite for saying that, you know, math gets abused in biology?

So this is Robert May, a famous biologist in 2004.

And this was just very interesting, like understanding the nonlinear dynamics.

And this was in the case of a virus and health situation.

just extracting some of the key memes.

It's like, we're gonna have to learn across systems.

We're not just gonna be able to have one default system.

We need to think about multi-scale systems for applying and educating in transdisciplinary contexts.

Like having an understanding of viral dynamics is gonna require population and ecological understanding as well as protein.

And then,

I venture to predict that the corresponding immunology texts will indeed look different in 20 or even 10 years time.

Okay, well, we're right between 10 and 20 and maybe immunologists are starting to go, oh yeah, you can't just talk about what's the white blood cell touching the pathogen.

There's a bigger picture, there's a society.

And then what are those abuses?

And they're not always easy to recognize, especially because few have the expertise or the confidence or the personal narrative that they're able to ask questions across disciplinary contexts.

So it's easy sometimes for something to be transdisciplinary.

And then like the biologists don't question the physics and the physics don't question the biology.

all of a sudden something is not really getting questioned.

So it's totally a great point.

And this is a really important kind of fallacy, essentially, where a mathematical model is constructed with an excruciating abundance of detail in some aspects, while other facets of the problem are misty or vital parameters uncertain within a massive range.

and this happens just so many places it's unreal we made a mathematical model of this oh well you know of course we didn't consider other factor abc so it's not that everything has to be a theory of everything but we have to recognize that extremely partial mathematical models in biological systems may be less helpful than people claim them to be and it might be better if people pooled their efforts and work towards better models any thoughts on that


SPEAKER_00:
Just, you know, I mean, I think I'm definitely guilty of, like I remember back to Mike Levin's live stream when we were abusing physics.

So guilty as charged sometimes.

But it is important to, you know, have an open dialogue and to ask questions.

Like if there's a concept or something that you don't perhaps understand, maybe like you feel like you're a beginner.

I mean, I've definitely felt this way.

Like maybe I'm just being dumb, but...


SPEAKER_03:
know and then there's actually a very valid question at the end of that sentence so if uh you don't understand something be sure to ask until you do i think yep imagine just all the times somebody has said oh fep does that apply to living systems and so yeah it's a done deal well you know it's not a done deal so the conversation is still happening here we get to section two introduce introducing the fep

The free energy principle, FEP, says that unless a biological system minimizes its surprise, it will rapidly die.

Now, what do those citations say?

Do they talk about system death or do they talk about system persistence?

More specifically, FEP presupposes a view of biological systems as essentially persisters, different authors here, and foregrounds the conditions of possibility for the persistence of biological systems.

So that's their top level take on FEP.

And then to connect a few of the keywords in Howie 2020 refers to a system's periodic phase attractive dynamics.

So attractors in the phase space that have periodicity in the state space to define what it is for a biological system to exist.

Howie writes biological in existence is marked by a tendency to disperse throughout all possible states in state space.

e.g.

a system ceases to exist as it decomposes, decays, dissolves, dissipates, or alliteratively dies.

In contrast, to exist is to revisit the same states or their close neighborhoods.

So this is kind of bringing together what is life, Schrodinger's question, Ram said it all, 2018, with dissipative systems and systems that resist dissipation, systems that have a dynamic equilibrium.

What is the phase space we're talking about?

These are the big questions we're getting at.


SPEAKER_00:
And how does one disperse oneself exactly?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

And how, I think we heard that from somebody earlier today.

Somebody was getting dispersed during a practice talk.

It happens.

and where's surprise come into play not just the psychological like wow I was surprised it was a surprise birthday party but how do we go from attractors and dynamical systems to this statistical Bayesian concept of surprise and attracting sets and lower dimensional manifolds in attracting sets


SPEAKER_00:
Make that quote big one more time for me.

So something I thought was just unique or maybe remarkable was it says, free energy theorists relate the notion of entropy to the information theoretic quantity of surprise.

But I think that this is done before

the free energy principle arrived.

So in information theory, that's Claude Shannon makes the relationship between information and entropy and surprise.

So I don't think that that's something that the FEP started doing.


SPEAKER_03:
well two themes we'll return to today and again and again which is like first this shouldn't be a pape versus pape battle this isn't a battle royale for whose hot take will reign supreme we should be collaborating on bigger research agendas and so clarifying the contributions that different people have made will help demystify and make active inference and fep more accessible because

which claims or which contributions were made like a hundred years ago not that that makes it more valid but weren't made recently but sometimes when we only see recent citations it can be easy to get swept up but actually the authors of this paper do a good job of going back to some original citations but these are big eternal questions here's a fun paragraph in the paper

Because it's sort of like, I reformatted it slightly because it shows that we're in synchronous and asynchronous discussion with Fristin et al.

So here is like, you know, him thinking slash saying, Fristin saying.

By finding, this is Friston's claim, pseudo Friston claim, not actually his quote.

By finding a suitable attractor in the dynamic model, life scientists would be able to gain understandings of the workings of dot, dot, dot, dot, dot, basically like this is the dream of active inference, that if we had attractor, phase bays, all these terms coming together, then we could just make it work for diverse biological systems.

And then...

the authors of the paper, right?

To better understand what this means, let's examine how such idealized models are developed and why free energy theorists opt to build their models starting from concepts in physics.

So this is like the dream of active inference and physical groundings for biological systems.

And then the authors do the right thing, which is to steal person the argument, to investigate what its actual strengths are and why somebody would want to make that argument or why this is something that we're motivated to pursue instead of just immediately critiquing it as like not an important thing to want.

Okay.

All right, so here is in the red quote from the paper.

So Friston et al, 2006.

Way long ago, way, way long ago.


SPEAKER_00:
Ask us to imagine- Were you even born yet?

Were you even born yet?


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, please, Lou.

Oh, please.

Ask us to imagine a snowflake endowed with wings.

This winged snowflake could move, use its wings as solar reflectors or fans, and exchange energy with the environment for a much longer period than we would expect of an inanimate piece of ice to keep going under identical circumstance.

unlike familiar snowflakes the winged snowflake can choose actions which are the means of by which different outcomes are brought about in different states of the environment its wings allow the snowflake to bring about outcomes such as lowering its core temperature in response to an increase in air temperature so let's go to first in 2006 and this is figure one so we're imagining they're sort of on the left is like a traditional snowflake model

There's sort of, it doesn't have any action affordances.

So it's just being tossed around in the soup and it freezes when it's cold.

And then when the temperature gets below this critical phase boundary, it melts and the system fails to persist.

So it's like, you know, checkpoint, are we good with systems persisting versus dissipating?

This is kind of our simple physical example.

a piece of ice freezing in the sky and melting all right now let's imagine if the ice froze in a way where it had wings and slightly different colored wings i wondered what the symbolism was here but it has these two different wings

and that allows it to engage in action on the environment.

So for example, if it detects or it predicts or acts as if it's predicting that it's going to head towards a warmer area, that's like lower down or something, all of a sudden it can flap a few times and get into a colder area.

So here, this snowflake just falls, but this one is able to flap and stay cold.

And so through action, it's able to persist longer.

So it's precluding a phase transition

from solid to liquid through this active exchange with the environment.

So that's like the winged snowflake model.

That's kind of a nice thought experiment from Yonder to help us understand like the steps from mere physical system to systems that start to engage in actions on the environment, especially those that keep persistence of the system.

Anything here?

Okay, here's figure three from that same Friston 2006 paper.

And this is really an awesome figure because it shows some concordances between act-dymph, even though it's not even really used in those terms.

So that's why we need the timeline.

Like is act-dymph even mentioned in this paper in 2006?

It might not be actually, but we can see there's this perception action cycle, right?

and this is related to a few other kinds of action perception cycles footnote paper incoming we can think of this as like a bowl and then the ball is rolling to the bottom of the bowl it's a image we return to again and again now the y-axis is the free energy and so here's the minimum possible free energy and it's like the system starts here there's a change in the environment

that causes a mismatch that mismatch can be reduced through two different types of updates of a model one is an action and the other is a perception so which order happens details details details but the idea is like at each loop there's an environmental change which is then renormalized or returned to something

through perception and action, which relates to an active inference, how we say that the two ways that free energy can be minimized are through updates of the generative model, like learning or parameter updating, or through action.

How do we reduce surprise?

Inference and action.

Why reduce surprise?

Because if we have an optimistic generative model, we don't want to be surprised about our model where we're living.

So we act and we infer so that we persist.

Any comments here?

But it's just a cool, like input could be the state of chemoreceptors.

You know, already we're going from these sort of physics formalisms and dynamical systems formalisms towards just, oh yeah, you know, drop it.

It could be like chemical and biological, but was it justified in 2006?

Well, looking back on it, not as much as it is justified today.

And what will they say in 2033, looking back on this?

So all work in progress.

okay so this is from page six of the paper and won't uh read the full quote because we've kind of gotten at this trade-off between utility and accuracy and generalizability but the big questions here are what systems is the fep modeling or describing where has it been used where could it be used where shouldn't it be used or can't it be used

How good is the FEP for modeling or describing these different systems?

How good could it be?

And what would it take to get it there?

And then also an important question for those of you who are FEP or ACT-IMP fans, and you have a challenging conversation,

take a step back and ask your colleague, what models do you prefer with similar or different explanatory scope?

Just what else is out there?

Because it really helps ground the discussion in what that person's understanding or preferences are.

And a lot of times people will come up blank.

They'll say, I'm critiquing your unified model of perception, cognition, action.

Okay, great.

Critique away.

That's what I'm doing too.

What do you prefer?

Oh,

Nothing.

So it helps us stay positive with the contributions that we're making to this field while also recognizing the discrepancy.

And that combination of recognizing discrepancy and taking action is active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
You know, this is funny.

This is a good contrast to the Sims paper that we just did.

And I feel like at the end of the last live stream, we were just talking about thermodynamics and information theory and the relationship between those two things.

But I always want to take the FEP and use it for non-biological systems.

I think I veer toward panpsychism more than most people.

I have a hard time with the line between

Mere active inference and adaptive active inference or like the evolutionary late evolutionary commerce late whatever and

Like the, you know, brain is the ultimate source of cognition and capable, capable organ, capable cognition.

And so like, would the FEP apply to a set of molecules in a beaker?

Like it doesn't have preferences.

Do the molecules prefer to be in an equilibrium state or how does that work out?

Like I want to take the FEP and use it in systems that maybe it's not designed for.

I don't know.

I tend to want to go the other way.


SPEAKER_03:
Makes sense.

Here's that adaptive versus mirror active inference slide from 30.


SPEAKER_02:
Good segue, perfect segue.


SPEAKER_03:
And so here's a question from FEP Landia.

What makes biological cognition special or different?

So we're not gonna go too much into it here.

We talked about it in live stream number 30 a ton, and it was just super interesting.

To what extent does it matter that it can engage in counterfactuals?

Does the temporal depth matter?

But if we're on the outside, how do we know what the temporal depth is?

Is it the temporal depth it acts as if it's cognizing?

Where does energy dissipation come into play?

So these are big questions.

What is cognition?

And is there just one kind of cognition?

And biological systems do a special combination of it, but it's different in kind of decimal point, but not in the top level.

Or are they really different in type?

Or is it such a great quantitative difference that it's different in type?

Big questions here.

More from the paper.

Active inference models are phase space representations of biological systems.

So that's like a full stop moment.

This isn't what biological systems are.

It's a phase space representation of systems.

Here we're talking about biological systems.

as forming expectations over observable external states and inferring policies, state action mappings, that minimize the expected free energy of those states under a generative model in some predefined Markov decision process.

By minimizing expected free energy, the modeled system would attain a non-equilibrium steady state, and so it would maintain, in some sense, a low entropy probability distribution over its states.

So what is active inference?

What topics is it related to?

What is it based upon?

We look at that ball in the bowl and it's easy to say, well, the way that the imperative that's pushing the system forward is that the ball wants to be as low down as possible and it's gonna be minimizing its potential energy that way.

Another story about the bowl is the ball is going to end up or act as if it's going to end up with the tightest bound.

through time on how far left and right it goes now that also takes you right to the bottom of the bowl but you didn't have to mention that you wanted to go down it was just that the desire to minimize the uncertainty led to the bottom of the bowl in that structure and so how do we think about some of these different ways and what are the physics metaphors and then

An assumption from the paper, an assumption made by the active inference models developed by free energy theorists is that target biological systems can be represented as random dynamical systems.

What does this assumption mean exactly?

What does it mean?

And what are the assumptions of ACT-INF?

What are the assumptions of other frameworks?

Does Act-Inf have the same assumptions as other frameworks?

Does it have fewer or different?

Does it have more assumptions?

Are there assumptions of Act-Inf that are consequences of other ideas or vice versa?

So these are just awesome questions that the authors are raising and that their work is like a jumping off point into.


SPEAKER_00:
Good.

So one question that I always have is what if the active inference and the free energy principle presumably have the same assumptions, but do they have to?

And so that's always something I wonder.


SPEAKER_03:
How has active inference developed?

This is a fun paragraph.

Active inference modeling evolves rapidly.

Eats, shoots, leaves.

As Maxwell Ramstad, Dr. Maxwell Ramstad, helpfully reminded us in conversation, up to roughly 2012, the dynamics of internal and active states in active inference models were determined through gradient descent on variational free energy.

So let's call that phase one, before 2012.

We need a real timeline for this.

This is just informal, but this is why we need the timeline.

Figure out if we're truly on the best timeline.

From around 2012 until recently, like 10 minutes ago or 2019, active inference models have been equipped with algorithms for policy selection, which evaluate the average free energy expected under each policy.

So expected free energy, not just variational free energy.

In their latest work, the active inference community

have endowed their models with a recursive expected free energy functional, which enables the models to represent target systems higher order counterfactual beliefs, which are beliefs a system has about the beliefs it would have as a consequence of action.

So that's the deep parametric active inference, that's sophisticated active inference, that's what we spoke about with a mental action paper, Sanved Smith et al.

Okay, so those are three waves that are important to distinguish in the development of active inference models.

Because these modeling advances all seem to make assumptions about the ergodicity of biological systems and the biological meaning of dynamical attractors, the points we make in what follows may help explain why hashtag all active inference models thus far tend to trade off realism for maximal generality.

So they're respecting the developments on the framework and encompassing it, summarizing it, maybe accurately, maybe not.

And then saying, because they all make some common assumptions, they're all victim to this trade-off of realism for generality, or is it utility for generality?

Which one was it again?

Realism, utility.

What are the trade-offs?

So what are the waves of active inference?

how does ergodicity come into play in these different waves?

So I know there's a lot on there, but this is really an important piece to understand that there's been recent developments and yeah, it's still in progress.

Okay.

Here, this is some technical details that it'd be awesome to just learn more from the authors or from anyone else who sees this and gets excited by it.

This is about some of the physics formalizations of noise and dynamics and phase spaces.

And just a term that I was curious about is like a co-cycle.

So it's kind of taking that idea of returning to an attracting state and maybe connecting it to some other ideas like a co-cycle.

But these are just things to learn and discuss about.

And then this is sort of the classic Bayesian network, Markov blanket.

Is there a Markov blanket that picks out the mind?

Is the network of autopoetic processes and biological systems identical to the Markov blanket of the system?

What is the metaphysical status of Markov blankets?

And then the author's right.

These debates in the metaphysics of the FEP can be left on the side since we're not interested in metaphysics here.

Hmm, I thought we were having a discussion that was meta to physics.

So where is your metaphysics now?

Okay, anything else there?

Action in the loop.

Given this setup, free energy theorists are interested in finding the active states of the systems that are confined to a bounded subset of states and remain there indefinitely.

So we want to have our internal states be at a certain level, like thinking about our temperature being at a certain value or anything else.

And now we want to talk about the control theory question, which is what active states

should the system engage in, conditioned on internal and sensory states, such that the internal states do remain bounded within a subset of states.

More technical details.

If one assumes that the dynamics of the target organism is ergodic, if one assumes that the dynamics of the target organism is ergodic,


SPEAKER_00:
It's grammatically incorrect.

If one assumes that the dynamics of the target organism are ergodic, that's why you can't read it.


SPEAKER_03:
That's why the compiler failed.

Then random dynamical attractors can be associated with the ergodic density, a P distribution of X given M, which is proportional to the amount of time each state is occupied by the organism.

So here's where we return to their definition of the ergodic density as the invariant probability measure.

There's a few other terms that I know some listeners know about, whether they'll help us with it, it's another question.

But what does it mean to talk about the Lebesgue measure of the attractor?

How is that connected to dynamical systems and entropy and whatever this integral is calculating in the limit of time approaching infinity?

But this is kind of this thing that we see in space and in time, like one over space.

So like what's the tiniest infinitesimal space for all space?

Or what's the tiniest, tiniest moment for all time?

So how does that connect to action control theory?


SPEAKER_00:
More on that later.

But here, even in this slide, it raises the question.

So here it says, such active internal states in an organism.

And so maybe it's the way that the diagrams are usually drawn for active inference, but

I don't ever think of active states as internal states.

Like there's active states, sensory states, internal states, external states.

And I always think about the sensory and the active states as on the boundary between internal and external.


SPEAKER_03:
So... Absolutely.

There are internal, external, sense and action states.

So what are the active internal states?

There's a few ways of thinking about it.

The particular states are the sense action, the blanket states, and the internal states.


SPEAKER_00:
So maybe that's what's being referred to, or we can... Well, when we're talking about mental action, I guess then the active states are internal.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Between the past and the future.

But still internal, right?

Like in mental action, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Yes.

With this definition of active states in hand, so I believe that we're now working with the Friston ontology of action being not the internal states, but who knows?

Friston 2012 finally formulates the principle of least action as follows.

The principle of least action.

the internal states of an active system.

So that wouldn't be the action states.

That would be the internal states of a system with on the interface having action.

They minimize surprisal L such that the variation

delta s of action s with respect to its internal states r of t existing in r vanishes and then classic future friston look at that the 2100s are going to be just so good the fep would suffice to derive the principle of least action and is defined by friston in the past and the future as follows the free energy principle

technical technical technical if the internal states minimize free energy then the system conforms to the principle of least action and is an active system this will be good to unpack and learn more from the authors as well as from those who study these areas because it's sort of something we all ask is like wait least action but then they're engaging in action couldn't they just do less action wouldn't that be more of a fulfillment of the least action principle but

What is it actually?

It's like a stationary principle.

It's an invariance.

So there's a little bit more nuance than just staying on the couch.


SPEAKER_00:
And I haven't heard this term active system before.

I've heard like active inference system or inactive system.

But this active system is new to me.

And indeed, Friston was a very forward thinking guy, is a very forward thinking guy all the way into the 2100s.


SPEAKER_03:
When expressed in these terms, so in the terms of physics, the FEP provides us with an account of biological persistence as a generic type of stability of random dynamical systems.

So then they talk about first in 2012 and 13, some simulations.

And then here's what the author's challenge is and say, let's then put into better focus some of the difficulties involved in this challenge and ask, is there any reason to believe that all biological systems at any scale can be modeled as random dynamical systems?

And how does this maximal generality bear on the degree of realism of the models?

So we had a few previous discussions ago, we had, you know,

realism we had utility we had instrumentalism we had all these different axes and how are we going to manage that trade-off because sometimes the most quote realistic description of a system isn't the most useful or it's not the most general so there's a lot of trade-offs happening how does model realism relate to generalizability and how does that relate to the utility of the model as well as other attributes like its simplicity


SPEAKER_00:
that's like the relationship between the map and the territory.

If you wanted the territory, then you wouldn't need a map.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

And then almost like the compass or a piece of paper that just, you know, says like, you are here.

It's like, it's so general.

You can always look down and that map is going to be at least not telling a lie.

You know, this is your left or something like that.

This is, but is that useful?

It generalizes really well, but have we lost this whole question of navigation in the desire to find the simplest map?


SPEAKER_00:
So something that I wonder about, like, you know, are biological systems random dynamical systems?

Like, what's a non-random dynamical system?

Like, a dynamical system as opposed to, like, a static system?

Like, statics, dynamics?

And so, like, what other system could a biological system be?

Like, if it's not a random dynamical system, what is the alternate system?

How about hypothesis?

Just like what you said about like, okay, well, what is the better model for cognition?

If not, you know, active inference, then what model is the better model, right?

Like, so, but what about for a biological system?

If it's not random dynamical system, what is the best model for a biological system?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Dynamical through time dynamics, random.

used in a lot of different ways, but is that statistical?

Is it stochastic?

Where's determinism fit into play?

Well, let's talk about it.

So here's section four, and this is like some of the main body paragraphs and contributions of the paper.

It's the section modeling biological active states as random dynamical attractors.

Free energy theorists account of biological systems persistence relies on three main modeling assumptions, ergodicity,

the existence of Markov blankets that imply a partition of states into external and internal, the existence of random dynamical attractors.

In this section, we concentrate on assumptions one and three, and on the more fundamental challenge of defining phase basis for target biological systems in the life sciences.

So the three core ideas that they're saying are,

underlying FEP work in biological systems are ergodicity, Markov blankets, and random dynamical attractors.

Are those the main three?

That's a really important question.

This paper is going to focus on the first and the third, not going as much into the Markov blankets discussion, because there's been a huge amount of discussion on Markov blankets, and we've talked about them separately.

So they're going to focus on ergodicity and random dynamical attractors.

That's 4.2 and 3, but that's going to be introduced by discussion on phase spaces in biology.

So that's what the authors have set out to do.

Now, shameless lab plug, we're working on an active inference ontology in a participatory way that includes references, definitions, translations into multiple human languages.

It will be many things and it will scaffold educational content that will make this entire field more accessible and rigorous.

So terms like face space,

We've talked about state space on September 13th.

So every week we're bringing together different perspectives and sharing resources and working towards common understandings in this document to really get at what are the core assumptions of FEP or ACT-INF?

What do these terms mean?

What would somebody need to learn if they wanted to understand more?

So it's really important work and we're definitely going to draw upon the author's contributions here as we work to scaffold an active inference ontology so that we don't get tied up in active state, action state, systems with action.

We can be clear about how we're talking about this field.

And in fact, we really have to be.

Anything on our ontology document before we continue back to the paper?

No, I'm good.

But this has been a fun project with many contributors.

So let's talk about phase spaces in biology.

We introduced this in the earlier keyword section.

So the phase space of the system is a giant space formed by the relevant degrees of freedom of the target system.

And then that's the space of the possible.

A point in the phase space corresponds to a microstate, which completely determines the system in terms of the variables and parameters required for analyzing its dynamics.

And the dynamics are determined by the equations of motion, which describe the evolution of points or trajectories in phase space.

So here's that phase space kind of model.

And then the authors are going to suggest that there's at least three facts.

cold hard facts that make face spaces in biology hard to apply because first biological systems have many degrees of freedom.

It's not just a pendulum.

Second, the symmetries, which are invariant preserving transformations, underlying the observed regularities in biological phenomena are more unstable than physics.

Okay.

And third, the phase space for many real world biological targets is much less stable than that for the kinds of target systems studied in physics.

So what do you think about that or about phase spaces in biology?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, I think I mentioned the multidimensionality in the beginning when we were talking about the phase spaces in biological systems.

And I think that it just comes to that with any system, right?

Like you can always include too many parameters.

Like you can have the territory or you can have a dramatically reduced map.

And so finding that correct balance is hard.

And if we're looking at, you know, say states of a system and trying to predict the next state,

What are all of the factors conditionally independent?

Is there some mingling of the variables there?

And is it okay to just model a couple at a time?

And what if we don't know if there are some confounding variables in the system too?

So it's a difficult task, but it's how do we start to get a grip on it is hard.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

And a big question in the background here is, does this matter for applications?

So yes, these are in principle critiques of doing dynamical phase space models of biology, but we know that dynamical systems models of neural systems, of hormonal systems, of ecology, these are all really useful and people use them every day.

Gene, regulatory networks, don't forget those.

how could we forget but does something having these sort of fundamental critiques prevent it from being useful not always this is a really nice um points about the open-endedness of biological phase space so this is the work of longo montvale and kaufman 2012 who said that in physics one can pre-state the phase space for target systems based upon stable stable invariances and symmetries

So we can like say the ball is going to be rolling around in the box.

Those are the boundaries and here's the invariances.

Historical processes studied in evolutionary and population biology, like all these processes that we know and love in biology, involve symmetry breaking, which makes the phase spaces structurally unstable, ever changing and unpredictable.

Now unpredictable is a little bit of a tough one because that's a continuum.

What if you can predict 1% of the variance in great evolutionary transitions?

Is it unpredictable or is it predictable?

You know, is it half full or half empty?

And then this is from the paper.

Because we cannot pre-state the ever-changing phase space of biological evolution, we have no settled relations by which we can write down the equations of motion of the ever-new biologically relevant observables and parameters, but that we cannot pre-state.

More, we cannot pre-state the adaptive niche as a boundary condition, so could not integrate the equations of motion even were we to have them all.

So it's like there's the ball rolling around on the billiards table,

but now there's mutations in the genome of the ball so that there's like totally new mechanisms arising in a way that might have a historiosity.

Oh yeah, and the table is mutating and it's made up of other organisms.

So it's easy to see how we get lost in the complexity, yet adaptive action exists and useful models exist.

So how do we reconcile the fundamental open-endedness and creativity and novelty of evolution with our desire to explain some portion of the variance so we can act effectively?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, and this relates, like, to a question that I had brought up to you yesterday, Daniel, I think, about, like, what about discretizing space?

And so I know that, like, some of the physics principles rely on infinite time.

Like, the ergodicity specifically relies on the possibility of infinite time.

And this is all stuff that's, like, kind of beyond me.

But what if we have a temporarily restricted moment, right?

Like, what if we're just interested about now and five years from now?

Or what if we're just interested in now and five years ago, right?

And so...

In each moment, is this symmetry breaking happening or at what scale?

And so is there perhaps a chunk of time, a small discrete chunk of time from a microsecond to 100 years where these types of inferences can be used and where the equations are applicable and where we can use the model under the specification that this model is not good for the next 2 million years, but it will last you 20, right?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
it's a model of the phase space of blood glucose versus ph in a person as measured by the devices we have it's not of blood sugar over a million years because that doesn't even make sense given the system of interest so how do we reconcile pragmatics and utility with these really important philosophical questions so that was four one phase spaces four two

Ergodicity.

One of the assumptions of the FEP is that all biological systems are ergodic.

So paging, Ramstead, et al, et al.

This is something we really want to unpack and understand.

How does it...

mean ergodicity or more precisely metric transitivity in random dynamical systems like what is the math and the physics and is that an assumption of the fvp what does this mean to assume that biological systems quote are ergodic

which is different than saying biological systems for some spatial temporal scales can be modeled using statistics that involve ergodic assumptions.

So there's a lot of nuance there, like whether we're making relist claims about how biological systems are or whether we're using statistics in an instrumental fashion to make useful models of organisms.

But the big questions are like, what kinds of systems are ergodic and how?

what are the implications of ergodic assumption is it ever not an assumption but it's actually like a consequence of some empirical grounding there's the ergodic hierarchy so ergodicity it's not just like yes or no there's a total continuum with a lot of complex math and then just for everyone how or where does this matter for modeling under the fep or active inference in real world situations


SPEAKER_00:
And they did call out in the paper a reference to Ramstad and the local ergodicity, which is for a biological organism, something like the boundaries in which the organism can exist.

Anyway, I think Maxwell, come explain it to us, please.

But the authors did mention that.


SPEAKER_03:
Here's a quote from the paper.

Birkhoff, 1931, demonstrated that if a dynamical system is ergodic, then the infinite time limit exists and coincides with the phase average for almost all initial conditions, little x, like the realized conditions, within the bigger x, like the space of the possible.

This is called the ergodic theorem.

And that is going to get linked to everything we were just discussing.

Surprisal minimization as ergodicity maintenance.

And then here, the proof of the principle of least action is straightforward.

Okay.

and rests on noting that action and the entropy of the ergodic density over external states are related via the ergodic theorem, Friston, past and the future.

So PNAS, Burckhoff, 1931, pretty interesting paper and just,

It's amazing to think like 100 years of mathematics after this, but this is kind of that initial formalization of what if the space average and the time average were going to be related to each other?

So it's a cool topic.

We've brought up ergodicity before, and it would be really helpful for people who know some of the technical details to help work with it.

This is one analogous to how they brought up, like, here's the facts that challenge phase spaces in biology.

So here's some facts that challenge the application of ergodic theorems to real systems.

And there's good reasons, the authors say, to think that the theorem cannot be realistically applied in the domain of biology.

First off, it's not enough to show that the infinite limit exists.

It also has to be shown that the convergence rate is plausible.

We're going to talk about that in a second.

Second point, comparing biological to non-biological systems, it's harder to estimate the amount of time that they need to kind of asymptote because of the non-uniformities.

Another reason, and this is going to be one that I know people will have things to say, why ergodicity cannot plausibly be assumed in biology is that the ergodic theorem requires the dynamics of the system to be ergodic, which means that eventually almost every point will visit every measurable region in X.

We've talked about that before, but biological systems never revisit the exact same state if you think about every molecule constituting the phase space.

But if the phase space is just temperature versus blood sugar, yes, you pretty much will revisit some points, but will you revisit every point?

Are you going to reach a value of negative 5,000 sugar and 900 degrees Celsius?

No.

We're talking about bounded states.

And that's kind of a nuance.


SPEAKER_00:
And then- Well, and it's also the arrow of time is moving forward, right?

It points one direction.

And so like, you know, at age 40, my skin will never have the collagen it had at age four.

Like that's never going to happen again, right?

So, I mean, and there are some things that just decrease as you age.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

So there are, yeah.

Let's look at this Palacios 2018 paper.

So this is, I guess, an earlier paper by the first author.

So it kind of gives a little context.

Had we but whirled enough in time, but we don't.

Exclamation point, colon.

Justifying the thermodynamic and infinite hyphen time limits in statistical mechanics.

Great title, well punctuated, a bevy of punctuations.

And this is just a very interesting paper that we skimmed over.

And I'm sure there's a ton to say, it'd be great to speak with the author about it, but they argue that this has, there's an important consequence for the philosophical literature on infinite limits.

And that's basically, it's not just about like where you are,

where you are in phase space it's about where you're going that's the asymptote in infinite time and it also matters how fast you're going to get there so it's like kind of the asymptote for a pane of glass is like in a puddle on the ground because it's a liquid or it's a glass but that might take so long that over some time scale it can be modeled as if it's not changing for example

So that's kind of a cool notion that it's not just about where a system is or where it's being attracted towards, but actually the dynamics of the approach matter a lot.

And that's certainly true in biological systems.

The assumption of ergodicity to give a definition of equilibrium states is a controversial assumption even in the domain of physics, especially due to existence of physical systems in equilibrium that have proven to be non-ergodic.

So I didn't find this Palacios 21 citation in the Biblio.

This is the reason why physicists and philosophers have offered alternative approaches to equilibrium that do not rely on ergodicity.

Even philosophers that defend a quasi-ergotic approach to equilibrium recognize that this definition of equilibrium may plausibly apply only to a restricted class of systems such as gases.

so sounds bad but then we go okay the authors say it doesn't mean of course that ergodicity or a weaker notion of local ergodicity may sometimes be a reasonable assumption to make so in other words it might be useful for specifically defined systems anyway

However, the fact that one cannot extrapolate the assumption of ergodicity to the behavior of all relevant systems in biology casts doubt on the project of formulating a principle that depends on this assumption and is both maximally general and biologically realistic.

So ideas that we've heard a little bit about, but how are we going to finesse realism and generality and grounding in physics when biological systems might be grounded in things that

are not fulfilled.

So that's 4.2.

All right, 4.3, random dynamical attractors.

What makes the application of FEP to account for real world behavior, biological systems, is even more challenging beyond 4.2 and 4.1, because one also has to show the existence of an attractor and also justify why certain attractors, but not others, plausibly denote homeostatic states in the target.

There might be multiple attractors.

And then there's this question of chaotic systems.

Do you want to add anything on these?

Basically, it's non-trivial to say that there's an attractor and it's the right one and it results in adaptive behavior.

There's a lot that goes into it.

So, but we can learn more.

We'll hear more questions later.

And then just to go quickly to five and six.

So five, discussion.

In the previous sections, we've analyzed three challenges involved in the justification of the free energy principle.

So one was pre-stated phase spaces for most biological systems.

Two was the lack of the warrant for making ergodicity assumptions in biology.

And three is the challenge of identifying homeostasis with attractors in a phase space, even if one and two were accomplished.

Based on our analysis, one overall conclusion is that because of a fundamental mismatch between its physics assumptions and the properties of biological targets, model building grounded in the FEP achieves maximal generality, yay, for minimal biological plausibility.

Bad.

So how is that going to work?

As we raised earlier, how does generality versus plausibility get traded off for real systems?

in the FVP, in ACT-INF and in what other frameworks?

Let's always have another one if people want to or can think of one so that we're not just asking whether it's like as good as it could be, because here's a hint, it's not as good as it could be.

We're always going to see ways to improve the theory.

and the literature, if only by organizing other work and making it more accessible.

So what is its relative biological plausibility?

What is its relative generalizability?

And what are we relativizing to?

Because as they say, like for other idealized scientific representations, even if the FEP involves simplifying distortions, it does not follow that it must be minimally realistic and have limited explanatory or predictive power.

So they're saying like, it's kind of like enemy of my enemy is my friend.

It's like saying, just cause you idealize and simplify that it doesn't mean that you're gonna get explanation or prediction.

So that's their discussion.

They fall back to the three key points that they think challenge

the usage of physics ideas in biology that are postulated to be underlying the FEP phase spaces, ergodicity, and random attractors.

And they're concluding that there's a mismatch between the physics assumptions and the properties of biological targets.

Here in the implications and predictions, they write,

If the FEP or active inference models it grounds make simplifying distortions, distorting assumptions about the phase space of a target system, the ergodicity of biological systems, and the existence of an attracting set corresponding to homeostatic states for these systems, then these idealizations should earn their keep.

So, you know, you've been a bad theory, but it's not all over.

You could be a good theory.

You could earn your keep maybe in the future.

And then they write, we'll just read it.

These idealizations should allow life scientists to attractively draw some explanation and prediction about relevant biological observables in real world systems and assess those predictions against measurements relevant to understanding some aspect of homeostatic processes in actual biological systems.

DaCosta et al., 2020.

Our contention is that the idealizations made by free energy theorists do not play these practical and epistemic roles.

And so this is the DaCosta et al.

2020, active inference on discrete state spaces, a synthesis.

And here are from table one, here's all the applications.

it's interesting because like this pragmatic and epistemic role that's kind of the ontology of active inference that's how we talk about policy selection and then it's like okay looking at this list i'm seeing a lot of pragmatic and epistemic value but what is the contention that the idealizations themselves

do not play pragmatic or epistemically valuable roles, I think it'd be good to get a little clarification because table one has a lot of, and since then even, there's a lot of interesting areas.

What do you think about that, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah it's interesting like the word choice of the author here like the idealizations made by the f free energy theorists theorists so what are these idealizations like the reliance on ergodicity and random dynamical systems theory like are these the idealizations or is it actually using the fep and active inference for practical applications that don't play the practical and epistemic roles so i just i'm curious as to that word choice


SPEAKER_03:
And Steven in the chat wrote, the use of approximation science around ergodicity

could give the potential to have sufficient revisiting of states to make meaningfulness plausible.

How can we measure when sufficient approximation to ergodicity exists in order to make variational free energy inferences?

So good question we can ask.

And as we kind of explored, revisitation is one component of ergodicity, but also there's this element of revisiting every point and of exploring the whole phase space.

So as we kind of addressed, what is ergodicity?

the reality of ergodicity and applying those models to biological systems and then yeah can we use approximations and approximation science to make it work even if in the infinite perfect case it doesn't exactly seem like it would like the t-test assumes that there's an equal variance between the two groups unless you have a t-test with in equal variances yet

No two groups in reality are going to have the exact same variance, yet the t-test works.

So how can we take that same approach and think about the systems that we're working with here?

Here's their whole conclusion in a churning maelstrom.

They're arguing that FEP theorists have pursued maximal generalization by relying on physics concepts.

However, that means that they've sacrificed biological realism

And the danger of sacrificing biological realism is that you risk minimizing explanatory and predictive power of those accounts for biological systems, which are homeostatic and manifestingly far from equilibrium in their persistence.

And their last paragraph, the FEP can perhaps be better understood as a maximally general definition of any system that persists

but this definition does not seem to provide us with any new insight into biological systems.

To the extent free energy theorists treat all biological systems at any scale as pre-specified generic objects with fixed, currently unknown equations of motion,

their account risks missing all features that make biological systems interesting kinds of thermodynamic systems.

So it's like, you know, a city where there's all kinds of intersections and then you have a grid map.

And so we distort the system in a way where all of a sudden we thought we were generalizing, but we ended up losing touch with the system and therefore explanatory and predictive power.

Any thoughts on the conclusion?


SPEAKER_00:
um no i mean i think that that you know they have made their point pretty clearly so um i think the fpp also has a lot of room to grow being that it's you know relatively not not quite 20 yet so i think that um you know hopefully that some

pragmatic and epistemic value will be put forth by the generalizations made by the FEP in some future model, perhaps.


SPEAKER_03:
That's almost like a deep time sociological value.

Even a provocative theory, which has limited epistemic or pragmatic value, not saying the FEP is, could play a role in a broader social system that still gets the job done.

So that's kind of a cool notion.

What questions for 31.1 did you put up?


SPEAKER_00:
So I think I've raised them all already.

So what is the dynamic equilibrium of living systems, as the authors state here and as I stated in the beginning keywords?

And it says we should pay closer attention to the fundamental differences between physics and biology.

What are the differences between physics and biology?

In the paper they made, they went to a great length to explain why biological systems weren't ergodic, but then also they made the point that

physics they have they have a really hard time like proving organicity exists at all um in any physical system so what are what are these fundamental differences between physics and biology that that are so critical like that it seems that you know the fvp kind of misses the point um and then they refer often in the paper to active states as as internal states and i i just wonder

What, like, I mean, I've really thought about active states as like the interface between internal and external and part of the blanket.

And so I just wonder why...

the active states are included in internal states and their description of the model.

So just some technical things that I have questions about and hopefully the authors will be here to answer them.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Steven wrote, we may never know the whole phase space as the phase space may be variable.

Yes, that's what we talked about, like the phase space of temperature.

Does that include...

impossible temperatures that the system cannot persist at.

And then the fact that the phase space can change is the open-endedness of the long ago, I think, 2012 open-endedness of the phase space in biological systems.

So for sure, that's why we can read the papes and then have specific citations and ontologies in mind.

So we're not kind of cross-angling because those are great points and they were the points made in the paper.

And then Steven asks, is biological realism based upon folk biological assumptions?

So I think this sort of like folk hyphenated everything has come into the forefront with the discussion with Matt Sims.

So yeah.

what is biologically real you know what models are biologically realistic isn't that just like the question of what is real so yeah what is even real at all exactly yeah realism sounds good until you so you ask too many questions so what a fun discussion so we ask all these questions like what does a good understanding enable

What are the unique predictions and implications of this paper?

What are the next steps for FEP and ACT-IMF?

What are the goals of this research?

And then what are we still curious about?

It was a fun discussion.

So thanks a ton, Blue, for doing it and for working a ton on the slides.

We'll look forward to 31.1 and beyond.

Awesome.

Thanks.

Bye.

Bye.

## 4XR8mIw9gcc

SPEAKER_04:
Hello and welcome everyone to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 31.1.

Yes, we are live.

So today it's October 19th, 2021, and we're going to be having a discussion on the paper, Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics and the Free Energy Principle in Biology.

So welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

this short link you can see the past and upcoming live streams here we are at the end of october 2021 in paper number 31 and today we're going to be having an awesome group discussion and then next week we hope to have one or both of the authors join us so we'll be taking a lot of notes today and bringing up good things to talk with them on and all of these are participatory live streams so if you want to join or if you want to co-organize with us just let us know

Today in 31.1, we're just going to be learning and discussing this paper of Palacios and Columbo.

And we're just putting out some perspectives, giving some affordances for others to join in and...

Hopefully learning along the way.

So we have a few questions that Blue and others have prepared.

Maxwell also prepared some notes to talk about.

And we're just pretty much going to look through the questions that we have already written up.

We'll add more.

Anyone in the YouTube live chat who wants to ask a question, they're more than welcome to do so.

And we'll just hop around wherever we need to go.

we'll start off with the introductions.

So we'll just say hi and maybe something that we liked about the paper or something that stuck with us or something that brought us to this conversation.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and I think something I'm excited about today

maybe would be to look at this intersection of biology and thermodynamics and talk a little bit about the different ways we can approach that intersection.

This paper has some formalisms, but not all the formalisms.

There weren't figures, but there's so many graphical intuitions related to free energy landscapes and some other pieces.

So it's just kind of cool to think about what are the different ways that we come to learn about the intersections of these cool ideas.

And I'll pass to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, yes, Stephen, I'm in Toronto in Canada.

Pleased to be here again.

And I'm interested in this paper, the general topic of ergodicity comes up, and I'm interested to see, I often see these papers which are sort of free energy principle focused rather than, say, active inference focused.

So just to see how when that tree gets shaken, how that helps or hinders

the more process theory work, which is probably closer to where I'm interested in.

But this is all very interesting.

Thanks.

I'll pass it over to Maxwell.


SPEAKER_02:
Hey, I'm Maxwell Ramstad.

I'm the CEO of Nested Minds Network, an active inference AI startup.

And I am a fellow at the Welcome Center for Human Neuroimaging at UCL in London.

I'm looking forward to discussing this paper.

I think there's a lot to disagree with, and I'll try to be collegial in my criticism.

Beautiful.


SPEAKER_04:
What more could we ask for?

Let's start with the big question.

And of course, other of you, if you have a different take or there's other big questions, but this big question, which is in this paper, as well as the broader literature, what fundamental ideas from physics are utilized in free energy principle and active inference and how?

and just what are the implications or trade-offs associated with the use of this idea?

Does it lend credibility to a theory to be grounded in physics?

What does it mean to a theory for it to be grounded in a certain physical idea?

Does it constrain?

Does it prevent us from making the kinds of conclusions that we might want to draw about biological systems?

So that's kind of the big question.

Do either of you have any other sort of big questions that this raises or what is the alignment of like the vector of this paper with the bigger ongoing threads in our research community?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I mean, I guess one outstanding question for me is what is the horizon of relevant literature in terms of time course that one needs to consider before, you know, trying to

engage with and criticize this material.

It's something that comes up, I think, and it might be useful to discuss


SPEAKER_04:
maybe before we go into the specifics there just when we're engaging in interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary scholarship or we're diving into fields where we might not have taken courses to the undergraduate or higher level just it's a really important question how do we make

appropriate claims you know how do you take a little bit of a dip into the rabbit hole and come out with something that's useful rather than just being more confused than when you made the initial search so these are big questions any thoughts or just how do we determine what literature are relevant like if we wanted to write a paper on something related to active inference or just in general what do we do do we do keywords do we only look at the last five years


SPEAKER_02:
Are you asking the question rhetorically or do you want us to chime in?


SPEAKER_04:
Maybe Stephen first with a raised hand, but then just either.

Unmute Stephen and then yes.

Stephen, unmute and then continue.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm probably not the best person because I keep digging and digging and digging.

But I think it's a good question.

I'm from a chemistry background a long way back, and I always find it interesting as well because, you know, a lot of stuff that's used or developed comes from chemistry, actually, and uses physics.

But, you know, like you say, we're in this kind of –

need to approximate and an approximation like there's so many things that come up that are like new new ways of describing stuff which makes total sense like i i've read through the free energy principle and christen's work about the talk about approximation science and that science is is ultimately an approximation

And then it takes me a couple of days to then get my head around that.

And it's like, yeah, that totally makes sense.

But the implications of all of that are huge.

The implications of being in non-equilibrium states itself disrupts a lot of the accuracy of certain ways that you can roll out things from physics.

And are you rolling it out into chemistry, which is normally equilibrium chemistry?

Are we rolling it out straight into biology?

Are we rolling it out into something slightly different with all this modeling?

So I think it does cause some challenges in terms of discussions because it's easy for other people to start telling the free energy principle and active influence community what they are and then start telling them

framing what they're not and by which point it's kind of hard to have a discussion because it's like the straw man's been set up and I think that can be a little bit challenging for some conversations to move forward because now you've got a complex idea trying to first of all counter

the fact that other people's paradigms have been challenged.

So I think that itself, I don't know if that's a literature thing or whether that's a cognitive thing, but I think that that is part of the challenge that seems to be faced.


SPEAKER_04:
I agree, Steven.

Thanks for that.

And it's maybe a good segue, Maxwell, we can just start to hear some of your thoughts and I'll be typing some notes and maybe asking some follow-ups and unpacking because I know you'll have a lot to say on this.

So maybe just go for it and I'll just type along and we'll see where we go.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, I guess that...

probably the thing that I find most puzzling about the paper is that it claims to be the first in the literature, essentially to be looking at the connection between the physics of the free energy, well, physics and the free energy principle.

And I find this puzzling because it seems to me that the connection between physics and the free energy principle has been really maybe the, the focus of active research in our community for like,

four years or so.

Um, so I mean, you know, the, uh, Carl published or at least pre-printed his, um, particular physics monograph in January, 2019.

Um, and, you know, prior to that, we had all been working on, I mean, effectively the connections to physics.

So, uh, I find this problematic because the work that we're going to discuss today focuses on, you know,

older formulations of the free energy principle where the connections to physics were maybe less obvious.

I mean, as most of us in the community know now, the formal foundations of the free energy principle have been subject to extensive debate over the last three years or so.

Kind of Martin Beal and colleagues kind of started us off in this direction.

And, you know, since Martin and, you know, a few other groups have produced, you know, stimulated interesting discussion through their very interesting and technically rigorous critiques of the free energy principle.

But really, it seems to me that this has been like a focus of our discussions for the last several years, the connections to physics and so on.

And where this has gotten us is the Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes paper that was recently released, which accounts for the critical remarks that have been raised.

So really where we're at now is that we have formulations that start from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and information geometry and end up saying, well,

all systems that have stationary density dynamics in a markov blanket will look as if their internal states are uh you know modeling in a loose sense or in a more technical sense encoding the parameters of probability distributions or bayesian beliefs about external states that's sort of where we're left with and you get you get to this from the physics so i just found that the um

The remark was a bit puzzling, and the choice of literature was also, I think, a little puzzling for the same reasons.

I mean, I have more specific thoughts, but I mean, you know, this is sort of for your first bullet point.

In response to the last one that we added, what's the relevant time horizon, I feel like a rapidly developing theory, like the active inference framework and the free energy principle,

I mean, if you're going to be producing technical critical material, you should probably be working from the most recent versions.

I mean, I find it puzzling, for instance, that the authors spend so much time talking about ergodicity when the word ergodic doesn't appear or just about never appears in the particular physics monograph.

So anyway, I just find that there's a

kind of disconnect between what's presented here and the actual work on the physics of the free energy principle that we have seen.

And I think that leads to several of the arguments being proposed being a bit missing their mark, to put it diplomatically.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you for the concise summary, Maxwell.

So Stephen, with a raised hand, and then we'll continue.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I ask a little question as well that relates to this?

In the very first part of the abstract, it talks about the inevitable and emergent property of any ergodic random dynamical system at non-equilibrium steady state that possesses a Markov blanket.

So that's a quote from the paper from 2013.

The thing is, it says before that, according to the free energy principle, life is an, and then it quotes, inevitable and emergent property, which is the quote.

But I'm not sure that life is ever talked of as an inevitable and emergent property of any random dynamical system in terms of how it's referenced.

And I'm wondering if there's a bit of a confusion in the paper there where

um, it talks about this, that quote, but makes it as if that's what life, that life is an emergent and emergent property.

And I think it's, um, I think what we're talking about is, um, adaptive reduction of surprise, um,

um or bayesian um inference properties is an inevitable and emergent property but i don't know if that would be life i don't know what your thoughts are on that or whether i'm misreading that


SPEAKER_04:
That reminds me of one of my favorite papers, What Is Life?, answering Schrodinger's question by Maxwell et al.

in 2018, because maybe you could even say something to this.

What is the relationship between reducing surprise and life?

And do these recent technical developments in FEP

help bridge the gap between inanimate and living cognitive or computational processes?

And where does physics play into that?


SPEAKER_02:
That's, that's very interesting.

I mean, I think the, the FEP itself, uh, is not a theory of life just in and of itself, right?

What it, what it is, it's a theory to understand, uh,

systems that are able to maintain themselves in non-equilibrium regime effectively.

So, or I mean more precisely, you know, stationary systems with a Markov blanket, which is to say the same according to the theory.

So I've gone on the record as saying that the free energy principle can allow us to construct a theory of life, but the claim isn't just that the free energy principle in and of itself

allows you to do that.

I think, you know, the FEP needs to appeal to auxiliary hypotheses from, you know, biological and other sciences to really do that.

I mean, it's a theory of thing-ness in physical systems that interest us.

And a subclass of those systems are biological systems.

Um, so, I mean, it is an aid in the formulation and probably the foundation of a formulation of, uh, living systems.

So, so long as we agree that living systems are a subclass of persisting systems.

And I mean, there's some talk in this paper that maybe this persisters living systems as persisters might not be the right way to think about life, but yeah, I think it acts as a foundation.

Um, I mean, but then you need to add a lot more.

to turn that into a theory of life.

I mean, if you read my Schrodinger paper carefully, for example, what we propose is a variational approach to neuroethology.

We're not saying that the free energy principle in and of itself can just offer this.

Like the free energy principle has to be used as a foundation from which you can build these variational approaches to neuroethology, to niche construction, to ecology, or what have you.


SPEAKER_04:
um so i mean but you know that that might just be uh picking it nitpicking so like i um you know well i don't want to double down on that too much it's good points and it's almost related to the definition or the distinction between like a discipline and a trans discipline

if fep is a discipline versus if it's connecting other disciplines variational neuroethology it's right there in the title we're connecting across different areas and the framework of thingness is one of those enabling features that helps it be an integrative theory but potentially it doesn't fulfill the disciplinary

uses of theory.

So that's one interesting idea.

I guess there's many other ways to go or things to ask.

I guess I'm just, I'm curious again, like Maxwell, what do you think in the last few years

how have we clarified or learned more about where active inference and FEP are related to each other?

So how was that thought of in five years ago, maybe when you were in grad school, and then what do you think is sort of contemporary greetings blue in terms of the distinction between active inference and FEP and then welcome blue and you can add anything you'd like.


SPEAKER_02:
I know some people want to mark the difference between the two.

I think personally, I think it's more of a sociological thing because no one or just about no one is contesting the validity of active inference models of cognitive systems, but there's a lot of pressure from different circles on the free energy formulation.

So, I mean, it might be a sociological thing where it's just easier to say, oh, I don't work on this more, you know,

metaphysics-y sounding thing.

I just work on computational neuroscience and that's straightforward.

I think there's no warrant for that from a mathematical point of view.

You should just, for example, look at the way that things are derived in the Bayesian mechanics paper.

Yeah, I feel like active inference just falls out of the core Bayesian mechanics.

I mean, I'd recommend everyone to read through that Bayesian mechanics paper.

It's really fantastic.

It's very clear.

One of the big differences between it and previous free energy papers is that it's authored by, or at least there are two authors out of the four on the paper who are proper mathematicians working on, you know, the mathematics of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics effectively.

uh you know that paper really uh i think uh meets the standards of rigor in mathematics you know you have an existence proof for the synchronization manifold that's sort of at the core of the whole formal construct the thing that links internal and external states uh and then you have a construction of it i mean it's very straightforward and having having established uh you know the kind of core

formal apparatus it's unfolding and by the end you know you what you do is ask kind of well all right let's split the blanket states up into sensory and active states and active inference just falls out of you know making the active states subject to the dynamics that those are unfolded throughout the paper so in my view the connection is immediate

um yeah uh i i i will grant that you know they're some of the computational models that we're using are a bit more um they look a lot more like just vanilla you know computational neuroscience models uh you know they're palm dps and stuff like that but but what the math that underwrites it all is the math of the free energy principle so i don't really

I don't really think the two can be separated.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Maxwell.

And the Bayesian mechanics paper we discussed in live stream number 26.

So it is a lot to keep up with sometimes, but that was a very fascinating discussion.

So Blue, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_01:
I was wondering if that was Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes, the one we did, yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
That's precisely it, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Um, so I, sorry, I'm late on the scene, but, um, I am curious about whether is the FEP a theory of life or does it allow us to construct one and does it only apply to life or can we take it in this kind of panpsychic direction, um, where even molecules like want to minimize their free energy and self assemble to become structures?


SPEAKER_02:
That's a very good question.

Um,

I would say that the free energy principle is not a metaphysics.

So it's a physics.

So it's a formal framework that may or may not give us grip on the systems that we're interested in.

I know there is some philosophical literature that presents it as more like a metaphysical statement about what life is.

But I think it's more useful to think about the Bayesian mechanics as just an extension of mechanics effectively.

The same way that statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics are flavors of mechanics, the Bayesian mechanics is also

And I realize that it's a little deflationary.

It's a more instrumentalist reading of the free energy principle.

But it's not completely deflationary in the sense that the model says that the best model of living and other existing systems is as a model of their environment.

So there's a kind of double instrumentalism at play, I think, in the free energy stuff.

To answer your question a bit more directly, I think the FEP can be used to construct the theory of life.

In and of itself, it's a theory of thing-ness.

Yeah, it's a great set of questions to discuss, and I mean, this is only my view.

I don't mean to settle this once and for all, but there are people who want to defend a more metaphysical view on this.

I guess the question is, how far do you want to take the commitment of the free energy principle?

I mean, you know, there are kind of two irreducible assumptions that go into the math.

There's stationarity, which, by the way, is not the same as ergodicity.

So, you know, I think the whole section of this argument just doesn't apply at all anymore.

The one presented by Colombo and Palacios.

And Markov blankets.

So I mean, if you think that systems that exist at some scale have to be stationary, and you think that systems that exist really do have a Markov blanket, then you can be realist about the assumptions.

But I kind of feel that it works whether or not you take the additional philosophical step of committing hardcore to the realist assumptions.

You know, it works just as, it works as an, you know, an as-if theory, if you will.

I mean, the whole thing tells you like living, sorry, systems that exist at non-equilibrium steady state and have a Markov blanket will look as if they're inferring external states.

And I mean, yeah, I think this looks as if stuff is really,

important um and i realized that you know for some of us it may be a little bit deflationary uh but i don't know if more is warranted from the math i think that you know there's a yeah we just need to be kind of careful um


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks for identifying those two key pieces.

And maybe we'll have more to think about with the stationarity and ergodicity.

So Blue with the raised hand and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
So just a couple of things, like when I say panpsychism, I wasn't trying to go into like the metaphysical realm, but because it's physics, because it's not metaphysics, can it then apply to life and non-life?

Like, can we just go all the way down?

And so in that kind of way, I wasn't really implying as metaphysical construct, but more in like the direct, does it broadly apply to non-life as well as life?

And then also, just a couple more things.

So systems have a Markov blanket, like Maxwell, that's you being entirely realist.

Like, I don't have a Markov blanket, but can I be modeled with a Markov blanket?

Probably.

So I don't know, like, you know, I don't curl up in my Markov blanket at night when I go to bed.


SPEAKER_02:
It's comfy.


SPEAKER_01:
It's super comfy.

And then just lastly, like going back to the paper, this like, so I don't know, that was one of the main questions that I have for the authors is this concept of, they say like systems are in dynamic equilibrium.

Like,

I don't think that the non-equilibrium steady state density is the same as dynamic equilibrium at all.

And that was one of the main questions that I raised.

And like dynamic equilibrium really is not, it's a chemical process like of a reversible chemical reaction.

So I don't, I really kind of missed that.

That was one of the key things in the paper that I just didn't understand at all.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I, uh, I mean, I, I very much agree with you on the points that you're saying, uh, the points that you're raising here.

Um,

So, I mean, regarding the panpsychism thing, I mean, yeah, you can from physics now kind of say that any system that exists kind of looks as if it has a mind, you know, then you might not want to go full on the metaphysics of panpsychism, but it certainly warrants that kind of claim.

I mean, in my view, this paper is making a few critical mistakes and this is echoed a lot in, you know, a lot of the literature coming from more like

for e-people writing about this.

I'm just gonna cite two sentences from a paper pre-printed this year.

I won't name names, but you'll see the style of what I mean.

To be as fair as possible, we'll do this as in criticize the FEP by attending to the more recent published versions and variants of these claims.

And then the next section starts literally the next sentence, the work presented in Frist in 2013

essential to practically all the proposals comparing the FEP and inaction.

And it just goes on and stuff.

And it's, I sort of feel like, yeah, the physics foundation has moved forward, like, you know, blue, you're pointing it out.

It's all about non equilibrium, steady states, and non equilibrium, steady state dynamics, and, you know, stationarity.

That's importantly different from ergodicity.

You know, the

One of the nice things about the Bayesian mechanics paper is that it abstracts away from those assumptions.

I mean, to be clear, the free energy principle at its core never really required the systems that you're studying to be ergodic.

We assume an ergodic density in some of the earlier publications because it allows us to finesse one step in the derivation, substituting the time average for the ensemble average in one of the

really core derivations.

Um, but you know, as, uh, Carl himself had been pointing out for a long time, uh, you could finesse the math into, you know, something else.

Like there's no reason why you have to stick with the ergodic assumption.

It was used to finesse one step of the derivation and, you know, what Lance DaCosta and, uh, Gref, Greg Paviotis and, uh,

company have done in this Bayesian mechanics paper with Carl is precisely to do the laborious work of actually generalizing the math to non-ergodic systems.

So, I mean, I think that's really important.

The Bayesian mechanics paper and, you know, we're, we're in discussions with the people, active discussions with the people who've produced the critical material.

And I mean, at this point, I think everyone essentially agrees that Lance's new derivations respond to

uh you know the the critiques by agliera and uh colleagues that came out earlier this year and also the beale at all critique remember the the core of the beale at all critique is that uh for ou processes in general of the sort that carl was using you can't assume that uh the synchronization manifold will exist between internal and external states

In fact, what Martin and company have showed is that for a generic OU process, it does not exist.

But that doesn't mean that you can't find very broad conditions under which the synchronization manifold exists.

And that's what Lance and company have done in this new paper.

Aguilera's critique, Aguilera et al, this is the Sussex group, also did a very interesting analysis of the math as it's figured in the...

particular physics paper, showing that actually the precise assumptions that Carl uses in the paper would restrict the scope of the FEP to a rather narrow class of systems.

But again, Lance just re-derived all of the equations.

So the formalism is now effectively different.

And what you can really see from the math is that it applies to non-linear systems and to non-ergodic systems.

And this leads me to another point.

I think the assumption of non-equilibrium steady state is often not understood in the way that it should.

So non-equilibrium steady state is a characterization of the density dynamics.

It is not a characterization of the system itself.

If I say that a system is at non-equilibrium steady state, I'm not saying that it is steadily in some state.

What I'm saying is that

The probability landscape that underwrites its dynamics is stationary or has stopped evolving.

Those are two very, very, very different claims.

So it doesn't follow from the fact that a system has a nest density that it is historyless.

It doesn't follow from the existence of a nest density that there should only be one attractor.

Like you can have metastability in an FEP system.

You can have non-linearity in an FEP system.

You can have non-ergodicity in an FEP system.

So, yeah, I mean, I think, you know, that means, you know, that one of the three sections, the critical sections in this paper are just completely off the mark.

And, you know, there's this new paper,

some of the tenors of the inactive approach on precisely this kind of stuff as well and unfortunately the same mistakes are made you know ergodicity in in the context of the fep uh i mean it really just means that the the the quantities that you're uh observing are measurable um it means that you know all the average of your measures converges

on average to a measure of the average, you know, or of the mean that you're actually trying to calculate in a heuristic sense.

So it never meant that systems don't have a history, it never meant that systems necessarily converge on one attracting set.

And so I really feel that that kind of takes the teeth out of most of the, you know, formal criticism in this paper.

The other part of the

The other critical parts of this paper talk about the challenges of modeling biological systems using state spaces.

But those sections to me don't amount to much more than just saying it would be very difficult to do this.

Therefore, it's not doable or something like that.

And I have a lot of friends who are computational biologists, and I speak to a lot of people doing this.

It's sort of like, well, you know, some work would have to be done to write a paper to respond to this, but you know, what's the expression one person's modus tollens is another person's modest modus ponens or like, you know, I sort of feel like, all right, well, you know, you say this is impossible.

I know that formally, you know, Alex, Alex Chen is a really cool guy and he's brilliant.

he and the Sussex team have recently, recently, I mean, this is two years old, so it's not that recently.

And I feel like this should be accounted for in this paper, but have recently automated state space construction in the free energy framework.

Like we have active inference models now that can kind of automatically assemble and can handle up to it's either 10,000 or a million states.

So, you know,

uh that's a lot of modeling power and i i find the example that they discuss in a footnote there uh you know however this is on page 11 however the size of the genotype space for a protein consisting of n residues chosen from an alphabet of amino acids the size m is m to the n and then they say oh well you know it's like 20 to the 100 or 10 to the 130 possible uh states if you wanted to model like you know amino acids

they're not considering is the nested formulation and i i kind of feel like nested nest densities should have been at the core of this argument and figure nowhere uh yeah i mean of course if you think that you can just plot all of the states of the system across all the scales at which it exists in one you know homogeneous state space you're going to run into a problem but you're not if you carefully construct these state spaces

in a kind of nested fashion um you know like a a friend of mine van de tower uh works on i pulled this paper up he has a really cool pre-print a deep learning approach to capture the essence of candida albicans morphologies um and i mean basically there what they do is start with a population of candida which is a fungus for those of you who don't know uh and then you

you randomly generate a CRISPR and you introduce it into the population and you see how the population develops and you plot each populational trajectory in a 30,000 parameter hyperparameter space effectively.

And you see the way that like the Candida self organized into pockets, depending on their, you know, the, the kind of CRISPRs that you put into them, uh,

I mean, this is not like fringe work.

This is just routine computational biology where we're already, you know, plotting phenotypic expression in 30,000 dimensional spaces.

You know, this isn't like forthcoming work to be done.

I mean, it's really just standard work.

It's interesting how, you know, I think they modified the paper.

We had discussed this in a live stream before and they

they nicely added some, uh, responses to some of the criticisms that I raised in discussion.

Um, I'd have to pull it out, but, you know, I, I said, well, you know, we're, we're using this stuff in, um, studies of, uh, cancer dynamics and, you know, like, so, uh, I, I wrote in a, in a paper, you know, um,

We can think of a biological systems extended phenotype as the set of extracting, attracting states of a couple dynamical system.

And this is supported by studies of cancer genesis and propagation.

Uh, I can link the papers and, you know, they say, well, you know, these studies provide evidence that cancer can be fruitfully modeled and understood as an attractor and a damage dynamical system, but they don't provide us with evidence that all biological systems occupy an attractor.

And I'm sort of thinking like, well,

No, but this is a counterexample to your saying that it's not doable in a real biological system.

So if I'm being snarky, I feel like this is armchair biology of the worst times.

You're telling me that what I'm doing is impossible while I'm doing it.

And you're doing it by appealing to an old conception of the physics.

uh by talking about assumptions that aren't even part of the formalism anymore i mean i i just uh i find that there's a lot to object to in this paper both in terms of the substance and in terms of the general kind of strategy of kind of gotcha-ing uh now

Does the free energy principle need to be discussed critically?

Absolutely.

And, you know, I should have caveated all this by saying that some of the most interesting and stimulating intellectual exchanges that I've had in my life have been with, you know, the people creating critical material.

But, you know, the people that are generating this interesting critical material are actually engaging with the theory at its formal core.

And, you know, I sort of feel like some of these things would have just been cleared up with, you know, a few conversations and looking at the more recent material.

But now I feel like I'm just kvetching at this point.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Maxwell.

That's what these discussions are for and hopefully bringing into the open.

It's just a multi-perspective scenario.


SPEAKER_02:
To give you a specific idea why this is problematic, if you focus on ergodicity and not on the nested nest densities, then you're going to say things like, well, first you have to show that there's an attractor, and then you have to show that the relaxation time is biologically plausible.

And they claim that neither of these things are done in the free energy literature when literally, you know, the core 40, 50 pages of Carl's physics monograph deal with.

And, you know, Dan, I know we've read it all together during the last year.

Like, I don't know how they could have missed this.

I mean, it's the physics monograph.

This is supposed to be their topic.

The core of the physics monograph is all about, you know, information length.

effectively, right?

And relaxation times back to non-equilibrium steady state and how all these things kind of work in a nested way to get you biological dynamics.

So it seems to me like they are just completely missing their target, but both by, you know, working out on formulations that are out of date and that introduce assumptions that are no longer at play.

And, and also by just really ignoring, you know,

The physics stuff, the free energy physics stuff that they claim to be criticizing, you know, so.


SPEAKER_04:
We need to be just like if we were going to catch a baseball, we need to be performing anticipatory knowledge work, not merely reactive, especially to previous formats.


SPEAKER_02:
Or if it's reactive, I mean, you know, react to the recent stuff.

I mean, you know, there's been a concerted effort

to ground this in the physics of non-equilibrium systems, like non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, information geometry.

I mean, if you're going to be writing a criticism of that stuff, then you should probably be writing about that stuff is sort of my point.

And, you know, and by the way, this often goes really badly.

When I point out that, hey, you know, you're working from a, you know, an outdated thing to say, oh, you know,

free energy version 25 from this morning and blah blah but i kind of feel like you know my friend if you want to write a criticism of something like you should be as charitable as possible with the target of your criticism on the one hand and you should definitely not be working on versions of this that no one in the core community is still working on and there is a dimension of like if you can't keep up then i don't know you know i don't know who benefits from this it's sort of like my my


SPEAKER_04:
questioning it's like okay so steven and then blue


SPEAKER_00:
yeah i think thanks for the giving us a good good insight there i think the the psych the sociological psychological piece is is present in all of this as you're saying i think i've mentioned this before to you maxwell actually is the the danger of systems talking about systems i think even if you were talking to people in the international society of system sciences they often talk about systems system dynamics

And everything else, things, complex systems kind of gets lumped into complexity, right?

So there's a danger, because I don't think Carl necessarily would say FEP system, right?

And that term system, I think, gets you into a lot of challenges, because the folk psychology of what a system is, it's what we see it as from the outside.

And, you know, these non-equilibrium steady states, I'm wondering whether we say, he says blankets all the way up and down, right?

But I'm not sure if it's more like thingness all the way up and down is safer than systems all the way up and down, because things can have all sorts of, you know, and they can have states and they can be what they are.

And the question really becomes then within all that ergodicity, which unlike physics, which tends to be about getting things to a certain number of decimal points of accuracy, Jen,

It's a messy thing.

You know, I was talking about that thing about approximation science.

I mean, again, that gets your head around what that makes.

Suddenly you've got, well, the main thing is you just need enough of whatever this stationary extractable data is to be able to do something with it.

And I'm kind of thinking that maybe, because in the same way that in chemistry, if you have a beaker,

and you stir it up and basically the thing will have its dynamics.

It will move based on the energy between the different things.

And basically entropy is just basically the,

the force that's pushing it in a way that you don't expect it to.

We know it does this from this equilibrium state.

We know that entropy is just the thing in the middle.

Now, no one has a bloody clue why.

That's just a black box, right?

Now, when you go to these non-equilibrium, far from equilibrium chemistry states, and they're held,

which you don't do when you mix up a beaker and just go from A to B. Now, we don't know how many non-equilibrium states

these reactions go through, to be honest, in those cases.

Now, but you wouldn't call the beaker a system.

You'd call it a solution.

You'd call it, you know, you might call the vessel and the chemical plant in which it reacts a system, but you just sort of kind of a beaker of stuff or things that's doing stuff and things, right?

And then you sort of see what it does.

And then it's like, what can we do that's useful in that?

And normally what's useful is what energy shifts.

But in this case, you've also saying the entropy can be useful, but not in the way most people would.

What we could say the folk systems thinkers would kind of tend to think about it.

So I'm just wondering if there's a danger of using the word system.

Yeah, I would agree.

I mean, yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
I think we use the term system just because all of this grows out of dynamic systems theory in some sense.

Carl talks of particles, right?

Like a system with a Markov blanket and does the free energy stuff is a particle in his account.

So yeah, there is a... So there's a linguistic...

danger here, because I agree with you, this is not what people think of when they hear the word system.

A lot of our exchanges, as you pointed out, Stephen, have turned around that specific point.

I think the term is important because especially in the context of relating the FEP to like the four E approaches, I think it's not appreciated sufficiently that the FEP math is what happens if you take dynamical systems theory seriously.

You know,

So when I was doing my undergrad, I was reading the four E guys and the 40 people.

Um, cause it's not just guys and, uh, yeah, the, the 40 people were telling me, all right, well, you know, computer theory, you only get so far in the study of cognition.

You have to do dynamical systems, learn DST math and learn this physics of complex systems.

So I did, and several of us did.

But what happens is then if you continue asking questions along that direction, things arise like, well, how do you measure distances between states?

And if you start asking that kind of question, inevitably, information and entropy creep back into the picture.

Because that's how you measure distances between states effectively, is in NATS and other information theoretic units.

This is to me, the great irony of this whole, you know, FEP versus an activism confrontation, which is slowly turning into like one of the big discussions in contemporary philosophy is I don't think that the 4E people fully appreciate that the FEP stuff is just a prolongation of their thinking style.

That if you, if you really want to take seriously the core tenets of embodied cognition, then inevitably you are led back to information.

There's no escape.

It's really, if you want to take their own framework seriously, there's no other place to go but here.

I unfortunately have to leave now.

Thank you, Maxwell.

Thank you for listening to me rant about this.

I'll try to be there next week.

And yeah, I mean, keep kicking ass.

I mean, Dan Blue, I just love Active Inference Lab, and I'm so grateful for the awesome work that you do keeping this community alive.

Steven, it's always a pleasure to talk with you.

And I'm glad to see that, you know, there's so much, so much, yeah, you're just there all the time.

And I just love your, you know, your contributions to the conversation.

It's always a pleasure to talk to you.

So big love to everyone.

And I will be in touch shortly.

Apologies for the snarkiness.

It's just, you know, this is the kind of paper that really grinds my gears.

I thought it was good to just point out a few of what I think are the issues.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Maxwell.

See you soon.


SPEAKER_03:
Goodbye.


SPEAKER_04:
This, Blue, will go to you, but this is, you know, it's a key difference between being an organizer and a facilitator or a participant.

We're here to help scaffold individuals to participate in their perspectives.

And that's the second order cybernetics.

So things will get more contentious than we can even imagine.

And someone just has to hold down the broadcasting, make sure that hands are being raised and that protocol is being respected because there are serious first level questions to resolve, but we can have precision in our second level policy.

And that's going to return to a question in the live chat, but first blue with a raised hand.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
So I just wanted to say that a lot of what both Maxwell was saying and what Stephen said just really underscores the need for consistent definitions.

How do we define a system?

And also a consistent synthesis of the FEP.

Historically, where did it start?

Where has it been?

Where is it going?

And where are the landmarks?

For example, this Bayesian

Mechanics for Stationary Processes paper, you know, has revamped the math and physics.

And when we're making a new paper or a new argument, are we working with the current version of the model?


SPEAKER_04:
Absolutely.

Nice foreshadowing of some work that we're involved in.

But if anyone is interested in sort of scholarship and a history from an empirical perspective,

on fep and actin they should get in touch with blue or i because this is a project that we're super keen on

but it's a very important point.

And that's why in our dot zero, we had like this slide with the active inference lab, the working ontology.

So we're going in a participatory way and we're working through these terms and we're finding where it's quoted in the literature, how it's used in the literature.

And then we're adding notes and relevant resources and we'll be developing curriculum

that helps make simple declarative uses of these terms so that we don't get lost and we'll have the terms and we'll have the specifics of literature and it'll be an awesome environment for learning, applying and communicating active inference.

So before, Stephen, you want to go with the question and then we'll go to the live chat.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I just add to that point you just made is I think

it is really going to be important because we're seeing the confusions that can happen.

But also, it's likely that there's going to be a kind of a multi-ontology.

There might be something in this whole field that speaks to how this changes, just in the way that Carl Friston talks about when something is regimes through an Infomax.

focus versus a Hamilton lease action focus versus you know a reward focus so there may well be this commonality and there may also be a way to process

when things systems particles um become you know derivations and you know that's going to be interesting because there may be some nexus whether it's called metaphysics or whether it's it's something more

you know less less out there maybe it can be grounded and i think that that's starting to come up as we we hit you know that's transdisciplinarity for you right it's gonna you're gonna want to know what's in the discipline piece so maybe there will be stuff which is kind of grounded in the biology world and grounded in the physics world and it's going to talk

as best it can their language right and then there's going to be stuff which is in the applied world which ultimately starts to go transdisciplinary at some point as soon as you get out and get to any sort of scale um so i think that's going to be very very interesting


SPEAKER_04:
awesome and both steven and blue and many others join us weekly in dot edu where we talk about this so let me read a few of the awesome comments from the live chat and ask a question from the live chat and anyone else can continue to ask a question

so there's a lot of discussion on the systems question and yvonne said maxwell subscribe to our systems thinking course we will discuss what the system is from the standpoint of systems engineering so that's really important thanks yvonne for sharing that and indeed two of the fundamental pillars or ontologies or trans disciplines of active inference lab

are active inference and systems engineering.

So those are the perspectives that we draw on and seek synthesis and application of, and we're all learning a lot, and it will be updating our generative model in a way that changes our policy selection to be able to use words like system without going down the philosophy rabbit hole every time, and just having a way that we can talk about systems of interest, like in .coms, our system of interest

is the live stream.

So how do we take a role-based approach that embodies the best of our values

and uses the term system.

And we also get all these other pieces too, so good.

Thanks for sharing that, Yvonne.

Dave shared a lot of interesting information about life and about some of the history of a few different ideas related to conceptualizations of life.

But the question that I wanted to get to was from Michael NYC who wrote, how would you model this conversation using this model?

So that's a question we can think about.

And it speaks to almost like applying because online teams are certainly an application that's important for different kinds of modeling.

And I'll give a first thought on this.

So one thing is when you said, how do we model it?

The question is beautifully phrased because it doesn't say, well, what does the theory say that this conversation is?

That's setting up for an absolute hegemonic realist answer.

How would you model it is going to be inherently different perspectives because different individuals and different years are going to have access to different tools and ideas and people.

So they're going to model this conversation differently.

so that's the first piece and that's moving from that sort of absolutist modest realism into more of a multi-perspectival system now what are some ways that one could model this there could be a cyber physical depiction where one is very interested as we were in our 2020 vatkin et al paper

in the information flows from a computational perspective like sense is the incoming states and actions are the upcoming states so in the context of a video conversation there's an audio visual feed in and there's an audio visual going out so we could use blankets and interfaces

and sense and action states to talk about just the cyber physical dimensions of the conversation.

Another approach would be the hermeneutic or computational conversationalist approach, which Dave has connected back to a long lineage of work related to 1970s conversation theory.

And he wrote, it provides a micro theory for nested mutual models, focusing on the evolution and incorporation

or rejection of predicates and their syntactic occurrence.

Active inference work provides a corresponding needed macro theory focusing on secular evolution of the interchanges.

So one could have a communication oriented model that focuses on the semantics of the conversation,

one could make also as discussed that kind of a cyber physical very computational model and there's other types of models that could be made and then there's a million different implementations so that's just the first pass but it's a really important question and it helps us connect

the abstractions and the framework to the minute particulars, which are the system-specific realizations that ground us in transdisciplinarity and application.

So, Stephen, and then any other questions from the live chat or Blu?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think they're quite useful questions, though, because that question about how can I, I mean, it ties into a couple of things.

My first interest would be to say, OK, why would I?

But the other thing is, how can I implicitly also link to

is available to me like what information is possible to interact with you know that idea this this so we can bring in we this modeling process sort of ties us in this sort of mid ground between how we actually want to talk about all of this which i think is where the um

systems engineering is really useful because ultimately you kind of have to bring it into a system of externalized knowledge which can be then communicated and moved around as in the papers and other things that can be done but it's also how can you start to understand say the processes going on in the moment so it could be measuring

what we're doing in this real-time process and someone tracking that it could be a case of video in it and watching back the video with an interpretation thereof it could also be you know if we were wearing sensors you know there could be just trying to model the dynamics of us as things you know there's a just trying to say how could i know what i can even try and to feed into a system

So I mean, one of the classic cases that's recently there with Ryan Smith, their work on interception, they had to devise a method for recording.

First, they did it with the heart, and they changed the way the heart was measured.

But they also did some recordings of the stomach and the stomach region.

They had to find a way to get data

to find out what could then be modeled.

And was that a system they were modeling, or was it almost the dynamics they were modeling of the things?

And I think in just seeing how the dynamics change over time, and I think this is where maybe there's a lot of challenges that's going to be faced.

Because we've had this conversation in this modeling world is,

you know, jumping things into a system engineering world, which isn't only a non-equilibrium philosophical world.

It's quite useful for applied work because it does that ability to make something a system in a way that's intentionally that, and it has system of interest, just like Daniel was saying.

And then you've got, but within that, our system of interest is about going beyond the systems of obvious interest.

presentation, you know, there's stuff going on under the hood, which is not necessarily intuitively available at all.

So I don't know what your thoughts on that, Daniel, but I think it's interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

The only short thing I'd say is like, even if the system of interest, for example, is the mind of someone being educated, for example, in the curriculum of Active Inference Lab or the audience who we're speaking to is our system of interest or even live stream.

Having your system of interest be the learner's mind or brain doesn't mean you're looking for the neuron level description.

Having the system of interest to be the live stream or the audience doesn't mean that we need to know every single person or how video encoders work.

So it's an application oriented approach, perhaps even an action oriented approach

that cuts through some of these questions or sidesteps or saves them for savoring.

After the project has been completed, after we've made the changes on the real world, it savors some of these truly excellent philosophical and important questions while also allowing us to act

reasonably in the moment.

And so it's always that north star of a unified model of perception, cognition, and action that's so motivating.

So even as some of the formalisms do evolve, we hope that we can respect the spirit and the inertia of the research that we've carried out and also know when we can modularly swap in new elements of the framework.

So blue.

And then of course, any questions in the live chat.


SPEAKER_01:
So as a modeler, how would I model this conversation?

Really like, let's talk about how to really model it.

And not from a philosophical standpoint, like if this is my model of the FEP, I have a model of the FEP that exists in my brain, as does Daniel, Steven, Maxwell, we all have a model of what the FEP looks like.

Every time we read a paper, have a conversation,

take input from the action perception loop, right?

My model exists.

It's in my internal states.

Through my senses, I perceive, read, hear something that either confirms my model, provides evidence for my existing model, reduces my uncertainty about my existing model.

So I have some evidence input through my senses.

then I update my model or if it doesn't jive or if it makes me realize something, I mean, always we're gaining information.

So there's this epistemic value add through doing these conversations, these live streams, reading papers, having these discussions, et cetera.

So my model is updated through these conversations.

And then holistically, we kind of come to a place where

our models either converge through this communicative process on something that resembles each other's models more similarly or not, right?

We might have this divergence and then we go away with like this uncertainty, like is my model wrong?

Or what was that argument about?

I mean, everyone's been in conversations or discussions or heated scientific debates where

you don't really come to a consensus, right?

There is no general agreement or understanding.

And so then you walk away with maybe some, maybe my model is invalid and then do some more deep thought about it.

I mean, that's how I would model it.

That's just me.


SPEAKER_04:
In the Vyotkin et al.

2020 paper with active inference and systems engineering, systems thinking, we use this font framework, formal documents, ontology, narratives, and tools.

And so one kind of fun parallel or a way that conversation and the real dynamics that arise can be modeled in active inference is like agree to disagree.

two individuals can have high precision and convergence on a narrative inference were agreeing to disagree.

They can both be precise and agreed on that.

And then at the first level, they can literally disagree.

That's the whole point.

So that is modeled in Active Inference as nested models, just like Maxwell brought up.

And so we have nested models and the second order matrix can be the same between two agents.

yet their first level matrix can be very different and none of those matrices are the system map territory mel andrews actin 14. so we've come back to these ideas and we'll continue to dance around them many many times because they're so fundamental that sometimes they're hard to see play out so stephen and then anyone else


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think we have to be careful to note that it appears as if information, what active inference tells us, it appears as if

knowledge is coming in and that it's being, we, we see it in our heads, so to speak.

And, um, yet the, this conversation is, is we're, we're attuning through the action of our info niche, our semantic niche of talking, and we're aligning what our actions give us to,

in our externality, be it through the diagrams, be it through this document, the slides or whatever the boundary objects are that we can align to, given us, partly due to our own folk psychology over the last 150 years, the sense, and this is the thing, it's really hard to counter this because this is kind of the way we tend to think, you know, that

we have it in our minds, I, so to speak.

So it's true, there's like this generative model, yet at the same time, the generative modeling is also part of what we're doing.

We're generatively modeling each other's conversation and getting a sense of how I...

should say my actions of words, none of those sentences were pre-made in my head.

It's an action policy that's close enough to my sense-making so that it feels like I'm on the right track.

And until someone looks at me really strange, I'll carry on.

And I've been in these conversations a few times.

I'm a bit more aware of how to keep doing.

But I think that's something that's quite useful to, when we talk about this modeling is,

we're modeling the action policies that are externalized and our generative model is as good as it is at being able to enact through participatory sense-making what should happen next more than it is about having something that we've received in our generative model


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Steven.

That speaks to the interactionist versus instructionalism.

Like, is the FEP model that Blue is describing, this generative model of the FEP that's in or embodied by all of us, is it like a skyscraper made of glass and piping and there's 90 degree angles?

Or is it...

some other type of metaphor that or even transcending metaphor and only realize through certain sequences of interaction so that's um really interesting and uh cool yeah there's great comments dave's uh thrown some biblical references in the chat

And someone wrote, I'm here first time in the live stream.

It's so good to listen all the cutting edge discussion about FEP.

Keep up the good work.

So nice work, Stephen and Blue.

But thanks also for joining.

You have tuned your regime of attention.

Hopefully you're having some questions and thoughts come to mind just as they are for us.

We're just on the other side of the video chat window.

And the participatory sense-making side is,

and how to mobilize that and enact it we can have participatory sense making with people on the video stream those who make asynchronous edits and improvements to these slides like we still have to go through blue's prior thoughts that were added to um this slide deck and then

from a history of science perspective and sociology, like it's happening in a new way.

One thing that was impressed on us, I guess, months to years ago, forever ago in crypto slash act-inf was like the timescale of these discussions.

going from peer review and annual conferences in person, annual or multi-annual cycles to like the preprints.

And then we send a Twitter message to the author of the preprint.

Could you give a guest stream?

And then the authors can respond, like looking at what Maxwell wrote, which was very important or said.

Like Bayesian Mechanics, that was live stream number 26.

So we did a dot zero contextualizing video, respecting that people have many different backgrounds approaching the work from.

And then two of the commentaries, Beal and also Aguilara, were in guest stream number five and seven.

So it's like we've heard from many of the important perspectives and that's this participatory scientific sense-making.

We're all part of a bigger positive project that's transdisciplinary.

It's not even just happening in the scientific literature, but it has to a large extent been because these are research advances.

These are conceptual and theoretical advances.

And now we're all learning by doing.

and increasingly doing and applying.

And so there's so much to learn and do.

So Blue, and then Steven, and then there's more great questions in the live chat.

So go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
So you're like giving shouts out to us, but I just want to like thank Daniel for all the scaffolding that he's provided in the act and flab, like to give us the kind of the baseline for these discussions to take place.

And also just to kind of go back to what Steven was saying about, you know, about modeling and enacting really like,

I don't see knowledge as coming in.

In the modeling sense, I don't know that what you have is knowledge or what Daniel has is knowledge or what the paper contains is knowledge.

All of that in my world is information.

And I think that there's a difference between knowledge and information.

And so like when I'm interpreting comments by Maxwell or Steven or Daniel, when I'm interpreting that, I take that information and transform it through my model, right?

Like, so some of like, take it or leave it or take what you want from this discussion.

And it's always like that.

I mean, we always do that.

Whether people have to remind us, you know, to do it or not, right?

Like you take away the parts that,

validate your model, right?

Or that improve upon your model or that you believe improve upon your model in some way.

So then when I have it and I have transformed it, then maybe I can turn it into knowledge, but I don't see coming in, anything coming in as knowledge.

That's just me.


SPEAKER_04:
And with video chat, it becomes super real.

Like when there's lag, all of a sudden it's like you're at the semantic level.

And then it's like, wait, just the syntax, I'm not hearing the words.

And so it's like we dip into this lower level.

And then imagine if the audio is working fine, you can totally hear non-equilibrium steady state.

But then conceptually, what does that mean?

So these nested and overlapping layers of meaning.

So that's just very cool.

So Stephen, and then there's a question in the chat.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is a good point, Blue.

And I suppose there's also this sense that

there's always got to be some belief in what you think the other person is saying.

Like for instance, I believe the words mean X, Y, Z, because I know the English language, right?

If we're all speaking in the language, didn't know.

So I believe this word means this.

I hear this word, these words together mean this.

So there's, there's, there's, there's always, and I'm hearing it, seeing it, I'm feeling it.

The fact that my chair is comfortable changes things, right?

So there is this sense that, you know, they talk about this in free energy principle.

It's like it can also appear like, you know, so things as well as there being Bayesian inference, it can appear like there's a Bayesian inference type process, which is what's happening.

My models can be updated.

And I think what I'm really interested in is,

For some of these things to then to be capitulated as knowledge, I think there has to be, and this is where the 4E work comes in, is we bring this into some subconscious embodied practices, which we can re-tap into by sort of eliciting what they're like, maybe getting a metaphor.

It feels like the knowledge is coming from around me and I'm grabbing it.

For some other people, it feels like it's coming in as a sequence of very clear things that

so my way of assembling um the connections of my belief structure to the sensory information coming in will capitulate my modeling

And as best I can, I'm going to be then trying to attune to the way everyone else is.

And we're all, I'm sure it'd be different if we were all standing up during all of these talks.

We might actually interpret and process a bit different.

Or if we're all in a pool having a cocktail, you know, I don't know.


SPEAKER_04:
I think Blue's on a stationary bike about half the time.

I have my stationary bike hidden out of view.

But let's ask a question.

Yeah, exactly.

We could do a ride stream.


SPEAKER_01:
We could do a pull stream, but you got to come to my house.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool, I remember that.

So let's ask a question from the live chat and then we'll return to some of Blue's previously phrased questions about the paper.

And that's, what's kind of fun.

Like in the dot zero, we get a lot of the details and the bulk of the paper and all the key ideas and figures, if there are them.

And then in the dot one, there's so many directions to go.

And I remember early, it's like, wait, two times two hours group discussion on a paper.

I'm used to academia papers being discussed for one hour, if ever, and people having very heterogeneous understandings or they did or didn't read the paper.

So.

yet we find that there's always enough questions when we open the doors of the conversation to just like super fascinating direct directions for the discussion so again we'll ask a great question in the chat and then we'll kind of turn to some of these dot one questions because next week hopefully we'll have one or both of the authors to be talking with so joseph wrote how has active inference changed the way you view the world in daily life

That's a big question.

Do either of you want to go first or I'm happy to go.


SPEAKER_00:
I can chip in if you go for one of the ways I've actually found it really helpful.

And I sort of is changing the way I think about how I see the world.

Um, and also a bit change that I think about playing soccer.

So, uh, so the first one is

there was this sense that, you know, I'm seeing the world, right?

And it's all a bit separate from me.

With active inference, it can be quite nice to go out and think about actually perturbing the world and feeling the world as if you're feeling the world with your eyes, touching the world with your hands, seeing the world and touching the world with your eyes.

And I think

that actually can help bring me out of my head, so to speak, in a metaphorical sense.

So I found that useful, actually, just thinking about the world as being something that's out there and it's very much something I'm sensing.

And so that takes a little bit of the...

modernistic kind of concreteness.

And then with soccer as well, it made me realise, I used to always think, you see those things on telly, like, you know, like someone's kicking a ball, you know, like the equations, a bit like Terminates, you know.

But now it's like, well, actually, it's more like I'm just...

I'm just getting whatever my feeling is, right?

And that whole other stuff, it doesn't matter.

So then you realize that all these really great sports players, the really ones actually, they've acclimatized the feeling for what it means.

Like Messi must have this feeling for what it means to kick.

He doesn't need to have the trajectory of the ball in his head.

Anyway, I don't know if that helps.

That goes through my crazy head.


SPEAKER_04:
Lou, you want to go or I have a few?

Okay.

So there's a few angles and this could definitely be a worthy topic for another discussion, but just to give a few angles.

So first, thinking how we view the world, that was a visual illusion in the original question.

And so it reminds me of the development of thought from seeing the world.

That's the signal processing paradigm.

Photons are pouring in and we're seeing, categorizing, classifying the world.

Okay.

Then we have predictive processing.

And that's like, well, you know, our visual field for most individuals, they see color in their entire visual field.

And there's equal clarity in their visual field, even though there's an extremely heterogeneous distribution of resolution and color elements in the retina.

And we have a big old blind spot.

So color.

Clarity of vision and blind spot suggests that we're experiencing a generative model, a predictive model of vision, that's predictive processing, and it applies also to other sensory modalities.

And then that third step was where Stephen took it with the active vision, the epistemic foraging.

And we know that even though we don't directly experience these either, there's eye saccades, which move to the most informative part of the visual scene.

so to me it's about moving from signal processing 1.0 to predictive processing to active sensing and exploration as informed by epistemic and pragmatic value together you know eyes on the ball but you got to also see more than that generate more than that so that's one really important part

Second one, I'll also parallel exactly what Steven said, which is like, it made me think, even though I don't know about soccer, I don't know about the telly, wrong continent.

But it's kind of like the top-down, the video game model, where there's like, I see it more and more in sports replays, where it's like, it will pause and it will look like a video game.

But that's not the action model of the player on the field.

They're...

using much more of a personal flow and a feel and interactions and cues.

And so they don't need to be having this 30,000 foot view.

They need the peripersonal perspective.

So that is one piece.

And then just a third one, but I think another, there's many more we could list would be like the reward oriented worldview, right?

so reward maximization is the paradigm reinforcement learning is how neurons associate utility maximization is what investing is about in contrast with an uncertainty reduction paradigm a precision optimization paradigm where qualified levels of precision of nested models allow a lot of flexibility and a lot more realistic phenomenology for different models

because precision pursuit on an optimistic world model gets you utility.

So I just think we get utility from a precision-first worldview, but from a utility-oriented worldview, we don't always get precision, and that...

i personally connect to how if we have like a tetrahedral based geometry of nature we get cubes but if we start with cubic geometry we never get tetrahedra so that's sort of where i connect it utility is like bigger and a more general framework because utility falls out of precision on an optimistic generative model

but merely having utility, it's always going to be ad hoc or secondary where it is curiosity and epistemic gain and all these other features of real decision-making.

So those are a few of the key pieces, how it changes, how I've seen the world blue.


SPEAKER_01:
so besides from like having integrated fully into like my daily vocabulary which is like you know we talk about things like the generative model like you know in completely unrelated offline conversations um so aside from like you know enhancing my vocabulary and building this new language of you know the fbp

That's weird, right?

Like, okay.

But aside from that, you know, one of the things, one of the recurrent themes for me in Active Inference has been

The idea, like we touched on it in the mental action paper that we did, like Daniel, you're going to have to pull it up for me because I can never remember.

You've got a better track.

Your model is updated and configured with all of the appropriate live stream numbers, more so than mine.

It's 28.


SPEAKER_04:
It's 28.

And it's only because of my extended niche, but continue.


SPEAKER_01:
That's it.

And so can you also query your extended niche?

Because I can't ever remember the one where we talked about anxiety.

Like was it, if it was big five or sophisticated active inference, or I always ask which one that one was, but I can't ever, that was a long time ago.

But going back, you know, touching on mental action and meditation and the idea that we touched on way in the long ago livestream of anxiety representing, you know, trying to project too many time steps ahead into the future.

and having this relate to anxiety, and then depression is relating to fixating too many steps in the past behind you, right?

So this model of neuroatypical things, it just always reminds me to come back to the present moment.

And I'm looking for an excuse to do that anyway, just because of my inclinations toward Eastern religion and so forth.

So but but the reminder to stay in the present moment has now been like made through an appeal to my logical brain, like outside of a spiritual sense.

And so that that kind of is is a cool, you know, effect of of active inference, I think.


SPEAKER_04:
awesome there's so many fun questions in in the chat so i mean i'll i'll ask these and then we can we can we'll still have time to return to the paper so mihail asks okay one if you were to let your imagination roam freely where do you wish or see the best possible real life application so for that question

That's a question for us and the community and beyond.

So we can maybe each just mention one thought that we're having, but if you see a possible future state, active inference of X,

let's act, infer, serve.

Let's act first, update our models and serve and make the impact that we want to see.

So this is actually an affordance of a question because if two people are like, wow, we should do this, or could this be useful?

If you can state it, you're like 90% of the way there.

And we hope to develop the sort of transdisciplinary tools like active inference agent software and the expertise tools, people, and ideas and the education so that when somebody else who's not on this live stream, there's just three of us, has that insight or sees it being applied in a new way,

we want to help you scaffold that action trajectory but blue and then steven


SPEAKER_01:
so I guess I always come back to this too.

Something that fascinates me fully is how information is integrated across scales.

So how is the model of, of my, you know, DNA strands imported into my cells, imported into my tissues, imported into my organs, imported into my sense of self, right?

Like, so how does this, and how do I import into the organisms that I'm part of like the active inference lab and so forth?

So for me, really like,

concretely realizing a mathematical way to find information passing up and down like is it salience or what else what other way this emergence like for me that's like it like if active inference can nail that and this is like a fantasy daydream and i know people are working towards that but it's out there in the future but but if i could really wish one thing if i could you know daydream about my ultimate fantasy of active inference being fulfilled it's completely that


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, awesome.

Modeling nested biological systems, something that we've seen qualitatively discussed in the literature, like Ramsted et al.

2018, answering Schrodinger's question, variational ecology, variational neuroethology, a lot of contributors to these works, but that kind of a model would be epic.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'm really interested.

I think active inference...

It doesn't have to do everything to be really a contribution.

It can fill certain gaps as well or give certain mechanisms that can give an insight, either to tractably give a way to model or a way to just think about things.

So what I'm curious about, and I'm working on something called conceptual action sociometry, which is an action method,

I'm really interested in how to work back from a high complexity context, which would be too many dimensions to model from first principles.

So rather than modeling the generative model per se,

I'm looking at how to create an instrument to track the info niche being scribed by the agent.

So it's almost like a trace.

So I'm...

really interested in how we can go both ways as well as the sort of general extractable sort of principled work that can be show how generative models are happening and being applied across things like context of autism and other areas where there's different types of

classifications i'm really interested in kind of contextual work which will be outside of the ability to do full research but might be able to do an inquiry process and how to sort of just get a grip on that inquiry so um be it people looking at their lived experiences and things like that and we're actually talking about that in the tools section people are sort of giving me some advice um or open to that once we get to the next phase


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome, thanks for also sharing that.

And then I think the system, just the one that I'll mention would be online teams or research, knowledge, inquiry.

and doing scholarship and just at this point in time just facilitating the reduction of our uncertainty on the history of active inference and free energy principle literature and a few other areas because um tools for research and sense making would be

really awesome for a lot of different reasons so cool and then the second question um from the hill in that sequence was what if we model our group conversation where we as humans disappear and where we are not exploring the universe but the universe is exploring itself utilizing us a beautiful thought question and there's a lot to think about that so blue


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, I think that this is possible, right?

And, you know, we've talked about it in the computational boundary of the self, the Mike Levin paper, like ultimately it's like dissolution of the cognitive boundary.

And is there some like meta organism?

This goes to like the Gaia hypothesis, maybe not the universe, but the earth, or maybe the earth is part of the universe.

Maybe there's some ultimate like super organism that with cognitive boundary contains all of us.

And so just in the same way that like our cells are working towards our optimal function, given the circumstances that they're presented with, right?

Like given that assumption, maybe we're also working toward the optimal state of the universe.

Like every interaction that occurs between all of us is working toward the optimal state of the active inference lab or the optimal state of the United States of America or the optimal state of scientific research or who knows, right?

So any kind of, you know...

umbrella category that we might fall into, maybe we're serving the optimal state of that.

And really, like, I think it's quite possible and a really cool way to model active inference for sure.


SPEAKER_04:
Another take on that from Bucky Fuller is this function first mentality led him to ask, well, what is the function of human?

And are we local sensemaker?

What is our role?

So those are big, important questions.

Let's return to 31.1 and kind of prime ourself for our dot two, because in the dot zero, that's where like whoever's really excited about the paper, maybe whoever contacted the authors or maybe one of the authors themselves, or just a few people who want to learn by doing.

The dot zero, which was like blue and I for this one, 31.1, the previous video.

We go through the paper.

The dot one, we unpack.

That's sort of the bathtub phase.

Everything is getting spread out.

A lot of sociological criticisms or insights.

A few random questions from the guests of our stream.

A lot of different areas.

A lot of threads get pulled out.

And then in the dot two, we try to have some synthesis because it's not the end of the discussion with the dot two, but...

we have to move on from a live stream perspective.

So the .2, especially when the authors can be there, we can get some more insights.

We can resolve some questions that arose during the .1 and .0 and the intervening times.

So questions that didn't arise before we enacted

this process and then we get to ask those and then kind of use that as our jumping off point as we move on to our next phase so here in the dot one at the end it's kind of like a fractal dot two we're kind of trying to tie a few things together returning to the text as a strange attractor so that we'll have a whole week to read think sleep

stationary bicycle mind and body relax maybe do our day job if we can find any time and um be here you know next week or whenever works to continue the discussion so blue um in this questions for 31.1 what were some quotes or some questions from the paper that you wanted to like learn more about or ask the authors about


SPEAKER_01:
Well, just as I mentioned, you know, even earlier in this live stream today, like the dynamic equilibrium of living systems, like I'm not understanding that at all.

Like maybe that's homeostasis, but homeostasis is not, in my mind, dynamic equilibrium.

And I think that this, you know, Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes and the idea of a non-equilibrium steady state density kind of supersedes that.

this concept of dynamic equilibrium because homeostasis is not equilibrium and so that's kind of a fundamental like it like bends in my brain a little bit when i when i've been reading over this paper um and also uh you know it says here we should pay closer attention to fundamental differences between physics and biology and how these differences interact with importing concepts from physics into the modeling of biological targets

So, I mean, is it physics all the way down?

Because I always thought it was physics all the way down, right?

Like, so I don't know, that goes to, you know, like when I was in school, they always said like, you know, biology is not as precise as chemistry and chemistry is not as precise as physics and physics is not as precise as math, right?

Like, so there's this like tiered hierarchy of how, you know, fundamental your study can be, right?

And so-

it, I think biology is based in the concept of physics, but, but also chemistry, I feel like was really omitted and left out.

And like, in my heart, I'm a chemist, Stephen, I'm sure can relate to that.

But really like, so, so that's kind of one other thing I wanted to explore.

And then I'm,

The other part of the questions that I have for the authors are, you know, in active inference, are the active states internal?

Because they said internal states include active states.

But I've always thought of active states and sensory states as part of the interface between internal and external states as part of the Markov blanket.

And so I just wanted to clear that up, maybe if that's a misunderstanding on my part.

Or, I mean, I guess action can happen internally, like as we've seen in the mental action.

So that's definitely possible, but not all active states are part of internal states, I thought.

So I don't know, maybe that's something that we can tease apart with the authors.

And I'm looking forward to having them here and asking them these three questions, which are the ones that kind of, for me, don't align with my current model of the FEP.


SPEAKER_04:
They were salient.

They were different from your generative model.

So it's a nice way to put it.

And then I'll just show this one comic and then Steven.

So this is a classical XKCD comic.

The fields arranged by purity.

Okay.

So it's a comic, you know, retweets are not endorsements, but you have, this is a classic disciplinary hierarchy slash Ponzi scheme, pyramid scheme, whatever, you know,

You have the physicists, let's just start in the middle.

It's nice to be on top.

That's the common pinnacle of the pyramid in certain paradigms.

And then like the physicists can make claims about lower levels.

But then if the psychologist makes a claim about physics, hey, we need a sociology of molecules.

It'd be like, that's not science.

But then the physicist talking about sociophysics is like, wow, that's so modern and exciting.

So there's a sort of linearity

as well as potentially some sociological scaffolding that facilitates the diffusion of information and expertise and uh notoriety like one way but it's not always a two-way street and then the joke i guess in the xkcd is like the mathematician saying hey i didn't see you all from over here so again just a comic now

playing with the media what does it look like to i don't know close the loop or have these learn about each other's perspective or there's a million ways that we could go counterfactual on this xkcd what if i mean that's the name of the xkcd's author's book which is kind of fun um but how does active inference challenge this either specifically or just how are broader ongoing sequences of actions like

decentralized science, DeSci, open science, open access, open source, global collaboration, transdisciplinary application, complexity science.

I mean, there's a million ways in which this is kind of funny because it speaks to an academic hierarchy.

And maybe we've even met some characters who really embodied these archetypes.

But

What are the archetypes going to be going forward?

What are more accessible archetypes and ones that are more true to form and they can still be funny?

I'm sure we'll have acting memes just enough to warm the hearth.

But this is just one view that kind of speaks that disciplinary hierarchy.

So yeah, Stephen, then Bloom.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this is where this foundational shift is.

This desire for purity, right?

um starts has been really challenging of course now we're in this post-normal science era where you know the reality is that we're gonna have to make decisions and not just wait for the purity of the

the random control trial or whatever it is to make choices.

So how can we be more systematic and rigorous?

And so then complexity comes in and the challenges that we are facing is that a lot of psychologists and

psychiatrists have also gone down the purity route in a way.

The idea is they're all trying to be more pure, and the mathematician can be more pure than the others.

But that question about being more pure

I think this is what Blue's points make a really good, you know, they come into question.

Like physics comes into question, chemistry comes into question when you talk about far from equilibrium states.

um even the idea of it in chemistry they call it far from equilibrium chemistry in physics they call it non-equilibrium states right um because they can actually math and the mathematicians would call it lorenzo tractor states right and but in either case you know you only have to look at lorenzo tractor the whole point is you don't know where you are in it right and and not in the same way as

Quantum, well, that's a question when you get into the fine details, we don't know yet, but it's still different to quantum, right?

And I think that's where that quantum contextuality comes in as well.

So anyway, what's your thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_04:
The thing that just came to mind and then blew is like, this is linear, right?

It's open-ended.

But sociologists and philosophers make important insights about the philosophy and history of science.

And so the mathematician can say, yeah, we're the most pure or we're the most correct or whatever it happens to be.

But they're nested in a sociological context, in a historical, in a philosophical context.

So...

It is closed from a causal closure perspective because it's not like physics have just broken out of the frameworks of thought.

So how to move this line into a conversation that's including all of these disciplines in a trans discipline and including people who aren't in academia or research in that as well.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So this is an interesting comic.

And I usually don't even talk about psychologists or sociologists because that's not science, right?

I'm just kidding.

I really actually have a lot of respect for psychology and sociology.

But it's just not something that's ever been lumped into my pyramid before.

So thank you for sharing that.

And seeing it in this way, maybe...

they should arrange by like the fundamentality of it, like sociology without like social interaction, we would not develop things like mathematics, right?

Like there would be no need.

So in terms of what's more fundamental, like maybe sociology,

is fundamental.

And psychology, like we're not even thinking about what makes us work if we're not psychologically okay, right?

Like if we're in a bad psychological state, nobody's thinking about intracells and DNA.

Like that's, there's just no, you have to have like the fundamental needs have to be met before you start to ponder things like, what am I made of?

And how do my parts work, right?

And really like, so maybe in terms of fundamentality, and then we are biology, and then, you know, so maybe in terms of the fundamental things, sociology is,

the pinnacle of that.


SPEAKER_04:
And again, there's probably many ways in which different perspectives or active inference can challenge this, or at least kind of continue this joke a little bit, but it's like pure active inference.

It's really about sociological context.

We really have a mathematical formalism.

It's really grounded in the ways that people have been studying physics.

That's one of the questions of 31, the paper.

is to what extent is it, has it, could it been grounded in physics?

But we really have physics and we really are talking about biology and for comprehensiveness and getting to the fundamentals, it is really fundamentally relational.

So we're not taking this reductionist purity spiral.

We're taking like a transdisciplinarity purity and we're just saying, this is our keyword.

And to really get at what we're talking about, we're really gonna respect all of these perspectives.

So that's kind of a funny challenge that you wouldn't necessarily hear arising from a disciplinary conversation.

So Steven, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this is also one thing, you know, we say, though, that we see the importance of social interaction, social inference and the challenges that I think actually this might be quite apt for where we had at the beginning with Maxwell's conversation is the perspective of the sociologists.

becomes what is ascribed to social interactions.

The psychologists is what's ascribed in the mental models that we have in our head.

The biologists are ascribed in the categories.

The chemist is ascribed in the steady state.

So when you get into this agent-based modeling, which again I think is more familiar to the newer work in biology, but it's something that I had to start to learn about,

and looking at these dynamics and modeling actually starts to go under the ground of all of these.

It doesn't make them invalid, because they are useful when you can take a perspective on the systemic work.

But we're not taking perspectives in this.

And the whole ground starts to become shifting.

And that's really interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
here's another kind of a subtlety actually so um sociologists okay just starting there that's our prior you know d coming in from the left sociology is applied psychology okay so we're going all the way you know chemistry is applied physics it's just like it's interesting the conversation is going that way i'm just seeing another comic where it could have been like physics is applied math

chemistry is applied physics like who is saying which field is an application of which other field so there's a lot of ways that conversation could play out and by imagining the counterfactuals the semantic the rhetorical counterfactuals and then asking well what is concordant or disconcordant with our generative model and why

That's a very rich starting point for transdisciplinary discussions because the whole inter, meta, transdisciplinary discussion, it's been decades, centuries, truly, with different words.

So how are we going to

look at this with a new light and maybe even integrate some of the truly recent developments in tools like performance computing and interactive notebooks and ontologies.

These didn't exist one or 200 years ago in the same way they do today.

So how are we going to respect qualitative and quantitative and different backgrounds, recognizing that we're never going to get the end of the story, even if you got 100 PhDs in any one of these fields or lived 100 years in a field outside of academia, you still wouldn't be at the end.

So how are we going to take a radically different approach to learning and applying?

Maybe active inference could have something to do with it.

So

In the last few minutes, anyone else in the live chat could just ask a final question.

Otherwise, let's just sort of recap.

The big aims and claims of this paper were about the foundations in statistical physics and dynamical systems theory for the free energy principle.

And what's on the line, what's on the table for whether the theoretical underpinnings are adequate or not for FEP and ACT-INF?

Well, it's the practical utility as well as the theoretical adequacy.

So that's what matters.

they claim that their work is starting to fill in this gap.

And whether we think that there's any other pebbles in that gap or the gap is a meter across or a kilometer across, there is a differential and we can all positively contribute to that through discourse and through contributions to the literature.

And then the main argument of the paper

And one of the big ideas that'll be really cool to talk about is that the foundations in physics allow the FEP models to be maximally general, to describe across systems

But in the author's words, these assumptions also decrease the ability of FEP models to include enough factors to provide biologically plausible representations for living systems and the way that they are in the world.

So, you know, big idea, physical and physics grounding of FEP and what that says about the theoretical adequacy as well as the practical utility.

And then this idea of generalization

And if we overgeneralize, do we sort of leave behind some of the features that we wanted to explain in the first place?

So that's a little bit of the recap and I'll just,

pull to our kind of closing slide and ask these questions and then Stephen and Blue, you can give a last thought.

What would a good understanding enable?

What are the unique predictions and the implications of this research or of what you thought of after learning about this research?

What are the next steps for FEP and active inference?

What are the goals of this or your research?

And then what are you still curious about?

What is your intrinsic motivation that's going to keep you reading these papers and contributing to the discussion?

So Stephen or Blue, any last thoughts?

Stephen first and then Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
I think in terms of this paper anyway, I think...

that this really does highlight this need to understand the difference between particles, voxels, things, systems.

I think this, because these types of critiques keep coming up, right, at times.

I know it has a risk of kind of tying the free energy principle community in some knots.

And so I think that...

It's a challenge, and I think that that may be part of where this goes.

And at the same time, I think it's a good provocation.

And there is some questions here about how and why those confusions arise.

And so I think that might be, you know, I'm curious about learning more about that, because I think that's going to help in other ways in doing this work.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Stephen.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So it's awesome to me, I think, that I'm talking about the general general generalizability.

Sorry, that didn't come out well.

The generalizability and applicability of like the free energy principle.

I really like that that's also like a trade-off between like epistemic and pragmatic value.

Like it reminds me of that balance that we see in the FVP.

And so I think like the ultimate goal is to resolve that, right?

Like how do we strike the balance between epistemic and pragmatic value?

How do we strike that balance between generalization and application?


SPEAKER_04:
Great point.

We want to describe many systems and describe them well and walk in with a scaffold, but minimal constraining priors that prevent us from seeing some fundamental or even essential attributes of systems.

And then that general and specific, connecting that to learning and doing, to epistemic and pragmatic values or gains, which...

Hint, hint, we have included in the act of formalism as part of our policy selection approach.

So Stephen and Blue, plus everybody who asked truly excellent questions in the live stream, we'll see you in an organizational unit meeting or the Discord or some other way.

Just this is your affordance to participate and contribute.

So thanks again to everybody and we'll see you next time.

Bye.

## GYJ0UC6ykxk

SPEAKER_08:
Hello everybody, and welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

Today it's October 26th, 2021, and we're in Act-Inf live stream number 31.2.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

We're here in our second discussion, group discussion for 31 towards the end of October.

So also happy Halloween.

And this is our jumping off point to many ideas.

So looking forward to this cool discussion.

The goal is going to be to learn and discuss this paper by Patricia Palacios and Mateo Colombo, both of whom are with us today.

So thanks so much to the authors for joining and

Feel free to address what you can while you're here and then just leave whenever works for you.

And in this discussion, we can take it many different ways because so many topics came up in the dot zero and dot one, but we have all of the formalisms, some big questions, a lot of topics that we raised in the 31.1 video as well.

So we can begin with an introduction and warmup section.

We'll have the non-authors introduce themselves and then just say hello.

And then we'll pass to the two authors, both of whom are joining for the first time to a stream.

So again, thanks for joining and we look forward to the discussion.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

And to just add something I'm excited about, Mateo and I were just discussing right before we started some of the sociology meets history and philosophy of science.

And oh yeah, who could forget about the actual topics themselves?

So there's just some cool intersections that we'll be able to talk about.

I'll pass it to Dave.


SPEAKER_09:
Hi, I'm retired from

Information technology.

I'm in the cool, dry mountains of the northern Philippines.

And now that I don't have to work for a living, I'm getting really busy on learning cybernetics, which is one of the things I did back in college.

And having a great time.

I'm fired up about having a complexity weekend ramp up starting tomorrow.

So true.

And Stephen.


SPEAKER_08:
We can't hear you, Stephen, but you're unmuted.

So maybe your audio selection is odd, but let's welcome Stephen back.

So figure it out and let's go to Patricia first.

Welcome and happy to hear your introduction.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello.

Well, thank you for the discussion, for the interest in discussing our paper.

So I'm an assistant professor in Salzburg.

I'm originally from Chile.

And I work on the philosophy of physics, philosophy of science.

And now I'm working more and more in the philosophy of the complexity science.

I have done some work on econophysics.

And well, I'm interested in general in the statistical mechanical applications to other disciplines.

Well, statistical mechanical models in economics, biology, and well, chemistry, although I haven't explored that yet, I'm interested on that.

And here with Matteo, I did my first exploration in the free energy principle.

But just to be clear, I'm very interested in the application of statistical mechanics to other disciplines, even if we appear to be critical to that in this paper.


SPEAKER_07:
Thank you.

Matteo?


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you very much for the kind invitation and also for the spotlight on our paper, completely undeserved.

My name is Matteo Colombo.

I'm based in Tilburg in the Netherlands.

As my accent might suggest, I'm Italian.

I'm originally from Milan.

And mostly my work lies in the philosophy of cognitive science.

I have a special interest in computational modeling, especially reinforcement learning and Bayesian approaches to brain function.

um and you know it's been fun uh to collaborate with patricia at this project which uh um you know combined a bunch of interest already had and helped me to learn something new


SPEAKER_08:
Great.

Well, maybe we could just start with some of the context of the paper.

How did both of you intersect towards this very interesting view on FEP and active?

So were you studying active inference and then wanted to integrate it with statistical physics or vice versa?

I think we heard some of the seeds of that, but it'd be good to clarify.


SPEAKER_05:
Patricia, shall I go?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, if you want.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

Okay.

I think Patrizia and I started to chat about this two or three years ago at a conference, probably.

So my background is in cognitive neuroscience and philosophy, mainly, so I have a Master's in both.

And during my work at Edinburgh,

as a PhD student that was actually co-supervised by a person, Peggy Serrier, who is an expert in psychophysics.

And then she moved slowly to apply tools from Bayesian modeling and reinforcement learning modeling to psychiatry.

And so my other supervisor was Andy Clark.

And so it was a good, say,

environment for me, you know, to learn about active inference.

I think those were the early days of this approach and started to asking questions basically about the approach in terms of actual applications, a very limited experience.

I suppose that the only serious modeling experience I had was during my PhD, where with another collaborator, we started to model

things in a broad Bayesian framework.

This paper came in to be, I think, mainly because of my own interest in Bayesian modelling and Patricia's own interest, which she just mentioned, in statistical physics approaches to economics and to other sciences.

And so we started to ask, hey, in terms of scientific representation, that's the focus of our paper.

Focus is not so much as also written in the paper on the metaphysics of active inference, but more about this language, this formalism, the scientific representation.

And let's ask what kinds of opportunities and challenges this formalism

presents when it comes to applying it outside its, say, original field, as in, you know, statistics, statistical physics.

And so we started to chat and we had a back and forth for a while and then we, say, started to put into focus various opportunities and challenges in applying, say,

concepts from thermodynamics and statistical physics to make sense and understand organisms and life science phenomena.

And what we found very interesting is this kind of trade-off between the generality of it.

It seems that the machinery of the free energy principle or active inference, we might have a discussion about the difference, if any, between the two.

how this machinery allows you to cover at least model many types of systems, at least allegedly, but with a sacrifice in plausibility, what we call realism in the paper.

And again, by itself, straight up, we don't think there is anything wrong with, you know,

going for maximal generality in an approach that might cover, you know, or at least allegedly from cells up to, you know, cultural phenomena.

And that's our paper in a nutshell.

It is how these trade-offs might depend on a choice of language, of formalism, to make sense of allegedly any thing.

And again, the thing would...

is one of the key terms, I think, that Maxwell and, you know, before him, Carl Freestone put on the map here.

And I think it's a helpful way also to look at our contribution.

Again, in a nutshell, I think the framework of thing good might miss out the most interesting properties of the kind of thing, if there are things, say organisms happen to be.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks for that.

Patricia, anything to add?


SPEAKER_01:
I'll suggest just to repeat what Matteo said.

So my interest in the free energy principle came from my interest in the application of statistical mechanics to other disciplines.

So that's why we started discussing this, and that's why I got so excited about this research.

And I agree with the summary of the paper that Matteo just did.


SPEAKER_08:
this thread of grounding in fundamental physics ideas and then trade-offs or opportunities and challenges really became clear so maybe one general opening question what does it mean for a non-statistical physics idea to be grounded in statistical physics

Like we're intrinsically talking about some interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary or applied scenario.

So we're leaving that thing, that field of statistical physics.

What baggage, good and bad, do we take with us?

And then is it an advantage?

Is it a weakness?

What does it actually mean for a non-physics area to be grounded in physics?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah thank you for that question that's one of the questions that have motivated my research in the last years i don't think there is a unique answer to that so the more i do research on the applications of statistical mechanics to other disciplines the more i understand that it varies so it depends on how it is used how how statistical mechanics is used and depends also on the case studies and disciplines and the specific models so i think that's why it's worth to look at

specific case studies the specific applications of free of statistical mechanics to the disciplines in order to answer that question like on a case-by-case basis i think in some cases the application of statistical mechanics is well justified especially when the idealizations are well justified in some other cases as i would say tend to think that it's the case of the free energy principle

application of statistical mechanics to lack justification so we are not saying or we are not concluding in the you know paper that that cannot be done or that it doesn't make sense to propose a principle that is based on statistical mechanics but we just think that there is much more work to be done in the justification of especially of the idealizations that are involved when we use statistical mechanics to formulate a principle like the free energy principle


SPEAKER_08:
Classic philosophy, where do we err or miss when we idealize, make ideas of, or generalize specific ideas?

systems or things um and what is the thing concept or the system concept in either patricia or mateo in either of your areas like if you mentioned a thing or a system what would that mean in to the the disciplines that you're working with and then how is it being used differently in fep and active and then i see steve


SPEAKER_01:
Matteo, do you want to answer this?


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.

I mean, in a sense, your question is about metaphysics.

And the question is, what's a thing and in what way we can make sense of a thing good with a formalism like the formalism of Mark of Blankets, for instance, or the formalism of statistical

mechanics.

Just to turn the point slightly in a different direction, if I may, I suppose the question about thing good and the role of idealizations on which Patricia just commented on is not just boiling down to the conclusion that, ah, that's difficult, let's move on to apply these tools to a certain system.

The challenge we put on the table here is concerning the generality of it.

The generality of the active inference approach.

You know, there is...

Excellent work by Philip Schwantenberg and others using active inference models in Markov decision processes with humans, fitting decisions in reinforcement learning or decision tasks with active inference models.

And again, this is just one example of a productive use of the active inference approach

which resonates with regular approaches like Bayesian modeling or reinforcement learning modeling.

What we're taking issue with is, look, you're making claims about a maximal scope, a maximal scope kind of application of this approach.

And to sensibly apply models at any scale

know any scale even outside the life sciences you know having to do with economies or thing good certain assumptions must be in place and these assumptions you know we provide a number of examples which all involve the availability of large data sets okay that can constrain

uh say the application of the model and also background knowledge about the target this is the target system and the thing you want to understand

and especially bridges, conceptual bridges between parameters within your model and features of the actual systems you want to represent.

So these are the three, I think, challenges that we put on the map for, again, the large scope or very general scope

some understanding of active inference or the free energy principle.

So this is a bit off topic, so I didn't really answer your question about TINGO, but at least these are motivations we had to write this paper, as in making claims about maximal scope come with commitments.

And these commitments, at least in the case of many or most biological systems, do not look satisfied or plausible.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

In a way, it does.

Wait, maybe mute a little bit, Mateo.

But in a way, it does address this question about our models as things and their relationship to other things, perhaps the target of modeling.

So Patricia, if you want to add anything, otherwise we can go to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Just to stress some of the things that Mateo said, because I hear the session offline, I hear the session of last week, and I saw that Maxwell was concerned or pointing out that we didn't take the cases, the applications of the free energy principle to some systems in biology seriously.

and but the thing is that our claim we did take them seriously and we mentioned them in the paper but that doesn't contradict uh our claim because our claim wasn't that the statistical mechanics cannot or the the language of dynamical systems cannot be used to model biological systems our claim was about the generality of this of this principle so basically we were

concern or where we were casting doubt on the possibility of formulating a general principle like the free energy principle that presupposes that

all relevant biological systems can be modeled as random dynamical systems.

So just to emphasize that our claim was, or our concerns with the free energy principle had to do with generality of this principle and not with the possibility of modeling some biological systems in that way, using the language of random dynamical system.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

So Stephen, and then anyone in the live chat or anyone with a raised hand here.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks.

This is very interesting.

Hopefully you can hear me okay.

Yes.

I'm curious.

I know that in the reference you make to the paper that is Life as We Know It, so there there's that question about suggesting that life or biological self-organization is an inevitable and emergent property of any ergodic random dynamical system that possesses a Markov blanket.

And I know that in some way, I sense that what they've done to try and deflate that claim from 2013 is maybe to go down the mathematical route.

I sense that you're saying they need to maybe also go down the physics route.

Would that be something that you would say, like in terms of how that statement

which has to some extent been couched over the last few years.

Are you saying that the physics aspects haven't been addressed as much as the statistical aspects?


SPEAKER_05:
I can say a couple of things and then I leave it to you, Patricia.

Yes.

Very quickly.

So one line of criticism about our paper is that, you know, the active inference approach has been evolving over time.

And so we're making claims about ergodicity and which are just obsolete now because, you know, from the Costa et al.

paper, that assumption seems to be dropped.

ever plays with the assumption of stationarity.

But then the question, actually two questions.

One question is, why should we believe that any life science phenomenon, any organism is stationary?

What is the justification for that assumption?

And the second observation, before I leave it to Patricia, is that even within that paper, you know, the Costa et al paper, which is, you know,

um theoretically very rich they frame the contribution to biology in terms of a metaphor explicitly early on they're saying look what we're saying here is just a metaphorical representation and so in a sense that's what we're being arguing for that is sure you can gain this maximum generality

but at the cost of making assumptions, either ergodicity or stationarity now, which might or might not apply to biological systems.


SPEAKER_07:
Thank you.

Patricia?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so to answer Stephen's concern, I would say yes.

So one of the things that we wanted to point out is that

One needs to focus on the physical foundations of the free energy principle a little bit more than only the statistical foundations of the free energy principle.

So we believe, we don't claim to be the only ones that focus on that, but we believe that there's lack of literature in that sense, and we wanted to contribute to that, to fill that gap, what we call fill that gap.

So that's the short answer.

Then about, again, the discussion that you had last week, you saw Maxwell, I think, as well, was complaining that we focus too much on the older formulations of the free energy principle instead of the new formulations.

And he basically said that ergodicity doesn't play any role.

It's not even mentioned in the new formulations of the free energy principles.

I don't have a biological background or a background in neuroscience, and I haven't worked for a long time in the free energy principle, but I do have a background in physics.

And I am a little bit puzzled with the idea that ergodicity doesn't play any role in the new formulations of the free energy principle, especially because they explicitly allude to the existence of weekly mixing, random dynamical systems.

And to my knowledge, mixing systems require ergodicity, so imply ergodicity.

So I'm really not sure, and I haven't seen explicitly how can you drop the assumption of ergodicity in the free energy principle.

So I think that if some authors working on the free energy principle could clarify to what extent or why you don't need ergodicity anymore, I think that would be helpful.

So we would be grateful for that.

We wouldn't consider that as a failure in our project.

So we would consider it as a success.

So if our paper leads to more clarity in the free energy literature, that would

be a success of our paper for us.

And I think the fact that Bill et al, also some paper that was quoted in this discussion last week, also allude to the older formulations of the free energy principle just shows maybe a confusion in the literature between older formulations and new formulations.

So I think, again, it would be very helpful for people interested in this, at least, to have more clarity about what has changed in this new framework, in these new formulations of the free energy principle.

and to have a more consistent framework that one can work with because we were interested in working with the legitimate framework.

We weren't against the free energy principle and then try to look for the weakest argument to attack them.

So that was never our strategy.

I don't have anything, I am not married against the free energy principle.

I don't have anything a priori against Bristol.

So the same with Mateo.

So we are just generally interested in this application because it can be actually potentially useful or because it has been so, it has called so much attention in biology.

So that's why we are interested on this in the first place, not with the idea of attacking the free energy principle.

So again,

if we could have better understanding of of why the new formulations don't require ergodicity or about what are the key assumptions in the new formulations of the free energy principle i think that would save us time and we would be happy to to look at that so i i think again i i agree that we focus mostly on the older versions of the free energy principle but i think it was

partially because the papers were clear and not because we wanted to attack the weaker papers and the same like the fact that they appeal again to the existence of weekly mixing random dynamical systems suggested for me that they still are using ergodicity

And apart from that, ergodicity was not the only argument that we were presenting in the paper.

So we also mentioned phase spaces and attractors, and the new formulations still require phase spaces because they need some probability.

And they also consider or model homeostatics or non-equilibrium steady states in terms of attractors.

And that, again, falls into our criticism because we were pointing out, independently of the ergodicity assumption,

we were pointing out that it's very hard to model in most systems, biological systems, even physical systems perhaps, stationary, non-equilibrium stationary states in terms of attractors, because attractors imply some asymptotic results, and it's not easy to get these asymptotic results.

And so basically, that was our criticism.

So we were by no means only focusing on ergodicity, even if ergodicity doesn't play any role in ergodic formulations, in new formulations, which is not clear to me.

But even so, I would say the other points still remain, and we would like to have a clear answer to that, even if that means that we have to

I don't know, say that we were wrong in the end, but I insist.

So if our vapor leads to more clarity in the literature, that would be fine.

We would consider it a success.


SPEAKER_08:
thanks for that and welcome blue so i'll just give one comment and then steven so absolutely about the evolution and changes it's a non-stationary or maybe there's a higher level of a stationarity to the literature but it's one reason why blue and i and maybe you if anyone listening wants to contribute seriously to this are very interested in tracking the

uh nomenclature and which letters are used to refer to internal and external states and which assumptions are implicit or explicit how does that play out with the evolution of literature in this area so that's like something that will hopefully we'll be able to point to maybe it's going to be version 1.4 in this paper or you know version 1.4 the uh the english gambit we can name them like chess openings okay stephen


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think you make a good point.

I mean, I think also I do agree.

In the DaCosta paper, stationarity is really given as another way in to some sort of state that gets revisited.

It doesn't necessarily take out ergodicity.

It maybe adds another potential.

So there's this question.

It can't just be answered from a math perspective.

I think there's this physics

reality and maybe this is where non-equilibrium chemistry starts to come in although it's a new field and I think that your points are useful in clarifying some of those questions I suppose the question that also comes up which is maybe less common in physics is how much can approximation science how much can a kind of noisy

version of ergodicity be enough?

And at what point, how many beers is it before I fall over?

At what point does the active inferences process come down?

And I don't actually think that's necessarily been brought in, but I don't know if physics knows quite how to handle that question.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes, how stringently do specific realizations or models, especially if they're being evaluated on utility, how stringently must they fulfill some of the underlying frameworks?

Like we talked about how the t-test is built around equal variances, unless you're using an unequal variance version,

and of course those will never be precisely realized but then how close to being precisely realized must or should things be um mateo or patricia any thoughts

otherwise the the comment that came to mind was Patricia you mentioned um and it was in your 2018 paper I think that we looked at in the dot zero about how there's the asymptotic characteristics and the convergence time so that was very interesting um just

that there was a there was it's sort of this attractor but there was more to the attractor than just where it was so maybe unpack that and then how did you see that grafting into or relating to the um comments on fep and active


SPEAKER_05:
yeah sorry i have to leave now thank you you know it's been fun uh i'm very sorry you know it lasted only 30 minutes because i saw so blue joined and had answers to a couple of her questions in previous sessions about dynamic equilibrium and why we use internal space


SPEAKER_08:
states as active states well we can do 31.3 literally anytime we can do it in a year so that's why we do decimal notation anytime it's right just let us know and you're always welcome back for a guest stream presenting on current work so good luck with your teaching responsibilities and see you soon too generous though ciao ciao everybody and thanks for paying attention cheers ciao patricia ciao ciao

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So, yeah, you were mentioning my 2018 paper.

Thank you.

Yeah, so I think the question of asymptotics is related to the question of approximation science, and I am interested in both questions.

And this is basically what I have done independently of the free energy principle in my research in the last year.

So basically what I pointed out about asymptotics in the paper that you were mentioning is

is that in order to make a model realistic, a model that takes asymptotic into account, in order to make that model realistic, we not only have to pay attention to the solutions that you get in the limit, when you take a limit, you also have to pay attention to how fast that limit converges.

And that time that could be considered relaxation time or that time that the limits needs

or that we need in order to achieve that limit needs to be realistic too.

So you don't only have to pay attention to the values that you obtain when you take a limit, you also have to pay attention to the rate in which you approach that limit.

So that will also help you to understand how realistic is the model that you are using.


SPEAKER_08:
how would that tie to approximation science?


SPEAKER_01:
It depends, again, some models, like on the models that you're analyzing and the science that you are looking at.

So if you are investigating models that use limits, then there is a very clear understanding of approximation because limits give you sort of a neat understanding of the approximations that you are using.

But approximations are not always in the form of limits.

Sometimes approximations can be in the form of similarity and then saying to what extent that model is realistic can be a little bit more obscure.

So when your model implies limits, then you might have a clear way of understanding to what extent your model is close to the target that you are trying to model.


SPEAKER_08:
very interesting so one thought that's um come up in a few different contexts is um it's almost like a vitalism 1.0 and a vitalism 2.0 and the 1.0 was like you know is there the elan vital is there something more to it than chemistry in biology and you know the synthesis

ex vitro or ex vivo should i say of vitamin c for some reasons point to as an example of like demonstrating that biological molecules could arise through chemical synthesis and therefore maybe more than just vitamin c but maybe dna could also be made in the test tube um and now we're in a area where we're asking okay given that grounding of biology in physics and chemistry 1.0 how do we go from that sort of

equilibrium into homeostasis and allostasis and more advanced forms of predictive higher level behavior from systems that are also composed of less strategic components.

There's going to be, just like there were challenges going from the physics of a membrane into understanding how biological systems deploy membranes, now we're moving up a level into the cybernetic or into the anticipatory space and asking how those very same biological systems, which we've deflated away to be chemical and physical,

now will there be another level of deflation or is this a bubble that's a little harder to pop so steven and then patricia or anyone else with thoughts yeah this is a good point about um it being a bit harder to pop um because there's a lot of the once you get into the chemistry there's a lot of um


SPEAKER_00:
There's a lot of hidden states.

Let's put it like that.

So there's that assumption that you pass through often maybe a transition state when you go from reactants to products, but it's going from equilibrium to equilibrium.

Even the transition state is looked at in terms of its energy accessibility, but that's again, a kind of a stable state.

So this question about something circling around non-equilibrium or far from equilibrium,

mixing states which is why I think you can't I think they say ergodicity can't be or something along those lines can't be ignored certainly once you get into anything which is more in the liquid contexts so the question comes up then is when you've got these attractors or these far from equilibrium states which are not necessarily energetically favored

alone they may be somehow entropically favored or somehow complexity favored through these attractors anyways that's something around how catalysts are working um in the more sort of if you were to go in at a more detailed level of modeling um so i wonder how your thoughts are around the sort of catalysis processes that might be happening in biological systems and

How do these far-from-equilibrium states facilitate these abilities to minimize free energy?


SPEAKER_08:
If you have any thoughts on that, Patricia, otherwise, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I would leave that to Blue, who has worked more on the free energy principle.


SPEAKER_04:
I don't know.

I think the assumption that I've worked more on the free energy principle is maybe kind of... I don't know.

Not right.

I don't really have an answer.


SPEAKER_08:
Don't let the cat ears deceive you.

But cool questions.

There's many other avenues we can go, but Patricia, what is your current...

research or what do you see following your work now that it came out like what where do you go from that state update to your next questions if they're related or not it's all good yeah actually i'm thinking about applying for a project uh which it doesn't have to do with free energy principle but it does have to do with applications of statistical mechanics to biology


SPEAKER_01:
So I have been working for a few years.

So I just finished a book on emergence and reduction in physics.

So I have been working on a concept of emergence and reduction for physical systems, especially thinking about critical phenomena.

What I want to do now is to see whether that notion of emergence and reduction that I suggest also works for biological systems.

But I will focus on biological systems that can be modeled as critical phenomena, which means can be modeled using the physics of phase transitions.

So this is what I have in mind now.

And I intuitively think, so my binary hypothesis is that

the same concept doesn't work for biological systems and well, that one needs to distinguish between them.

But I think it would be useful to look at specifically at systems that can be modeled as critical phenomenon to see that this analogy may be between biological systems and physical systems.

So that's maybe the reason why I will focus, especially on those systems that can be according to

to many physicists and biologists we model as a critical phenomenon.


SPEAKER_08:
Interesting.

In fact, criticality is perhaps, again, the language analysis will reveal in the future, but it's not a term that gets brought up in the ACT-INF and FEP area that much.

It's more apt to describe a system, although in

fristin's work on neural systems there actually is a lot of it and so there's actually so much in the spm and dynamical modeling literature that has um not made it quite over the hill but i think that there's more to be said we'll look forward to that book steven yeah just that's an interesting point and they're making um can i just ask so is it almost like you think there's a lot of


SPEAKER_00:
a lot of computational processes that can happen purely through phase transitions and statistical processes which is not quite the same as an inference process but it is it may be more like the sort of thing you see when molds find their way to food and things like that so you're sort of saying there's a kind of a physics explanation for some things which

doesn't require an inference process.

And that could do a lot of the heavy lifting.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So I will focus on models that use the mathematics of phase transitions with variations.

So you never use exactly the same mathematics.

You have to make changes depending on the case study that you're investigating.

But I will focus on models that use the mathematics of phase transitions to understand biological phenomena.

An example would be forking behavior, for example.

There are plenty of models that use the IC model or something like the IC model to understand forking behavior, which is that behavior of birds that seem to be emerging with respect to the behavior of individual birds.

and other case studies like protein melding that can be modeled as a phase transition.

I'm going to analyze plenty of case studies of research that have been done already in physics or in biology.

And the idea would be to understand what kind of notion of emergence do you find in biological systems?

And the question is whether that is similar to the notion of emergence that appears in physical systems.

And as I said, I intuitively think that it's not the same.

But since I will look at similar case studies, I think that can show the difference between biological systems and physical systems quite clearly.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

Stephen?

Let's add one thing to that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, I see the hands up.

I know Blue's going to say something.

There's one thing I was curious in.

Is it like, because there's this interesting, when I'm talking to people who've got maybe more of a chemistry background, emergence is more the emergence of interactions between things.

things right molecules and stuff and then you get these kind of and then you've got this more process based kind of inference dynamical one so are you sort of seeing the way of emergence being able to do quite a lot from the kind of perspective of things interacting with each other based on rules rather than a non-linear dynamical approach


SPEAKER_01:
both actually so you find both in phase transitions that way that's why phase transitions in physics have been considered as the prototype example of emergent behavior because you find non-linearity you find um a long range correlations and well the interactions in most systems are local but you still have these long-range correlations

that require using some fancy methods like renormalization group methods, for example.

So you have some notion of collectivity there in phase transitions in physics, not because of long range interactions, but because of long range correlations.

So it appears as if the interaction between distant particles would be long range.

It is not, but it appears like that because you have long range correlations.

So I will look at similar cases in biology that have been modeled already using physics.

And then I will try to answer whether that notion of emergence in terms of nonlinearity and so on, what I suggest its emergence behavior in physics can also be applied to biology.

And I think this is preliminary.

So these are not the results of my research because I will be doing that for the next years.

But preliminary thought.

You will see a difference, especially with top-down causation that might happen in biology.

That doesn't happen in physics.

But this is just preliminary.

So I will try not to say too much about this because I haven't done the proof.

I just have done the research for the project, but I haven't done the project.

So you can wait for this result.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

Lou?


SPEAKER_04:
So that's super interesting.

And again, something that I'm very interested in is this idea of emergence.

And when you're studying phase transitions or criticality in physics, like, for example, just from a liquid to a gas, it's easy to see on a graph this kind of inflection point of temperature where the phase transition occurs.

And I just am wondering what kind of metrics you're using to quantify emergence in your future research in biological systems.


SPEAKER_01:
That depends, again.

Sorry that many, many times my answer is the same, but that depends on the... I'm not using a specific metric because I'm not proposing a general framework.

I'm just studying like different case studies.

And depending on the case study on the kind of phase transition that I'm studying is the metric that is attached to it.

But I'm not suggesting a general formal framework that has a metric in itself.

So I'm studying like case by case.


SPEAKER_04:
So can you maybe provide some examples or you don't want to say yet too much?


SPEAKER_01:
In biology?

Uh-huh.

Yeah, the forking behavior.

So there are different models.

You can send me an email if you want, and I can address you to some literature, but there are plenty of models of forking behavior that use models that are already, so that sort of migrate models from physics.

So there's some of them use a slightly revised version of the icing model.


SPEAKER_08:
makes me think about how uh the sort of initial target system let's just say a solid to a liquid phase transition and then there also are potentially critical dynamics related to information and decision making which comes into play in active inference where you could have a non-linear

relationship between information coming in, and then it's in policy mode A, and then there's a phase transition to policy B. And so it's kind of like, again, that vitalism 1.0, 2.0, there's going to be a lower bar of phase transition to talk about, well, the protein folding in the cell, it's going to be a special surrounding that facilitates it to do special kind of

transitions physically but then how do we think about higher order behavioral properties especially when they exhibit some tantalizing similarity or analogy or metaphor like we've been discussing but can we just take those same models and think that it's going to be as clean all the way up um blue and then Steven


SPEAKER_04:
So in the flocking model, for example, like, and you're talking about downward causation and something as something that you wish to study.

And so I'm sure that you've maybe read the information theory of individuality paper by David Krakauer and that group at the Santa Fe Institute.

So there's a point in which, you know, this like group of birds that's like flying around, you know, kind of chaotically assembles and forms like a flock and flies together in like a kind of patterned way.

And so like I'm interested in, in terms of criticality,

at what point does downward causation occur?

And is that the point that then it stops being like the ensemble becomes a group, a unit that's functional?

Because that's a good kind of way to look at emergence.

But how do you find that point in which there's the bidirectional information flow?

So that's maybe a better way to phrase my question.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, so great to discuss this with you, but as I said, having done the whole research, I'm happy to discuss my intuition here with all of you.

But that's it.

So one of the hypotheses that I have is that you might find something like downward causation in biological systems.

I'm not sure if flocking behavior would be the place to find downward causation, but I'm thinking about downward causation in terms of selection.

And it might be that you need some high-order properties so that high-order properties explain some fitness.

And that in that way, that calls somehow all the way down that at the micro scale, at the micro level, you observe some behavior as a result of that fitness that is sort of coarse grain or higher.

So I'm thinking about downward causation in those terms.

But you might find other notions of downward causation there, and I might find them in doing the research.

Now, in the flocking behavior, I'm not sure, but you might think that the ability of many birds to do a particular pattern has some fitness associated to it.

And if so, that fitness, which is fitness of a group, might explain the individual behavior.

So if that's correct, then you might have a notion of downward causation that you don't find necessarily in physics.

But these are preliminary intuitions.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So going along those lines and going back maybe to the attractor, so when there is the emergence of a group, does that reign all of the individuals in the group closer to a new attractor state or closer together, like a tighter cluster around an attractor state?

Or is it like the new attractor state is an emergent property of the group?

Or how do those two fit together?

Like in terms of fitness and, you know, in biological fitness, you have to be able to maintain this kind of non-equilibrium steady state density.

So in terms of fitness of a group or a cluster in biological systems, is that like a new attractor or is there, or just what are your intuitions maybe about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I wouldn't try to describe the notion of emergence here in terms of attractors, but it might be useful in the end.

But I would like to have a notion of emergence that doesn't rely necessarily on attractors, because I think that

Finding attractors is a hard task in biology, and some of these models don't work with attractors anyway, so I don't think the notion of emergence needs to be associated necessarily to attractors.

Maybe in some cases it would be useful to understand emergence in that sense, but I wouldn't think that it's necessary to understand emergence in the sense of


SPEAKER_04:
And I agree with you, but like the coupling of emergence maybe to fitness, to me, like I link fitness to an attractor.

And so it's hard for me to separate them.

If fitness is linked to attractor, but fitness is not linked to or is also linked to emergence, then that draws a line for me between emergence and attractor, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So that's why I will work with biologists on this project.

I'm not a biologist myself.

But I think that fitness can be defined also independent on the notion of attractors.

And I would try to take those notions.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.


SPEAKER_01:
I would try to adapt those definitions.


SPEAKER_08:
So Dave, just because you haven't asked a question yet, then Steve.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, one of the reasons that spending too much time looking for attractors associated with emergence is among the things that happens when you get emergent behavior is there's a more differentiated set of interfaces with the outer world.

And because of that, there's less duplication and less resemblance among the subsystems already within.

the overall system.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Thank you, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's a good point around the challenge of identifying that attract, especially if you've got this multi-scale nested, I mean, say you've got attractors that are only present for nanoseconds, you know, even if they're there and there's millions and billions of them, you know, and then on top of that, you've,

So I can imagine that it could be really useful.

And I'm curious how you see the freezing of ice and the way that water becomes more dense and actually about two degrees and starts to get less dense as it approaches freezing.

And then you sort of hit this phase transition.

And I think there's a real use in that also being learned about for active inference.

although in active inference it doesn't happen directly in the field of anything to do with entropy there's this common misconception of neg entropy as if you actually get a negative form of entropy which is kind of in the in the kind of common usage but there's no such thing directly as a neg entropy if there's a there's a negative there's a change in entropy you know there can be a variation in entropic but it's not

a stable state in the same way that you get with energy.

But that, I think that can be a misconception that sort of creeps in quite a lot.

But I'd be curious if, A, you know, effectively, you know, there's a value of entropy that goes down, spooky value of entropy, of which no one quite knows what's going on with the entropy.

We know there's a value for entropy that,

entropy goes, changes from ice to water.

But, you know, even Richard Feynman used to say, well, no one quite knows what's going on there.

And maybe this is something that you're trying to sort of get into is what's going on in those phase transitions and these entropic changes, which doesn't have the benefit, like you say, of some agental change.

driver of the free energy principle to make it happen so i don't know what your thoughts are but how that might even how that might be useful to help people who aren't as heavily into physics just think about the idea of change and entropy because i think it's it's going to become something that more and more people are using outside of physics


SPEAKER_08:
If you have any thoughts, otherwise just the maximum density is 4C for water.

And it's super, super slight, but a very interesting pattern.

Okay.

We can turn to, well, if anyone wants to raise their hand or give a thought,

Stephen, you said that the negentropy might not exist.

That was one thing.


SPEAKER_00:
There's no such thing as negentropy.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I also wanted to... Sorry about that.

Yeah, I also wanted to stress that in equilibrium phase transitions in physics, you don't use the notion of negative entropy.

Of course, you just use entropy in standard statistical mechanics plus renormalization group methods.

So that my...


SPEAKER_08:
might be an asymmetry with some of the case studies that i analyze in biology but yeah we'll see and one of the fundamental trade-offs discussed in the paper um was this generality versus the plausibility and the realism do attractors even exist or is it just as if a system is moving towards something but does does something that

is not realized exists and so this kind of uh takes us into talking about uh whether we're describing the system as it is or rather situating the system in a broader space of how it could exist and that was one of the fundamental points of the paper about the challenges of discovering the appropriate phase space for a biological system so

um it's just cool because these are not knock down punches for fep and active uh nor are they trivial they're in that optimally informative or a confusing space you know between zero and one probability where it does matter and uh where philosophy comes into play and where the specifics of the situation come into play we can't just simply make um

arguments without reference to a specific model.

But then are we trapped to just describing specific models, specific papers, or are we able to go beyond that ever?

I'm just looking through, if anyone wants to raise their hand or any... Yeah, about that, sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
Go ahead.

So we do raise a concern about the existence of attractors

Of course, attractors don't exist in nature because you need taking infinite limits in order to define attractors in a model.

And you cannot, so infinites are not realistic, right?

So we cannot take, systems don't take an infinite amount, or processes don't take an infinite amount of time.

And you cannot repeat an iteration in random normalization group transformation infinitely many times in a,

in a realistic way.

Of course, these are all idealizations, but in principle, I wanted to stress that we don't have a problem with that.

So, of course, any model that uses attractors wouldn't be realistic in a way, so you will be using an idealization, that's true, but we don't have a problem with that if the idealization can be justified.

I think in many cases, especially, for example,

in in the treatment of phase transitions in in physics where you use uh limits there's a way of justifying those limits and justifying the existence of attractors and therefore even if you miss some realism in the model of your of your physical system since that idealization is justified that that is plausible so that that that model is plausible and it's legitimate

What we are worried about in the paper is that it might happen that sometimes the models that try to model many systems in terms of attractors are not realistic.

They cannot justify the realizations that have been made in order to model plenty of systems in terms of attractors.

So I just wanted to clarify that because we don't disagree in principle with the idea of using models that appeal to attractors, even if attractors don't exist in reality.

Our problem is, well, with the possibility of finding attractors in the first place or finding asymptotic solutions.

And the second is about the possibility of justifying the idealizations that are involved when you use attractors or when you appeal to attractors.


SPEAKER_08:
yes and like many other um arguments in biology it's a little bit like the anthropic principle or fallacy depending on which side you're on it's like you mentioned in the paper you have to prove the existence of the attractor as well as as we discussed the time to convergence and then justify why certain attractors denote homeostatic states and one biologist's answer is just those are the living systems if the attractor weren't

a homeostatic state or a high fitness state, that is not going to be an ant you see around for long.

And so we can just say that if there is an attractor, and indeed it's as if there's an attractor for persistent systems, that's the adaptive one, period.

And the second that it's not that way, the system fails to exist.

So that's the sort of circular but often impenetrable tautology of selection and persistence of systems.

Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So that's a nice transition, perhaps, into the question that I've had about dynamic equilibrium versus a non-equilibrium steady state density.

So I don't know if you want to flip to that side, Daniel.

But there's several quotes in the paper where the...

I'm not sure exactly what's referred to as a dynamic equilibrium.

I'm assuming that it's homeostasis.

But I just was wondering why, because dynamic equilibrium is a reversible chemical reaction.

And there's nothing about homeostasis that is, I mean, there may be some things, but not everything about maintaining homeostasis.

has to do with reversibility.

So I just was wondering, all biological systems actively maintain a dynamic equilibrium with their environment, and what is meant by that?


SPEAKER_07:
This was a quote from the paper.


SPEAKER_08:
Oh, you're muted, Patricia, but if you have any thoughts.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so sorry, I was missing the screen somehow.

Yeah, so actually, unfortunately, Matteo wanted to answer that in a in a

in a neat way.

Basically, we took this from Friston himself.

So he refers in many places and he had the quotations and so on.

I don't have that at the moment.

I can try to look at it.

So you might be right, it's not the right way of describing the homostatic states, but I think it's a mistake that Fristam himself does, I think.

So this is basically what Matteo wanted to say.

And he had these quotations in the papers where he does that.

So if you want to email him, he will address you to those words, but not so much

in our paper depends on that notion, actually.

So that might be a mistake that we make, I think, because we took it from Friston.

but not so much depends on that so basically our criticisms have to do with the idea of modeling all biological states in terms of random dynamical systems in understanding homeostatic states in terms of dynamical attractors as they are described in the paper but

we don't rely so much on the notion of dynamic equilibrium.

So that might be just a loose way of understanding homostatic states.


SPEAKER_04:
So it's referring to homeostasis, though, not a dynamic coupling?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.


SPEAKER_04:
OK.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, yes, yes.

To homeostasis, yes.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, this could be an interesting area for the ontological work that's happening in the lab, because this question of is it

dynamic equilibrium, I think like Blue was saying there, can be that kind of backwards and forwards of which there's maybe a bit more of an arrow in one direction.

And then you've maybe got the word equilibrium as opposed to non-equilibrium.

And then you've got this, so he has this term dynamical systems, you know, and as opposed to system dynamics, which is the kind of the way that say chemistry, like equilibrium work is more system dynamics, but dynamical systems.

And you've got this interesting thing because you've got this nonlinear dynamical work happening at the sort of,

the the physics level and this emerging property level and then at some point um as it appears from the organism's perspective we might start turning and using the language of dynamic equilibrium ecologically you know or ecological equilibrium and this this shifting uh

the way that the ontologies are present, which may be true because as things persist and are interacted with as entities, they appear to be in a different type of dynamic.

But we are seeing from the active inference that that dynamic may

itself be more dynamical than we perceive so I don't know I just thought I'd mention I don't know if we need an answer to that or maybe Daniel you've got a thought but there's something about this shift between biology and physics at the sort of this sort of very

molecular stroke, you know, theoretical level, and then you've got the idea of what that means for biology, and then you've got the idea of what that means for biological organisms.

And maybe this is something that we've talked about this pluralistic ontology that needs to be feasible in the field, because, like say, it depends, I think that was the very good point, it does depend on where your models are based and grounded.


SPEAKER_08:
thanks matteo has some very interesting work on pluralism in biology and the philosophy of science so i'd recommend people look there now

Contingent explanations are not necessarily plural.

One can be an absolutist and say it depends on the particulars and there's only one correct story.

So it's an open question to what extent pluralism and particularity will coexist and agreed that at the high level, as we mix metaphors, take ideas across different fields,

we have to be aware of what is gained and lost what are the challenges and opportunities of applying terms from mathematics to physics and from physics to biology and taking us all the way up and down that xkcd comic that we were looking at earlier one question area patricia that i had was about action in the loop so

Maybe there's two parts to it.

The first is just, we often hear about FEP as being akin to a principle of least action.

So just from a physics background, what does it mean to be a principle of least action?

Or what would it mean to be like a principle of least action?

And then how does it change the formalisms or not when we're integrating control of behavior, kind of control theory formalisms or cybernetics into ensemble modeling?

Because the actions of molecules are implicit in the phase transition of the ensemble of water.

But what happens when we actually have a control parameter in our equations, like policy?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, thank you.

So first of all, I did find the papers where Friston uses the notion of dynamic equilibrium, so for blue.

And he uses a synonym of homeostasis, but I cannot use the chat.

Can you?


SPEAKER_08:
Oh, it's on the left side, the bottom left.


SPEAKER_01:
It says that enter a nickname to use the chat.


SPEAKER_08:
You can pick the nickname if you want.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Ah, okay.

I thought it was kind of password.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.


SPEAKER_08:
Call me trim tab.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Okay.

It was so smart.

I thought it was sort of a password.

So you wanted to allow everyone to write in the chat.


SPEAKER_08:
It doesn't require a childhood nickname, but it helps.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Good.


SPEAKER_01:
These are the papers.

So you can take a look at this.


SPEAKER_02:
So, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
But as I said, not so, not so much in our paper, it depends on that notion of dynamic.

So you might disagree with that lack of record there.

Yeah.

But yeah, don't blame us for that.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, nice.

And that was, interestingly, not in a peer review paper.

Not that it explains everything, but he may be speaking a little bit informally in this Aeon piece.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

I think it's just a more loose way of talking about it.

And we also use it because it's useful then when you speak about dynamical attractors.

So if you have a notion of dynamic equilibrium, it's just...

useful, but of course we weren't thinking about the proper definition of dynamical equilibrium.


SPEAKER_04:
Just to return to the action question, yeah.

Okay, sorry, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so yeah, again, so we are here, sorry that I excused myself of summarizing the work that Friston did,

But here we are just summarizing, so we don't give a proper definition of principle of least action.

We're just relying on Friston's own definition.

And he basically, in that paper of 2012, he needs the principle of least action in order to formulate the free energy principle.

So the principle of least action is a step, an intermediate step, you know, to formulate the free energy principle.

nothing more.

Then I would be more careful in talking about principles of least action in phase transitions in physics.

I think you might not even require any principle of least action there, or you might talk about those ground states as sort of relying on a principle of less action, but I would be more careful about exporting that notion to the physics of phase transitions.


SPEAKER_08:
okay yes and so that's the first part about the principle of least action and then just is there um something that is changed markedly when we introduce these control theoretic formalisms like policy selection into physical

physically inspired or based models that entail activity, like the thermal motion of particles, but are not approached from a control theoretic or behavioral regulatory perspective.


SPEAKER_01:
Are you thinking about social systems, for example?


SPEAKER_08:
perhaps different kinds of systems, but mainly just a particular system in the way that free energy principle for a particular physics, Friston's 2019 work, like the particle is the blanket and the internal states that's engaging in active inference, let's say.

And so it is implementing inference on policy.

It's selecting policy, it's behaving.

And so

is that sort of policy selection latent within non-control theoretic activity based physics models again like the thermal motion of molecules or when we introduce policy inference does that change some of the qualities of the system


SPEAKER_01:
I think, so it's an interesting question.

I would need to think about that, about it more carefully.

But my intuition is that it does, it changes the way as you extend phase transitions in physics.

I think that requires change in formalism.

And again, it requires important, well, make an important difference in your model with respect to how you model phase transitions in physics.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks.

I agree.

Something changes and it's not for a linear time discussion necessarily to unpack, but these are the kinds of questions that we're getting at.

Absolutely.

So blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Yes.

I think.


SPEAKER_04:
So I just want to reference the articles that you posted in the chat.

So the Aon thing, they did say dynamic equilibrium, but I don't trust op-ed science writers to make direct correct quotations.

And in the Ramstad paper that was cited in your paper, the Markov Blankets of Life, it specifies that dynamic equilibrium specifically is not the state of homeostasis.

It says, the very existence of living systems can therefore be construed as a process of boundary conservation, where the boundary of a system is its Markov blanket.

That means that the dependencies induced by the presence of a Markov blanket are what keep the system far removed from thermodynamical equilibrium.

not to be confused with dynamic equilibrium.

So, I mean, specifically, like, it's not dynamic equilibrium.

It's far from thermodynamic equilibrium.

But still, dynamic equilibrium is not a part of that.

And so that's why that reference was very confusing to me.

And, like, they on paper is, like, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Then we made the same mistake that he made without correcting it in the way that Ramstein did.

It can be.

So I agree.

We were talking loosely there.

And what we were having in mind was the notion of dynamical attractors.

So that's why we found dynamic equilibrium very, very, like a nice term, but we might be talking loosely there.

But as I said, so that might be a mistake, but not so much in our paper depends on that notion.


SPEAKER_04:
And the notion of attractor in the state of homeostasis is specifically a far from equilibrium removed base that a biological system exists in.

And so it was just kind of confusing to me, I thought.


SPEAKER_08:
interesting um you know it's a challenge to say enough to identify what we're talking about but especially when we're crossing disciplinary boundaries to know which pieces of baggage make it through one border or another like dynamical could merely just mean involving time but

it also brings on a lot more meaning in different areas.


SPEAKER_01:
It's a great... Yeah, so we talk in the paper about the possibility of attractors, like that change, well, one attractor following another.

So we understood that loosely as a notion of dynamic equilibrium, but you are right, we are using the term rigorously probably here.


SPEAKER_08:
let's turn in the um sort of home stretch of however long we want to speak to the short and concise conclusion so you you in the last paragraph brought up this really interesting point about the fep as a definition for a system and so um i wondered what else could it be or might be what might we want

framework to be other than a definition like what else in the counterfactuals of the way that this paragraph could have been written what else could the fep or another framework be other than a definition is that synonymous or complementary with a description with what other pieces come into play here can you can you repeat the question i don't know if i understood it um if the fep

uh, is not a definition, what else could it be?

Or other than a definition, what do we want for a full-fledged model?

A principle.


SPEAKER_06:
What would make it a principle?


SPEAKER_01:
I think, uh, something that can be, can explain life, or can explain, um, yeah, why, why, why, uh, biological systems, uh,

apparently violate the second law, why do they stay in that far from equilibrium steady state?

I think many defenders or advocates of the free energy principle understand this sort of as a principle that explains, that has explanatory power, that explains not only the existence, even the existence of living systems,

but especially why those living systems stay far from equilibrium or from Maxwell-Boltzmann equilibrium for a long time in a steady state.


SPEAKER_08:
Great points.


SPEAKER_01:
So, yeah, that's much.


SPEAKER_08:
And explanation, which of course goes beyond or is complimentary to definition.

Explanation is one of the key terms and themes in the history of the philosophy of science.

And since an explanation is evaluated,

subjectively or intersubjectively like was that an adequate explanation that's a statement about the relationship between a perceiver and the explanation itself and so it uh dumps the entire mess back into the lap of almost a psycho-historical perspective on science because good explanation is about the enculturation of the person evaluating how good that explanation is so steven and then blue


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I was just looking up regarding dynamical and dynamics.

So dynamical, the adjective means relating to the study of dynamics.

So it says a dynamic system is a system exhibiting continual change.

So a dynamic system is continual change.

A dynamical system is a system relating to the study of the dynamics.

So a dynamical system is like a system working with the dynamics of a system.

And dynamic itself just talks about the actual fact that there's change happening.

So that's kind of interesting.

And it'd be interesting as well whether you get dynamical things or whether it has to be systems.

That may be where there's some sort of interesting play between

phase transitions as well.

Like maybe there's some, there's a dynamic going on.

Is there a dynamic that is second order to the first dynamic in some way?

So that's kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes.

Things and processes and static versus dynamic and then

loose, but acceptable in many cases, use of language.

And again, the text modeling will be superlative when we can establish where these adjectives and nouns and verbs are being used appropriately versus inappropriately, or at the very least, suggesting more precision or less precision than warranted.

So blue.

Oh, and Dave has a great comment there.

Historical examined by historians using founded methods versus historic, which is like about the event itself, like it was a historic victory or something like that.

So it's interesting how we give the disciplinary nod with that AL on the adjective.


SPEAKER_04:
I was just thinking about the difference like linguistically between historic and hysteric.

Like, what might that be?

So my question, unrelated to historics and hysterics, really goes back to what Patricia was saying about the second law and touches back to what Stephen was saying earlier about the non-existence of negative entropy.

And I'm curious about that because I think, you know,

A lot of the FEP is grounded in information dynamics, which depend greatly on the existence of negative entropy, like the minimization of surprise in the terms of information theory.

So I was wondering if physics and information theory are different.

Are they one and the same?

What are the differences?

How do we clarify them?

And similarly,

you know one of the claims in the paper is to pay attention to the differences between physics and biology and and what you know i've always thought that the laws of physics are universally applicable and and perhaps um they're not but but um i i think that they should be and you know that this defiance of the second law like are do the laws of physics not apply in biology in biological systems and

Is it negative entropy that biological systems do?

I mean, Scott David always classically refers to the entropy secretion of, you know, biological systems.

And so I just was wondering, how do we reconcile these differences, maybe?

Do you guys have thoughts?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, great question.

Stephen, you want to go on that topic?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this is really good.

I think this is important because, you see,

Neg entropy kind of is a bit like negative enthalpy in the way it's formulated.

The thing is, you have a reduction only relative to a starting state, a starting equilibrium state in terms of entropy.

It might have gone down in terms of a starting state, but it's not actually lower.

Energy is energy, right?

It can't be made, can't be lost.

But the entropy, you can have a variation in the entropy.

And that variation can be noisy going up and down.

You can then extract information.

You can have things which are more ordered.

Now, that's fair enough.

You can have more order.

But negentropy isn't something which is...

a value in that way.

It's just a convenient piece of temporary mathematics to help see whether you're going to have a force driving or reducing a reaction.

So that's where the challenge is, because you're getting it from the variations, not from something which is an equilibrium state.

Because as soon as you say negentropy, it makes it sound like it's sitting there with a particular amount of entropy.

Does that make sense?

And it's not really like that.

So this is like one of the kind of misunderstandings, I think, around entropy.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, interesting.

One other view, Blue, on your question about information and thermodynamics.

we have some very slam dunk info thermo syntheses on the processor scale, like the amount of heat that is emitted or absorbed by certain very, very granular atomic in multiple senses, informational transitions.

And so it's almost like that's like the stem and we know that there is a connection there,

um either as if to be sure if not in actuality so map and territory information and thermodynamics potentially coming together and part of our curiosity and drive with active inference is whether info dynamics

might apply to higher orders of organization and whether we can use some of these models and ideas to describe informational patterns and thermodynamic eventually even bioenergetic patterns and phenomena beyond the CPU and that's where it's going to be this question of okay maybe we generalize

And it's useful, but we've lost some reality touch.

So the parameter, a temperature parameter on decision-making doesn't refer to the thermometer reading of the brain.

I think we're okay with that.

So in a way we are lifting away from the physical grounding.

because we're using terms like temperature, entropy in their information and not their physical capacity.

And as the key questions raised in this paper brought to this discussion, there are opportunities and challenges with making those kinds of generalizations.

It's not just a simple win.

it's things are gained, things are lost.

Some things come into resolution, other things become incapable of being resolved.

So that's like the, some of the excellent questions that I think the paper brings to the table.

And it combines those questions along with just

a look at the history and the development of active inference as a framework.

And so we can be clear about which papers said what, when, and then where are we headed?

What would be our preferences for a thermodynamic model of decision-making?

Will we only succeed when it's about the temperature of the brain?

might be for some person however other people might just say if there's a temperature-like parameter in the sense that that parameter's formalism looks like temperature of water in a test tube then we have something that's already useful and interesting and that's where

The train ends for me.

And then somebody else may continue to build the rails off towards wondering whether is it metaphysically a temperature of decision-making, all these other areas that people can take it.

And so it's this trade-off between realism for generality and utility that we've come to these meta modeling discussions before in number 14 and beyond.

okay um anyone wants to ask a question in the chat or raise their hand here otherwise let's see back to our dot one questions and see if there's any threads from dot one that we want to just um recap or see if we have a different perspective on and then we can just sort of close the dot two and jump off into

next steps so in dot one we started with some questions again from a more history of fep and actinf about

in what ways has physics been used to investigate the fep we talked a little bit about how the da costa paper that was 26 basie mechanics for stationary processes relates to the ergodicity stationarity discussion or not we'll see

we talked about then and also a little bit today, is the FEP a theory of life?

Well, in the conclusion, it was said to be a definition.

And we talked about some other things it could be.

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, I still have to unmute.

You'd think I would learn after all this time.


SPEAKER_08:
Never learn.

Don't change.


SPEAKER_04:
The ergodicity thing, I think maybe you guys discussed that before I got here, but I think one of the points that was made in this paper addressing the ergodicity and the fact that biological systems are, I mean, I don't think,

I don't think biological systems can be described as ergodic.

And this is a discussion that Daniel and I have had many times.

I mean, sure, within a very restricted space, like, you know, my body temperature, for example, in the range from, I mean, what can I survive, like 105 Fahrenheit, probably, and, you know, maybe 95 Fahrenheit.

So I have like this 10 degree range.

And I'm sure at some point,

in my lifetime, I'll visit all the space within that range because you can't skip over, you don't go from 96 to a hundred and skip any of the points in between.

So like, you know, it's incrementally like, of course I'll visit all of that space.

Um, and so I, I do think that that that's an important question, but, um, yeah, that, that was really, um, addressed by DaCosta in, in that, uh, 26 live stream, um, about, you

a quasi stationary because it's not perfectly stationary right it's like a it's a squishy stationary but it's not you know it doesn't it doesn't sample the entire we don't sample the entire state space of say temperature um you know as a biological system that must maintain a certain temperature so i think that that um was resolved but did you guys discuss that before i got here


SPEAKER_08:
not the boundedness per se but potentially some relevant pieces about ergodicity and stationarity um yeah so may i say something sorry that i had to turn off the video i'm with my baby here hello baby um


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I agree with you, Bloom.

I think that's one of the things that we discussed in the paper.

So it's very problematic to understand biological systems as robotic systems.

But in the discussion last week, you were saying or Maxwell was saying that new formulations of the free energy principle don't rely on that assumption, that they drop that assumption in the new formulations of the free energy principle.

And what I was saying before today is that it's still in new formulations of the free energy principle.

They rely on the existence of weekly mixing random dynamical systems.

And to my understanding, mixing systems require ergodicity anyhow.

It's not clear that they have really dropped the assumption in the new formulations.

And if so, I would like to see exactly how the framework can work without the assumption of egodicity.

I haven't seen that explicitly.

I might believe that that can be done, but I would like to see it.


SPEAKER_08:
And we don't evade requirements just by not mentioning them.

So it's about what papers do mention, as well as reading between the lines, between the formalisms, between the citations, to really what is the bedrock or tautology that the theories rest upon.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
I think this also might point to your cybernetics point, Daniel, in the sense of where does something happen at this kind of ergodic process of mixing and where may it happen through a higher level cybernetic mechanism that the organism has that is enabled by sort of ergodic

active inference or whatever processes are emerging.

But the fact that it's emerged from ergodic processes at multiple nested levels doesn't necessarily mean that some of the higher level ways of keeping something within bounds then has to follow that because it, you know, you can create a system out of all the cells that are doing their thing, so to speak.

They'll be in their thing.

So we, we, we, we, this is where it can maybe, um, be that danger that, yeah, there's an overextension of a certain process.

It's like, okay, where does something which is relying on ergodic processes, um, or some other approaches able to give way to another type of, um, control theory.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes.

And over short time horizons, is it possible to have sensory motor loops that work, whether or not some infinite case is what it rests upon?

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So, Patricia, I'm curious to know, or to know what you think about, if you've read the DaCosta paper about Bayes and Zinneri, but

Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes.

There you go.

So I'm curious to know if you've read that and what you felt was perhaps lacking from that mathematical description to meet the requirements that you were referring to for mixing systems and ergodicity.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thank you.

I did look at that, but we explicitly wanted to focus on other assumptions, not on the Bayesian assumptions of the paper.

We didn't also mention the Markov blanket assumption, which is a core assumption in the free energy principle.

And we left that out deliberately, first of all, because of lack of space.

The paper is long enough.

Second, because there is much more literature on that than on these other assumptions that we discuss in our paper.

So I think in this formulation of, well, I don't have that paper on the top of my head, but I think they, again, rely on weakly mixing dynamical systems in the paper, right?


SPEAKER_08:
They don't... We can check.


SPEAKER_01:
They use that framework.

So I think to the extent that they use that framework, if I'm not mistaken, then the same criticisms apply.

you need to find face spaces and you need the existence of attractors at least.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

I just imagine like these networks of citations, like some sort of biological metaphor, some swarm of citations with words being traced between them and connections of the words and...

i think um we're in the boutique the artisan the farmer's market phase of these kinds of analyses and there there will be a time not so far away when these questions can be resolved better blue um so yeah just like the paper aside i mean i definitely realize that there are space constraints and also like


SPEAKER_04:
what was the timing of your paper versus the DaCosta paper?

And did you have time to like incorporate all of those, the new like updated version of the maths?

So there's not weekly mixing or mixing mentioned in the DaCosta paper.

And so I really just would be curious, maybe you wanna follow up via email

To know what was missing from that formulation in your mind for it to be plausible.

Because for me, too, it was very like the foundation of the FEP existing in ergodicity or requiring ergodicity.

for applicability was very jarring.

Like I felt like that can't be right.

But I felt that it was really resolved by the DaCosta paper.

And so I'm curious if you don't feel the same way, what your hesitation would be.

So maybe we want to follow up in a .3 at some point.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, or maybe by email.

So I would definitely look at this paper and other new research because that was published this year, right?

It's very recent.

So the papers that we were focusing a little bit more on in our paper was PAR-ERAL, which is also very new, and FREESTONE 2019, this Free Energy Principle for Particle Physics.

And the other papers, we looked at them very briefly because they were actually out after our paper was accepted, or maybe during the review process.

It wasn't part of our research, systematic research, but we did take a look at them.

I think we might have even caught that paper.

But yeah, so I would like to take a look at that again.

I'm not sure whether they use, if they use the notion of information geometry, then they probably also rely on weakly dynamical systems.

But I would have to look at that again so we can continue the conversation via email.


SPEAKER_08:
counterfactual paper spaces you know you have some sort of clause that gets triggered if something happens in the literature then this paragraph should be deleted like pending a future word on this this could be deleted um in the last little bit

Maybe we can just have any thoughts.

Just why does this whole discussion matter for the FEP and for ACT-INF?

Well, the validity and the adequacy were how it was described by this paper.

Why...

it matters.

So it's kind of cool because often the citations that we discuss, they don't always lay out on the table why it matters to understand this topic.

And I think we got that very clearly from this work.

So I really appreciated that.

And it also laid out many of the next steps directly, not every next step, but the specific key themes and challenges are addressed.

And if there is a obvious or non-obvious response, that'll be a citation that somebody can swoop on.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think it's important because we are seeing a lot of interest, a huge amount of interest from in activism and embodied work and physicality and how these things can shape up.

And therefore, purely mathematical arguments will

limit things.

I think getting into the nitty-gritty of the physics, which in itself is wrestling with some of this, because it's kind of cutting edge for them in terms of that, is really important, though, I think, because you see some of the criticisms coming around in activism, trying to get a wrestle on things.

And I do think, I will say that I think

maybe sometimes saying go and visit the math, which is ultimately based on ergodicity, which is basically a physics principle as much as a math principle in terms of how that comes to be present, comes up.

So I think this is a really important area that physics and maybe the areas of applied physics start to come into.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes.

And we'll just send them on the runaround.

Okay, go to the math and then they'll go to the physics.

Okay, now to the philosophers you go and then back to another maybe non-academic department.

Is that runaround the answer?

What if there's a stationarity in the runaround?

But very good points.

It's kind of fun because we've had these questions for a long time.

If not

longest time yet many of them were explicitly addressed by this paper and by the 31 discussions uh so that's kind of cool to see like a sort of it's not a conclusion on our series but these these uh questions which are often the next step for other papers

discussed in the dot too discussed in the conclusion or the discussion that's where this work picked up and so that that's a um a different attribute than we've seen from some of the other literature we discussed um blue Dave do you have any other thoughts Patricia would you like to give any final comments


SPEAKER_01:
I think I have said, you know, unless you have a last question.


SPEAKER_08:
What papers?


SPEAKER_01:
I am a little bit of an outsider in the free energy principle, I must confess.

But

I would like to see how it progresses.

So as I said at the beginning, we are not against the free energy principle a priori.

So if our paper can lead to more research in the free energy principle direction, we would be happy and we would consider it a success.

we are not necessarily enemies of the free energy principle.

And I'm in principle very interested in the application of statistical mechanics and even the language of dynamical systems to biology.

So I am in principle interested in this type of research and also in the active inference as interdisciplinary research.

So it would be very interesting to see how this evolved.

And if we as philosophers can contribute to that by criticizing some points that we find non-rigorous enough, then our job is done.

So that's basically our goal.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks, Patricia.

Totally agree.

Hopefully we can enact the kind of dialogue at the micro, like a conversation and disciplinary or scholarly dialogue that plays out over years and

the philosophers have a very important role in that blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So what Patricia was just saying reminds me of, you know, when we discussed Mike Levin's paper in the summer, the computational boundary of a self it's, it's, you know, there's the instrumentalist view and then the realist view of,

and then the utility axis in that diagram.

And so definitely I thought that this paper was useful in provoking dialogue and really kind of, I would like to leverage your vantage point to kind of grind into some of the deeper, maybe more mathematical stuff that's kind of beyond me, because it's not really my background.

But to kind of, you know, dig into that hole and make sure that there's a solid foundation under the hole, or is it a hole that pokes all the way through and leads to nothing on the other end?

So I think, you know, it's useful for getting at those questions.


SPEAKER_08:
My last question, Patricia, would be what...

areas of literature or papers might you recommend that we dive into so that we can have a comprehensive view and know where we're coming from and where we're going?


SPEAKER_01:
I can mention many, many papers.

I can do that better by email again.

So if you're interested in literature and some specific

uh research or topic just send me an email and i can recommend philosophical literature but i would like to especially recommend one paper so i can choose and i don't know the title right hopefully but it's it's a paper by karim tibo who is called something about imperialism and migration so i can look at that now

because it really, it's a very general paper in philosophy of science where they draw a very nice distinction between migration of models and imperialism of models that I think will be also useful in the interdisciplinary research that you are doing because they stress the difference about using the methods or exporting the methods from one discipline to the other

in a non-imperialist way, which would imply that in the new discipline you have to justify the model, you have to justify the mathematical methods.

That's the one, models on the move, migration imperialism, brilliant.

And they distinguish between that, what they call migration of models, from imperialism, in which you just extrapolate the same models from one discipline to the other, and you try to expand your discipline, which would be sort of the attitude that was illustrated in the comics that you were discussing last week.

So I think that paper is especially useful for people doing interdisciplinary research because it's a very useful distinction.

This model is on the move.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks for the awesome suggestion.

So just to the point about

emails or however it goes just consider the dialogue opened we really appreciate that both of you came to discuss and also interacted with the dot zero and dot one videos so just awesome work with uh research and thanks again for helping our lab do what it does and this is also an excellent suggestion

because it's a provocative title but we're talking about provocative ideas and with broad scope and this kind of takes that map territory discussion to a new place potentially talking about movement and imperialism and

colonization, all these other things that come up in different terms, but we've noted this in our upcoming streams calendar.

So after our lab meeting next week, we'll have stochastic chaos and Markov blankets.

So that will compliment some of the things that we didn't talk about in 31.

We'll talk in 33, thinking like a state with Avel, AKA Serval.

And then we have two more slots open.

So perhaps we'll select one of these that we've already listed, or perhaps somebody wants to join if an author wants to discuss.

And other than that,

think that brings us to a close today so again big appreciation to the authors for their work and engagement with the lab and thanks steven dave and blue and everyone else who participated and maxwell for joining the dot one so good times and we will see you next time thank you thank you very much bye