## 1FbOzAJ8CRQ

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

This is Active Inference live stream number 19.0 on April 1st, 2021.

welcome to the active inference lab we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at our links here this is a recorded and archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams as outlined in this checklist

this is the schedule that we've had so far for 2021 and the upcoming two discussions on april 6th and the 13th will be number 19.1.2 on this paper that we're going to be discussing today

So right now in 19.0, the goal is to set the context and give a little background for 19.1 and 19.2 and people who are just learning about the paper, which is Deeply Felt Affect the Emergence of Valence in Deep Active Inference by Hesp, Smith, Parr, Allen, Fristen, and Ramstead in 2021.

And this video is definitely just an introduction to the ideas.

It's meant to be a two-way on-off ramp from Active Inference, so exposing the Active Inference community to ideas outside of Active Inference and people who might be interested in some of the bigger ideas, connecting them to the Active Inference implementations.

And we have a bunch of sections planned for today in 19.

So thanks a lot to Stephen and to Blue for helping with the slides and for coming on today.

So maybe we can just introduce ourselves briefly and then we can go on to the rest of the slides we have prepared.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a postdoc in California and I'll pass to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Steven.

I'm in Toronto.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD around social topographies and community-based development.

And I'll pass it over to Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Blue Knight.

I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, I think this was a fun paper for us to read and we can just go right into what were some of the big points of the paper and the background ideas before we go through the figure and the model, which will take up a lot of the time.

The paper is called Deeply Felt Affect, the Emergent Surveillance and Deep Active Inference.

And it was published in the journal Neural Computation in 2021.

And so I'll read the first one and then either of you can give a thought on that.

In this letter, meaning paper,

We demonstrate that hierarchical, deep Bayesian networks solved using active inference afford a principled formulation of emotional valence, building on both the work mentioned above as well as prior work on other emotional phenomena within the active inference framework.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so that's just given us that insight into this idea of valence.

So we'll be speaking about that more, but that's an important part of this paper.

I'll say the next one.

Our hypothesis is that emotional valence can be formalized as a state of self that is inferred on the basis of fluctuations in the estimated confidence or precision an agent has in...

her generative model of the world that informs her decisions.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So we're going to be connecting some of the decision-making aspects of agents and inference aspects of agents to emotional valence, and they're going to demonstrate it.

So those are the goals and the claims that they set out in the paper.

Any thoughts, Blue, or do you want to go to big questions and maybe introduce a big question?


SPEAKER_02:
I'll introduce the big questions.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
So the big questions of this paper were, how can we make more active inference models or agents that are expressive, powerful, realistic, and interpretable?

What are the implications of this?

Active inference formalizes our survival and procreation in terms of a single imperative to minimize the divergence between observed outcomes and phenotypically expected, i.e.

preferred outcomes under a generative model that is fine-tuned over phylogeny and ontogeny.

Thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_00:
The first one, this to me is about just developing the active inference framework to capture more of the patterns that we see in nature or in designed systems.

So how do we make systems that plan for multiple time steps?

That's deep active inference.

How do we make agents that interface with the environment?

So that's sort of a big move overall.

and then this is going to be zooming in on the valence and some of those affective aspects that's on the first point and then the second this is a quote from the paper and it says something that active inference does it formalizes

survival and procreation not in terms of evolutionary fitness again you could agree or disagree with the authors or think it's consistent with fitness or not but claiming that the imperative is to minimize a specific kind of a divergence and so what are the implications of that if you think okay well if that's the imperative then where's the situation where we've been acting like there's a different imperative and is that consistent or inconsistent with

um this and then the last quote and then someone could give a thought is a quote where they say we conclude with a discussion of the implications of this work such as the relationship between implicit metacognition and affect connections to reinforcement learning and future empirical directions so what does active inference or this model say about cognition or metacognition and reinforcement learning


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, if I could add something.

I think it really opens up a lot of the philosophical questions and starts to give a modelling interpretation.

So how the body comes in, so the emotion starts to tie in

to a way that the body comes in and inactive inference starts to become modelable.

And it starts to also show how affect is somehow connected to all cognition.

and all processes so it's not some weird artifact of shame which might be more of a freudian trap but it's actually an integration of the cybernetic process all the way through in some way


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.

It's also captured a little bit on this slide, which is recycled from some 2020 vintage Act-Inf, which is asking about how Active Inference is going to be saying something about the relationship between agents in the world.

And we're imagining an agent, not a one-step tic-tac-toe player, but we're thinking about an agent that's imagining through deep time

and they have imagination or the capacity to simulate.

And then they have affect, and they can also predict their affect and have precision and so on.

So here's sort of the drama masks for the positive and negative affect.

And then there's sort of different world trajectories that are being estimated through time that lead to positive or negative sentiment.

And that gets around some of the sort of basic considerations.

Like in the paper, they say, well, wouldn't the agent, as they meet their demise, wouldn't they have precision over their sensory states?

And the answer is like, yes, but it's not part of a long-term trajectory that involves desired preferences.

So by appealing to model nesting, some of the sort of single-layer

not paradoxes, but just scenarios that models might fall into, like always going with what was known before, never going what was known before.

These can be resolved just with empirical modeling.


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
One reason why it matters and we'll come back to this when we quote the authors later, is that these kinds of richer models lead more closely to experimentally tractable and unique predictions of active inference.

because if the only thing the model predicts is the reaction time, that might fit the distribution better than some other model.

Now if it can also fit the reaction time and the EEG and also the self-report, it's starting to become a very rich multimodal and multi-measurement way of talking about behavior, which is what a good instrument should do.

so this is helping us come closer through these contact points with other big important areas of research like reinforcement learning and autonomous computer agents and just inference agents of all kinds especially ones with action but then maybe some of these other areas that we'll bring into the discussion because if we can have a scale free framework that does apply to cognitive agents

and then we frame it in terms of the input and the output and the actions and the policy, the generative model, all of these terms, maybe some of these other systems like online teams might be able to also be said to have at least computationally affective charge or precision or different things like that.

So we kind of talked a little bit about that in our 2020 paper for online teams.

Any thoughts on sort of the bigger topics that this paper is up against before we jump into the abstract and the figures and everything?


SPEAKER_01:
If I could just say one thing I think that's very interesting is that it opens up the realities of trying to bring in the mind, the body, and the environment.

And there's been this question, well, how do you do that?

And why didn't we do that before?

It was partly because we wanted to be able to measure things and lock things down.

And the question of how do you bring this whole dynamic in, how could you possibly

get a handle on all of that well emotion seems to actually make a lot of sense in terms of or let's say valence should say valence more broadly makes sense in terms of how it could be calibrated

um, the more conscious levels of that process.

Um, so I think that has implications for scaling psychology, um, and bringing consciousness back into psychology, um, and helping to really move into a ecological and ecosystem approach to psychology.


SPEAKER_00:
Lou, any thoughts or do you want to start with the first part of the abstract?


SPEAKER_02:
I'll hold my thoughts.

I have some, but I don't want to ruin the surprise of the paper, so let's start off on the abstract.


SPEAKER_00:
Agreed.

Fun times.

All right.

Does anyone want to start with the first part of the abstract?


SPEAKER_02:
I'll take it.

Yep.

The positive-negative axis of emotional valence has long been recognized as fundamental to adaptive behavior, but its origin and underlying function have largely eluded formal theorizing and computational modeling.

Using deep active inference, a hierarchical inference scheme that rests on inverting a model of how sensory data are generated, we developed a principle Bayesian model of emotional valence.

This formulation asserts that agents in further valence state based on the expected precision of their action model, an internal estimate of overall model fitness, which the authors term subjective fitness.

This index of subjective fitness can be estimated within any environment and exploit the domain general generality of sorry, my screen is in the way.

Second order beliefs, which are beliefs about beliefs there.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

So in this first part of the abstract, kind of priming what this whole research agenda is about, I'm seeing a few threads.

One is about fitting good models, overall model fitness, especially with a subjective twist.

So that's another kind of a bonus that it's actually not just objective model fitness, it's subjective.

So it's about good fitting models with this

recognition that that's like personalized okay so that's cool thread then there's the first words which are about the positive and negative aspect of emotional valence which is despite the richness and the amount of experiences and all the diversity of altered states of consciousness and adjectives there's also kind of this um approach versus recede binary

And this is, as they're saying, it's fundamental.

And we see it in living forms like go-no-go signaling, and we also see it in computational agents.

And so this is putting a lot of different kinds of systems that have very nuanced maybe behavior in their outputs, but at a top level, they act as if they have a sort of go-no-go

that in a way helps them be adaptive in their own niche.

And then the way that they're gonna go about that is actually with a second level or second order cybernetics model, which is by enabling belief about belief, maybe some of these gaps between systems can be bridged.

So interesting research questions that are not always brought out because the abstract is so reduced and they have to say what they did do.

But for those who are interested in those questions, that's good to know.

I'll read this one and then anyone can give a thought.

We show how maintaining internal valence representations allow the ensuing effective agents to optimize confidence in action selection preemptively.

Valence representations can in turn be optimized by leveraging the Bayes optimal updating term for subjective fitness, which we label affective charge or AC.

AC tracks changes in fitness estimates and lends a sign to otherwise unsigned divergences between predictions and outcomes.

that's pretty interesting we simulate the resulting affective inference by subjecting an in silico in the computer affective agent to a teammates paradigm requiring context learning followed by context reversal this formulation of affective inference offers a principled account of the link between affect mental action and implicit metacognition it characterizes how a deep biological system can refer its affective state to


SPEAKER_02:
and reduce uncertainty about such inferences through internal action i.e top-down modulation of priors that underwrite confidence so this for me like was a big surprise of the paper like the the valence and um the relationship with valence and subjective fitness so or precision accuracy this was just a really different take like compared to the last

paper that we did just like on valence was very much like positive or negative in terms of like feeling or emotion, where this is like really positive or negative, just based on like surprise, essentially like what, if my model doesn't match my expectations, like, or the outcomes, if my expectations don't match my outcomes, that is negative valence, which that was a kind of surprising take on this for me, compared to the last valence paper that we did.

And the other thing is really this,

The way that they've modeled this is totally like a perfect example, as they talk about in the discussion of the Bayesian brain and why Bayesian statistics and updating, like, especially when they talk, well, I'll hold my thought for them for that time.

But really, this was just an exemplary paper for that for me.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

Yeah.

one one thing that came up for me there is it talks about you know representations again and those so this idea that internal valence representation so suddenly we've got a way to bring representations back into um what had become quite a non-representational

modeling approach and that's really interesting because it's like normally you think of representations previously like the most concrete is the thought then there's the body and there was this fuzzy thing called emotions which somehow was there and axiology and all this stuff but now it's like well wait you've got an internal valence representation which could inform the body and the cybernetic

thinking metacognition process.

So it gives a way in for representations, but it's not representations as we normally maybe approach that term.

So that's quite cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

All right.

Third abstract, who would like to read it?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, I'll read this one.

Thus, we demonstrate the potential of active inference to provide a formal and computationally tractable account of affect.

Our demonstration of the face validity and potential utility of this formulation represents the first step within a larger research program.

Next, this model can be leveraged to test the hypothesized role of valence by fitting the model to behavioral and neuronal responses.


SPEAKER_00:
nice so they set up the problem by being about using higher order cognition this second level modeling to approach some of the interesting dynamics of agents like their apparent affective charge influencing their behavioral decisions in the present moment based upon inference about the future

and they're going to demonstrate a simulation there's going to be kind of a model layer and then there's going to be a simulation that goes down into the team maze and a mouse and so there's sort of two levels of generality that we're going to go through here they start the paper with the qualitative but still rigorous level of generality which is just talking about

action in different systems and multi-scale biology and the need to integrate bayesian approaches into how we think about evolution and development ecology and so on

And then they turn directly to the methods and perform this four-step walkthrough that will be somewhat familiar to those who have seen Model Stream 1 with Ryan Smith and Christopher White, where they also step through the construction of this model, but it's something that, as we'll probably see soon, it's just always worth it to kind of build up this model incrementally.

Then they...

with this implicit metacognitive model at step four of their models elaboration they discuss a few kinds of important key terms that are like bridges between previous computational psychological models and their active inference model and then they implement a simulation with a rat in a team base

which we'll discuss as well.

And then they bring up all these very interesting questions towards the discussion section of the paper, some of which we've excerpted and conclude with a discussion on the future empirical directions.

So before we go into the affect and valence model simulation implications, any thoughts on the roadmap?

All right, let's go to affect and valence.

This is quoting from their paper.

So definitely read it to see everything that they say, but they refer to classical constructs of valence.

So maybe here just representing the classical valence construct on a kind of clock chart.

What would either of you think or say about valence or what motivates the study of valence this way or overall?


SPEAKER_02:
So I just had a comment and it's based on something that the authors had said about valence.

So here we've got the arousal and like high and low arousal on one axis and positive and negative on the other axis.

But the authors had mentioned that some people see valence as like an array of positive, like it's a positive and negative are two separate axes of valence.

And I thought that that was very interesting.

Whereas it's not a binary choice, positive and negative, but there's a range of positive and there's a range of negative and ambivalence contains some degree of both.

I thought that that was an interesting take on valence.

Not something I've thought about before.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And they bring up good scholarship with bringing up a unidimensional view.

So that would be like, yes, there's like a thermometer and it's kind of just like it goes up or down.

It's a number that has to be strictly ordered and less than and greater than, maybe even linearly correlated with a hormone or a chemical or a neural firing in some region or a pattern of activity.

Then maybe there's multiple dimensions.

Maybe there's like...

As here, high to low arousal and high to low valence, positive, negative.

Maybe it's multidimensional.

So what's cool about the active inference framework is we could test the computational roles of these kinds of variables and ask, okay, this is fitting the data better, but is it...

more parameters, is this worth the trade-off that we're getting here?

So we're kind of taking this single dimensional model and thinking about it with a family of other models where we could test the influence of other factors and see if such patterns are detectable in the data or ask what kind of behavioral settings or groups or questionnaires or whatever it might be would elicit a differentiation on another hypothesized axis.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and just one thing that goes with that is it sort of shows you the current ways to get at this is kind of through self-reported emotions and using this kind of graph.

And I actually have used this tool with our community with disabilities for reporting back on their experiences.

But you're essentially still getting this emotion as a self-report and trying to track back using sort of assumptions about how that plots with other self-reported emotions.

And this is also used a lot in market research for marketing and advertising, this tool.

But actually in...

This approach here, they've got a way to access this without just getting self-reported words.

So this, I think, shows how it has, you know, this is an area that's got a lot of application potentially.

Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Here is a slide just upon differentiation in English between affect and effect.

So not to split hairs or to introduce words that they didn't use in the paper like effect.

But what would be the point on this, Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, you've got, just to give the sense that it is often confusing, those two terms.

So if we have the person, these two people on the left, so you've got the person X's experiences and effect at some sort of...

you know, relationship to person Y and it's, it's created some affect.

Now that could be anger if it was reported later and they said, what was their emotional state?

And this affect contributes to a policy selection where person X interacts with person Y and pushes them into the pool.

So you can see that.

Okay.

So that, that, um, the effect of this

is that that person winds up in the pool.

So there's an act and there's a cause-effect type of linear type of mechanical action that happens.

And of course, then there can be additional affects on both the parties and effect.

resulting from this, particularly if the person was to drown or something, depending on the scenario.

So I think it shows that there's a kind of, one's more dynamical and relational, and one is more objective, I suppose you could say, and cause and effect related.


SPEAKER_00:
Sounds good.

And here was from a previous discussion, I think number 11, where we talked also about affect and about trajectories through affect space.

So whether or not it's like how things quote really are, it might be a behavioral index or summary statistics of someone's online activity, even if you're not directly measuring them or getting their self-report, and there can be trajectories through this space.

Now, one

topic that um a sort of detail that's a little bit special for active inference that doesn't get emphasized a ton is that basically the certainty in the model is one and the same thing as having better affect better affective charge increasing certainty and high certainty in the model are taking the place in a reward centric of highest expected for example value and it's one major difference between

active inference approach to thinking about economics or decision-making versus a sort of just like classical maximum likelihood reward maximization.

So in these active inference frameworks, they're not modeling a happy to sad variable.

and calling that affective charge.

They're actually modeling a precision variable and then saying that when things are more precise and are getting more precise, there is low negative affect.

So it's kind of like positive.

And then anxiety, like negative affect, arises as a function of uncertainty in the model.

And here's just some words and some thoughts that we had put on anxiety from a previous one.

But any thoughts on this about this sort of integration of valence and certainty rather than valence and expected average?

What that means or how that's different than other models that others have seen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, well, I think that does have quite important implications because it's now prospective.

It's kind of what was the contextual expectation on where things would go as opposed to just it being this kind of static

expectation on the moment itself and it's all collapsed down into sort of some sort of reductive there's the idea that there's the person's valence is dynamic in relation to you know their expectation but then there's also the precision at which that expectation then resolved or didn't resolve you know so you may expect things to go badly

and then things went worse than you expected, or it went better than you expected, but it still might have gone badly, but it didn't go as bad.

So it gives you that much more, well, I don't know, I wouldn't use the word realistic.

I don't know what term you'd use for that, Daniel, but yeah, that question.

Cool.

Luke?


SPEAKER_02:
So I can't remember which paper it was exactly, but it was talking about anxiety.

It was one that we did on the live stream talking about anxiety as like a fixation on the future, right?

And it talks about depression as a fixation on the past.

Wasn't the big five, I feel like it was the big five paper, but that is just an interesting and kind of different perspective on anxiety as relative to the valence that's presented here.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And the question of how to map model parameters to experiences that we have, which are encultured and which are relating to our individual kind of qualia, that's a big jump too.

So we shouldn't just instantly also paper over the computational psychiatric gap, but that's what we're gonna unpack is what does the model really say?

And then what is that gonna help us do or rethink?

One note is that they wrote that they are referring to their model, distincting it from just sort of active inference more broadly as affective inference, because it sort of has the active in there, but it also has affect in there.

And they're saying there's what makes it different than just general active inference.

And one attribute that they apply here is deep.

So that's meaning deep through time or potentially also using deep learning, like deep neural network approaches.

We had, I think, Christopher White or someone, it all blurs together, but somebody gave a few senses of deep active inference.

And then they're also modeling affect.

And so that's why they call it affective inference.

So it's deep affective inference.

So if you know what active inference kind of is about, they're taking that skeletal framework and extending it through time and adding an affective parameter or set of interacting variables.

Way to think about and model the kinds of things that people study affect in.

That's what they want to study with this new development.

So that's kind of what

think they're doing in this paper and um it's also a little more general than just affect because as they say it can generalize to potentially other higher level explanations for conditional dependencies between higher level parameters and how they reflect

behavioral outcomes so that's a pretty general statement that's very important though it's saying that it could be possible to have other higher hidden states that cognitive ideas let's say and those don't have to be just the positive or negative approach or recede that they model here it could be something that's a lot more subtle or symbolic or categorical rather than this is more of like foraging go no go so this is a initial foray into this kind of

deep and hyperparameter reaching back down affective in that sense.

And it's tied to the affect rather than to the, for example, cognitive work.

But it's, as they say, implicitly metacognitive.

And Stephen, as you said, it's not that affect is latent, latent, latent, and then like strikes into the scene.

It's actually that there's this sort of fundamental cybernetic role for affect regulation.

So it's not a red flag mode that is explosive or something.

It's something that's intrinsic like metabolism.

okay they uh bring up a lot of previous work and some limitations of the model so check out the paper more if you want to learn about for example if you think well that's a very narrow uh model definition of valence they might bring it up in their paper so check that out but let's just get right into what the model is and

there's gonna be sort of two acts coming up here.

There's gonna be the model, which is just the mathematics of what they lay out and the formulas they lay out.

And then we're gonna go into the simulation with the mouse or the rat or the ant or whatever in the team mates.

So the first is gonna be general.

And the second is gonna go into a simulation that they're gonna get results from as well.

So we're gonna walk through kind of four clicks in the elaboration incrementally as they write.

on an active inference model, okay?

So fun stuff.

Thanks everyone also for joining live.

So here we are in figure one.

Who would like to go first?

Maybe Blue, you annotated this really well.

So what did you see in figure one with model one and model two?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So model one is the generative model of perception, which we've seen before, where S is hidden state.

O stands for observations.

D is prior belief.

A is this likelihood mapping or like a probability distribution.

And then tau is time.

which we've seen before.

So in M1, there's no time.

This is the first step of a generative model and it's just perception.

So it's like sensory input and the posterior over hidden states is all that's really taken into the model of perception.

And then the M2, so as the models, as we go through these M1, M2, M3 and M4 in the next few slides, there's an increasing layer of complexity as we transition from M1 to M2 to M3 and then M4, with M4 being the most complex.

And so in M2, which is the generative model of anticipation, the idea of perception is then extended forward and backward into the past, if you want to go there, using a transition matrix, which is this b sub t, to represent the hidden state.

So it's just an extension of perception, essentially, and it includes anticipation, what you expect to happen, as opposed to just the sensory input, which is just what's present in M1.

So it's anticipating hidden states over time, M2.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Awesome.

Good explanation.

And we can look at some of their... Anything else to add, actually, or ask here, Stephen, on Figure 1?


SPEAKER_01:
That was really helpful.

I mean, the only thing I might add is, as you were mentioning that, is it's almost like the predicted input in that funny sort of way.

It's like, so what's the predictions of what the sensory input is if I could sort of somehow infer that?

And that's that dynamical.

So I think this is really helpful, though, to go through it this way.


SPEAKER_00:
yep and to give a note on that a lot of times when people think statistics they think descriptive statistics like we're going to take the big data set the big you know image data set and we're going to describe it with a summary statistic and that does map onto this topology like observations get mapped through likelihood onto the most optimal state of the world

But where generative Bayesian modeling comes into play is that that model that's inferred, that hidden state, what is the real temperature?

Or what is the real average height of the classroom?

It can also be used to generate and to combine with other models to generate testable distinctions.

It can generate data.

And then this duality where you can take a little bit or a ton of data and then update your prior,

already using the Bayesian terminology and then use those prior estimates to generate more data, that is like expectation maximization or EM optimization or the parametric empirical Bayes approach.

So it's not just taking big data and crunching it into a regression coordinate and saying, all right, we found the most likely one, it's done.

This is actually a framework that allows us to bounce back and forth between summaries of big data

and the actual large observations themselves.

And then here you can think of the prediction is on a single observation with a single hidden state.

And here it's like getting a vector through time.

Then you can imagine that it would be more dimensions, but this is just the skeleton.

So let's keep on walking through.

Yep.


SPEAKER_02:
Let me interject here really quick.

Sorry.

So can you scroll back?

There we go.

I love this, what the authors, how they describe perception.

I thought it was very clear.

They said perception corresponds to a process of inferring which hidden states or posterior expectations provide the best explanation for the observed outcomes.

I thought that that was very clear.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And the softmax is the sigma, and that's just saying it's like a decision-making criterion function.

But we can also ask the authors more because that's sort of a machine learning term.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Actually, just one very quick thing on that as well.

I like what Blue's just said there as well is by bringing it on the outcomes as opposed to that outcomes brings in action.

So you...

Because it's like the perception, it's not what the data is telling me, it's also the outcomes of what happened in the world with the body.

And that is really quite, I don't know if that's been so easy to bring in before in the language.

So I thought that's quite interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And we're going to bring policy in in a second.

But for now, you're right.

We have the difference between the outcomes and the hidden states.

Is it raining or not?

That's the hidden state.

And then is my shirt wet or not?

That's the sensory state.

Or why is my shirt wet, right?

Why is my shirt wet?

yeah exactly but we haven't gotten to this policy level which is should i go outside so table one is just describing in a little bit more detail the p and the q distributions that they use um in their figure one for this like basic level and that uh comports their math with just the broader modeling bayesian statistics

letters used although the a b c d are sort of specific for active so let's go from that uh m2 model and bring in policy so this is m3 model this is the next click that actually gets us to the first thing that looks more like a real active inference model beyond just a bayesian time series approach so maybe blue go for it again with what you would say for m3


SPEAKER_02:
So for M3, this is the third step, and this is the generative model of action.

So here it's inferring phenotype congruent policies from all of the terms that we had talked about in M1 and M2, and then this brings in policies, which that's pi policies, and then E sub pi is the baseline prior over the policies, and G sub pi is expected free energy.

C is phenotype congruent preferences.

And then F sub pi is the variational free energy conditioned on a policy.

So the policies are here, already here.

And we just have these M2 is what's perceived over hidden states based on perception M1.

So this is kind of just adding that extra layer, including policy into the action model.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.


SPEAKER_02:
So it says here, posterior policy beliefs are informed by the fit between anticipated and preferred outcomes, while at the same time minimizing their ambiguity.

So to minimize that.


SPEAKER_00:
So nice.

Thanks for this.

A connection between variables in this kind of a graph represents them having like a statistical dependency.

So we can look at pi, which is policy, and then ask, okay, so we had M2.

which was this time series that looked kind of like a, I don't know, like a rake or something, or a horse.

And then policy, Pi, gets linked in, not directly with the thumb on the scale influencing the hidden state,

but actually influencing B sub T, which is the transition matrix through time of that hidden state.

So one thing, because there's no pi onto the hidden state, you can't have policy at a snapshot, like timeless policy.

All policy is intrinsically related to the movement of time because it's hitting the B matrix, not because it's not plugging into a hidden state directly.

So you're always talking about a temporal model, just how deep are you talking?

And then it also conditions the estimate of how the hidden state evolves.

That's what that vertical line, like given, you know, A given B. So this is, we're going to do the time series.

How much Bitcoin will I have under the policy of not acquiring any?

Zero.

Easy estimate.

Easy heuristic.

So then those kinds of conditionalized conditions

estimates of different kinds of things can help agents act in the world so that's why policy is interesting to think about and so instead of thinking about how to optimize a massively complicated scheme for maximizing utility with an unknown variability this is allowing the agent to model how one is embedded in hidden states estimate or changing through time

So that's the pie part.

And then also this is kind of explore exploit.

So minimizing the ambiguity is one imperative, but also you want it to be fitting the whole time.

Like I want my shoe to fit, but I also wanna figure out where it doesn't fit, but I need to be walking the whole time.

And so by keeping a bunch of these features

linked in the model the dials at least exist to modulate in really creative ways like e is this baseline prior and so you could modulate it so that the prior is relatively unperturbed by sensory outcomes or you could make it very sensitive to specific kinds of sensory outcomes so this is again like a modeling skeleton

that potentially could be used to evaluate how different sorts of behavioral phenomena, like approach and proceed or something like that, or freeze, whatever it happens to be, might be linked by the organism seeking precision on an estimate of how things are going to change in the niche given its policy.

So of course there's a lot to say because it's kind of an interesting area, but that's just the third level.

So we're integrating policy decision into how states are changing through time.

And then policy decision is the interaction of several variables, the baseline prior, like the affordances, the habit, as some have said it here.

And then C, the preferences, phenotype congruent is like if I'm a shoe size 10, I want a shoe size 10.

Then if you have a phenotypic preference that's different than what your actual niche or needs are, then it will be ill fit.

So you won't be fit for your niche.

So then the niche will be filled by those that are fit to it.

then f of pi is similar like it's um calculating variational free energy which we can definitely ask the authors more about and see how that is related to calculation on a specific policy you know yeah okay any thoughts either of you


SPEAKER_01:
Well, just one thing I think is quite helpful as well is they call that perceptual evidence, the variational free energy conditioned on a policy.

So it's like and then that gives you the sort of perceptual evidence and then the actual action model, which is kind of like the expected free energy.

And that helps sort of.

um show how free energy is coming in at this kind of larger time scale and i suppose one thing just to mention to the viewers there is a whole load of nested free energy processes going into all of this process but at this scale that we're talking about it's so that we can understand in terms of policies that we're trying to understand


SPEAKER_00:
Sounds good.


SPEAKER_02:
And so I want to add to your like shoe thing here.

You know, anyone who has small children knows that their feet grow very fast.

Right.

So when we're talking about the action model, expected free energy, it's the expected free energy because I don't like the actual free energy can't really be measured in this situation.

So we're dealing with expectation.

So there's this phenotypic risk component on the left side of the equation.

Like how much money am I going to

spend on these shoes and minus the the perceptual ambiguity like i think uh my kid is a size 13 but they might be a one or two how expensive are these shoes do i want to buy shoes that fit them right now or do i want to buy shoes that they can wear two pairs of socks with and wear for a little while so you're always weighing out this this risk and the ambiguity that that occurs


SPEAKER_00:
okay in that specific example the specific policies are like okay i could ever measure the field every day and that's my sensory outcome the hidden state is the true size of the foot and then every day my policy could be if they're in a new shoe size we change that day another policy with a different trade-off structure different measurement requirements might be every two shoe sizes another one might be when the perceived ill fitness

is too high, the squeaky wheel gets the grease, then we have an action oriented response policy.

And I'm going to be thinking about all the outcomes in this model and about the certainty on it.

So nice.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, it also relates to when my daughter has a big toe starts to get sore.

That's my perceptual evidence.

It's like, okay, it's like, that shoes rubbing a bit now.

So yeah, at some point, I've got to make a choice.

So that's a good that's a good example, actually.


SPEAKER_00:
it's an error signal that it's ill fit and so the policy and that's a niche modification with a shoe um but it's a similar idea so table three kind of goes through m3 in a little bit more detail and that brings us to figure three which is the fourth click

of the active inference kind of chain here, and it adds just two more letters.

It's mostly the same as figure two, like the C, G, and the E, which connect at pi.

That was my mistake in the 18.2, and I connected the E to the G instead of the E to the pi.

They're connected though at the Pi as shown here.

The CG and E are now in M3 with a blue box.

And then M4, one more dependency is being clicked in here, which is gamma.

which is being clicked to G. So gamma is now an input to a bigger G function.

So the G is a function which you could input just a number, you could input a few, depends on how you write it.

So this is a slightly more expressive G function.

because it includes this precision variable.

And gamma and B are kind of like one over each other.

The reason why it's kind of like when people take logs or do one over or negative this, it's just sometimes you want to get the most of something, but it's easier to frame it as getting the least of something or vice versa.

But what this gamma represents is the expected precision because this is kind of certainty, so this one is uncertainty.

So what would either you say about this final click to M for blue or stupid?


SPEAKER_02:
So this is so this is so fun.

So the gamma is like, how much did that shoe not fit?

And the beta is like, how fast are their feet growing?

So I think that that's the I mean, I guess beta doesn't take into consideration time, but it was it was described as a rate.

It was described as a rate.

So maybe it does include time.

I'm not sure.


SPEAKER_00:
I don't want to go too far down the rabbit hole with the shoes, but it's almost like there's more precise shoes.

Like, you can be more precise with a steel toe, and then you can have the more stretchy... No, no, no.

No one take this too seriously.

It's about what it actually does say, which is basically the precision, which is the expected precision is in the Gamma.

so that the uncertainty can be yeah in the b and this figure three the reason why they even went to this level of incrementing it out first off is to show us level by level how we're building on okay it's about a time series that's being predicted through time of sensory outcomes that are like generated from an underlying time series of hidden states

vis-a-vis a likelihood mapping and a transition matrix.

And that's getting played into by priors at that S1 level, at the first state level.

And then there's policy.

That's the whole cybernetics control theory.

And then this is the machinery of the decision-making.

And now we're just adding one more level, which is the implicit metacognition.

So now we're adding this implicit kind of always on, always being integrated into the model.

Again, not a disaster mode, recovery mode for the otherwise non-affective agent, but it's an affective agent whose implicit metacognition

its kind of key regulator here is related to its certitude not the thermometers tracking the average of um its its returns on investment or its average estimate but its uncertainty in its generative model so that's what we get to with their figure three with a fourth click


SPEAKER_02:
So wait, wait, I think we need to talk about here, because it's the first time that it comes up, is their affective charge here.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yes.


SPEAKER_02:
So in this model, which also M4 really is the top level illustrating the hierarchical...

hierarchical nature or the nested nature of how this model is is normally and then in the effective charge it's it's described here as phenotypic pro phenotypic progress which is the policy in the prior minus the policy in the posterior and then the free the free energy of the

Prior, posterior, minus the prior.

Wait, no, I said that wrong.

Prior minus the posterior.

There it is.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Here it is in table four.

Perfect.

So let's look at what they say.

So expected precision is gamma.

Okay.

Looks like a little dart.

Gamma, precision.

You want more precision in an optimistic world model.

And policy, pi.

Okay.

And it turns out that gamma, the expected precision, is one over a gamma distribution of,

that's going to be the beta.

And that's just going to be a statistical distribution that plays nicely with statistics, just like you see, like natural log, like the gamma, the normal.

These are tools that statisticians use.

And so they kind of

work here but we can ask the authors to what extent does it have to be this way but anyways gamma is the expected precision so gamma and beta we can kind of think about them as like linked because again they're one over each other so wherever you see a gamma or beta it could just be replaced with the other one and affective charge is being um defined as yeah the the uh change in the policy multiplied by the free energy of that policy

So not just if it's good, but unchanging, then this is gonna cancel out.

So the phenotypic progress is low.

If you expect the 10 Bitcoin and you see them and you're not changing your policy,

in this formulation that's why we don't need to tie it too closely to a specific emotional experiences because those are going to always be super subjective and require a ton more specification but we're just kind of broadly calling this ac variable something that's related to both the way that the phenotype is changing the policy is changing and the way that the free energy estimating of that policy is changing


SPEAKER_02:
But there's something important to note in that equation is if the policy doesn't change, then the affective charge is zero.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

And let's, again, let's have the authors give us the authoritative information on how to read some of these terms.

But here is what they said about that step four.

The fourth level, which is again this gamma precision, is required to enable the agent to estimate its own success, which could be thought of a minimal form of implicit non-reportable metacognition.

So even to be able to semantically express metacognition, like I am unsure, that sentence

is many levels or another level away from just this precision variable which is like an in it doesn't have a self-report circuit this is just like a model that has an error term that it's updating at a slightly higher level than just the likelihood mapping and um the expected precision term that's gamma reflects prior confidence in the expected free energy over policies

The expected precision term modulates the influence of expected free energy on policy selection relative to the fixed form policy prior E sub pi, which is the habits or the prior.

So it's kind of like, should I fall back to priors or should I...

go with what the g function lean into what my g is telling me then um yeah formulated this way we can think of of gamma the precision as an internal estimate of model fitness subjective fitness so higher precision my internal model is doing better lower precision my internal model is doing relatively worse than it could be

It represents an estimate of confidence in M4, that fourth click, in the phenotype congruent model of actions, given the inferred hidden states of the environment.

So they kind of tessellate it back out there.

They're saying it's about those outcomes

and about what generates them and how those change and how our policies play into it.

And it's about how certain we are in that generative model.

And there's a lot of ways the environment can change.

So if we're getting good data from our observation, then we should be reasonably confident with staying with what works to some extent.

But if that should change, there should be another mode that allows us to rebalance

preferences, affordances, and integrate that in a different way, in a different allocation to our policies.

And then to emphasize its relation to valence in our formulation, remember valence is like feeling good or bad, positive, negative.

Going forward, we refer to gamma updates using this term affective charge.

So here's AC, affective charge, is change in beta, aka change in gamma, in just another way of saying it.

It's change in precision.

then you can imagine if if the precision goes up it's going to be good precision going down bad and flip it for the one over or however it ends up being written but that's what it's getting at when the precision is going up as new data are coming in like they're you know i'm thinking of a slot machine and then it's like oh you won something and now the second digit is going to spin

So there's both an increase in charge and then that like kind of restabilizes.

And now it's about whether that changes again, whether the second digit is better.

And so that is how affective charge is being tracked through time with these gamma updates.

Okay.

Any thoughts or continue 32?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think, well, I think the one thing that sort of, I find helpful here in this here is it's, it's the general overarching active inference, um, parameter of uncertainty.

It's like, it's, it's, they're using the term confidence and precision more at these higher levels because it's like a meta parameter.

inter is still at some level uh an interpretation of uncertainty but because it's on policies and that confidence and precision um are at play because you're interpreting your ability to act not just the raw sensory sort of malheur so to speak


SPEAKER_00:
Right, there's a big difference between like visual uncertainty, it's just two shades of gray and they're so similar, you just don't know what, you don't even see a difference versus two strategies, two chess moves that are very different and you're just not sure which one to do.

That's a very different situation for inference because the way that your eye scans on the page is kind of reversible.

You're getting to retract your choices, but with strategy, it might be very irreversible, very nonlinear.

um okay here's another example they give on 32. so this carrying on right below equation 3.1 which was screenshotted there so um ac can only be non-zero

when the inferred policies are different from the expected policies.

So Blue, that's what you had said.

So if it's sort of at the bottom of the bowl from a policy perspective, thermodynamically, it's not moving, the delta is zero.

It is positive when perceptual evidence favors an agent's action model and negative otherwise.

So it's like, are the data coming in locally good for my model or locally not congruent with my model?

In other words, positive and negative AC corresponds respectively to increased and decreased confidence in one's action model.

So as the data are increasingly good, you actually like lean into your model and prioritize that prediction.

And then you kind of start maybe overfitting and then maybe the model has to pull back

and rely a little bit on something different to re-equilibrate that to stay on this multi-dimensional front with model fit and optimal learning.

So that's one of the ways that active inference is rethinking the explore-exploit.

is by relying on the generative model and then the trade-off with different ways the generative model can get combined with priors you can get explore and exploit behavior as well as a lot of other modes and a rapid switching that's informed by the instantaneous performance of a model um

Then they give some examples of different, a prey and a predator animal.

Okay, and then here's 5.3.

Yeah, any thoughts on that before 5.3?

Okay, 5.3, affective charge lies in the mind of the beholder.

So that's cool because it shows that the authors in this research line have taken up

the challenge of ecological psychology or of action-oriented philosophy or whatever it happens to be it's like this relational insight that these variables have to be about the beholder and their relationship to a situation partially for computational tractability and partially just because it's kind of how these systems seem to be

we are modeling things that are in the mind of the beholder.

So it's always gonna be with the situation and the context, and we're always gonna have to go into the specifics, but we're also gonna find the patterns that are similar.

For example, we all, as they say, tend to experience a rush of satisfaction

not five hours of satisfaction unless it was a long jigsaw, when we solve a puzzle or understand the punchline of a joke or active inference, an aha moment.

Our explanation is straightforward.

In active inference, biologically plausible forms of cognition inevitably involve policy selection.

Policy as fundamental.

So policy is not the disaster mode.

This is as fundamental as affect, whether those policy internal selections are internal, citation, citation, citation, or external.

Period.

Therefore, AC is also elicited by mental action, typically in form of top-down modulation of lower-level priors.

I'm getting the lower-level pain signal.

I shan't not think of it.

And then, now I'm feeling better.

as that is top down prior is influencing the bottom up signals just to give one example so this is like bringing a lot of pretty interesting areas together especially because again it's not just about humans as cognitive agents this is about a scale free formulation for how affective charge works in active inference but we can look at the specific example that they do provide with the simulation so

Blue, any thoughts here or on figure five as far as what they do in the simulation?


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe should we go through the simulation first?

Do you have that figured out or no?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, I think it's, is it this one?

Yeah, figure four.

Okay, sorry, yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that, yeah, that's probably better.

So in this simulation, the way that they set up the tea maze is it's a rat or it could be, I mean, it's a simulated agent, right?

So it could be a rat or it could be an ant or it could be anything in a maze where on one side of the maze is food or so the mouse is placed in the middle of the maze and on the north end, say you have on the left side food and on the right side, a shock.

And on the south end, there is an informational queue about which side the food is on as opposed to the shop.

And so the food location changes over the trials.

And then the subject is allowed to move themselves.

And so typically the subject checks the queue and then gets the reward.

So there's like some, there's a reward for, like you don't get shocked accidentally if you first go see which side that the food is on.

So how the cue is associated, how the cue is associated with decision making.

Well, if if they know to epistemically forage like that, that's more valuable than, you know, accidentally getting shocked, then they go to do that.

But I think in the trials they changed, they kept the location of food consistent for many trials and then they changed it for many trials.

And so the mouse had to relearn what to do.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

So let's just imagine the food was always on the left side, never changed.

Well, as soon as you went to the left side 10 times, you'd be like, I don't even need that queue anymore.

It's kind of useless info gain.

It's going to be not good time spent.

So I should just go for the policy of going right for the food.

Now, if it was switching every time, it would make sense every time if the shock was painful to get that queue every time.

So the mouse is able to, in one way, make a binary decision which arm to follow for the food, but also there's this higher order decision about getting information.

And actually in the Active InfraAnts, the ant paper that I did with some of these co-authors, we also use a T-Maze, but there was no metacognition.

There was just the stigmergy of the colony.

So the T-Maze is really a generalizable framework.

And once you have the code to make the T-Maze, you can just make basically anything.

It's just like any other shape maze.

It's just another matrix.

So this is, again, it's like an initial foray.

And the places where people see that it's lacking, that's where we want to kind of build in the gaps.

Let's get to a little more formal view of how you make that active infrared.

that is doing the active inference on this foraging decision.

So there's a bunch of sections to this figure.

And Blue, would you say it's better?

Yeah, I think five is better before seven, right?

Yeah, okay.

So there is a generative.

model uh first off i mean there's a lot of entry points people should check out the model and just read it themselves because it will take there's a lot of ways to enter into it but one thing to notice is this c the preference over outcomes

If it's not, if it's food, it has a plus four points.

Shock is negative six.

These are just numbers.

You can make it scale differently.

And then if it's not a shock or food, it's zero.

And then also it doesn't have a preference for going left or right.

So these you can already see are some of like the little atoms that are going to get fed into a bigger model.

So this bigger model is going to be able to take kind of these variables.

Like how much is the relative weighting of,

the food versus the lightning bolt?

Or is there an implicit preference for one side versus another?

And then here, the prior, D.

The prior is that they're 50-50, that it's on either side.

But again, that's actually different than a preference for left or right branch is different than a belief that it's likely to be on the left or right branch.

So we can separate out those two variables.

Someone says, I wish it were this temperature.

That's my preference, but I'm very accurate that it's not that.

And that's why I'm sad.

So then you can talk about those kinds of combinations of different parts of the model.

And B, so that's D and C. B is the state transitions.

And so these are, it's kind of like a second level matrix.

And this is kind of, it's like a cube.

If you think about it, it's like a four by four by four, because there's four positions it can be in.

The waiting position, that's this front one.

Then it can go left to the right or to the bottom.

And then there are state transitions that are defined.

Like if you go from the center to the left branch, that's going to be a defined move in a matrix that you can make.

Then A is the mapping between where you're at and whether you get the cue left or right.

So that's the info that you'd get on the bottom, the south branch, and then the reward or the punishment.

And that's the likelihood mapping, whether you go to the left or the right, regardless of whether you got the cue or not.

And then E is that baseline prior over policies, which is just, it's even here.

They're all 2.3.

We could ask, what is the effect of different values?

It might make, you know, you could work that through in your head a little bit, but it could be different.

But here,

all of the expressivity is in the other parts like the preference for the um reward over the shock so one doesn't need to specify like yes and i'd rather you know take a left turn at this exit while i'm going there but that could be specified because again it's just sort of a um skeletal model of this scenario any thoughts on this before we go to seven

Nice, but isn't it, it's cool model.

And it's nice how even with only four locations, there's so much richness in the behavior.

So it shows you don't need the little scurrying animal to simulate the spatial dynamics of the maze, because then you're going to get trapped up.

Oh, is it a narrow chamber or a broad one?

But this helps you look more semantically perhaps at the way that the agents interact with their environment.

Okay, so now on seven,

Blue, do you want to say the two halves of seven?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So this part of seven, this is the generative model that they've created for affective inference.

And the next slide is going to talk about all of the different matrices that go into producing this model.

So that's why I don't know.

Maybe it's this one.

Maybe this is better first.


SPEAKER_00:
Go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
so the uh here the the different matrices that go into the the larger model in figure seven include the prior expectations d2 for any initial states so that's this uh top left and then the second one which is down here on the bottom um is the affective prior which is the likelihood matrix reflecting some degree of uncertainty in the predictions which was also shown in figure five multiplied by that beta

and sets the expectation on expected sets the expected precision so which varies between negative 0.5 which would be a negative valence and then two which is positive valence and then this contextual prior is this matrix a c a a to the c

For the likelihood mapping from the context states, there's a lower level reflecting the fact that the agent is always certain which context they observed after the trial is over, so they either got the food or the shock and they know that, right?

And then this last one is the state transitions B to the 2.

And this is state transitions at the second level, reflecting a couple of assumptions that both the affective and contextual states vary, but have some stability across trials, 0.2 to 0.3 probability of change.

and that the agent has a positivity bias in the sense that they're more likely to switch from a negative to a positive state than vice versa.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Blue.

So what's happening in 7 is we're adding another level.

So here we see that beta and gamma being connected to the whole CGE policy and then that rake formation.

and now we're going to tie in this implicit metacognitive layer with another hidden state so that introduces this parentheses notation where if there's a parentheses it means which level of the nested markov decision process it is so that the s that we knew and loved that was giving rise to the sensory outcomes is now s one and that's the first level of the model and then the s

that is given rise to the precision is S2, the hidden state.

So that is now what is being called the implicit metacognitive component, which is the second level of the model S upper score two, which has its own prior D upper two, just like this has a D upper one.

It's actually not shown here, but it is there.

There are...

the same Markov decision process structure is being recapitulated, but there's a different interpretation because the hidden states at one level are now the observations linked through an A at the next level.

So here's the observations, like what square am I on?

The sensory outcome, am I then a hidden state?

What kind of square am I on?

And then that's getting mapped to, am I happy?

Or that's the whole question of this paper is what does this actual second state, yep, Stephen?

Oh, yeah.

You're heading out?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I'm going to have to head out.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Peace.

Thanks a lot.

Bye.

So then you get all these kind of interesting different kinds of matrices at the second level.

Like, yeah, given that I went left and the food was left, then will I find out about that?

And so you need a few matrices to kind of close the doors and make the model run, but that's a little bit on the implementation details and we'll probably learn from the others.

And in 10, we kind of just have a summary

This is, I think, a great figure because it shows how multiple timescales of nested processes are linked.

From the inheritance of prior phenotypes, like how big is that foot, and also development and learning, like how fast does it change?

get linked in through multiple levels that are getting nested closer and closer to action and perception in the loop and then rippling back out so pretty nice overarching figure any thoughts on this or continue on blue this just really like like like you said it's a nice figure a good summary and just reflects like the deep temporal like nature of of this model that they've built

Nice.

Let's go through the results of the simulation and then just deal with a few little further implications.

And then that will be a nice 19.

So in figure six, they simulate out that scenario that we just talked through a few times with the maze for 32 trials with food located on the left side.

So this was just testing that it will converge to expecting the left side.

So this was kind of like a little sanity check for their model, but also it shows that we're doing this in the broader SPM toolkit.

And so that means that a lot of these things, like the ability to visualize and easily run these models and check that they're complete and debug them and run them at scale, a lot of these things that tie up a lot of innovative modeling efforts, a lot of those are simplified somewhat.

And again, we'll ask the authors about this.

So they simulated in figure six just to show that they could do different policies from the exploratory policy in the first 12 and then switching over to just the go left policy.

Okay, figure eight, anything to say, Lou?


SPEAKER_02:
No.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Yep.

So figure eight, they're kind of just giving a few trajectories of what can happen.

So it's characterizing the model in a little bit of a playful way, but I think it's fair.

And as we'll see, it's at least computationally warranted.

So here we have initially anxious.

The state is negative.

for the first eight time steps where it's getting the cue and the left side and then it develops confidence and then the green line here in eight is where the um the situation changes so then there's a few time steps where it still hasn't caught on before it gets shocked and then it gets anxious again and it gets renewed confidence

So this is capturing a few of the, just like with the ants, how we showed how it could switch arms.

Here, they're showing not just that it can switch arms from Q and left, left and stuck.

Then the shock unsticks it.

It's like, whoa, I was very sure that going left was the right decision.

I got shocked.

Now I need to go take the cue and not just one time.

I'm going to get the cue multiple times.

Okay.

I think that I have renewed confidence in this direction.

So it's really nice model behavior.

Yeah.

What do you think Lou?


SPEAKER_02:
So they did actually, there's one thing.

And so it's not showing here.

Maybe it's going to show in figure nine, but maybe they, maybe they, I don't know if they showed it in a figure or maybe we'll just let the authors talk about it.

What about it?

So about the model that lacked the last level, the metacognition.

So in one of the models, they took that highest level of integration away to see if the mouse would similarly adapt.

So here they changed the position of the food in the top right figure.

so they changed the position of food it was always on the left always on the left always on the left the mouse adapted it didn't even go look for the cue and then in the the model without that metacognition the model thought the metacognition didn't adapt to going to look for the cue like they just like stayed stuck in the middle like not sure do i i don't know if i should go up or go down i thought that that was really like

So this is what happened with the metacognition.

Initially anxious, developed confidence, anxious again, and then renewed confidence.

But in the model that lacked that integration, that metacognition, it just like stayed stuck in the middle.

I thought that that was a very like cool anomalous effect and like a really neat control like trial for this test.


SPEAKER_00:
nice and it actually relates again to this idea that affect or anxieties in the loop and it's something that's a continuous variable and in uh you know healthy settings we could say maybe anxiety is actually warranted here there was a shock in a strategy that was pre there's nothing wrong with a strategy that works and there's nothing wrong with switching strategies when it doesn't work

But there is some variable, whether we associate it with suffering, again, that's the second question, but there is some feeling or some computational need for the system to actually pull back and re-weight how it uses its prior evidence versus how it deals with incoming evidence.

So I think this is a really nice example of just the categorical, the discrete kinds of behavior that are very different from low precision and negative valence, and then a kind of phase transition rapidly into a stable phase

into negative and back again and integrating it with decision making with as they say early on the imperative is that reduction of uncertainty with a generative model not maximize reward not minimize suffering either but actually to optimize its precision aka reduce its uncertainty about a generative model of

the states of the world including its own action so it's just really nice work some of the reasons why active inference is so cool actually and then figure nine they simulate 64 trials oh I think this is what you were speaking to um an affective agent plotted in orange and an agent without higher level contextual and affective states plotted in gray

So there's, it's, I mean, one could look at figure nine a little more closely to see the difference, but yes, the expectations in like just looking at the top one, the expected food location, they both converge to left and the orange goes a little bit higher.

So it learns a little faster.

It's like, yeah, I'm doing really well on this test.

This is an easy course.

Then the green line happens.

And the gray one slowly updates.

It's like, hey, I've been right for, you know, 20 and I was only wrong twice.

So I'm at 90%.

What's the issue?

And the orange one's like, whoa, something's wrong because I'm getting error signals when I wasn't.


SPEAKER_02:
And the green line here represents the food changing, right?

Like that's the context switch.

I just wanted to contextualize.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Yes.

The context reversal.

So it was on the left and now it's on the right, aka I got a shock.

And so then also look at this, the affective charge, the orange one, anxiety drop, right?

blissful ignorance, anxiety, drop.

And then the gray one doesn't have affect.

So we don't see it there.

But then, yeah.

Well, the gray one's affective charge is actually a little bit all over the place, but we could ask them what that means.

And so, yeah, pretty, it is super interesting because like learning, you know, even organic chemistry is an emotional learning process.

So how actually affect and policy and mental effort, all these things come together, it's kind of cool.


SPEAKER_02:
I wonder if this is, like, just, like, to take it to the, like, meta level, like, is it, like, you know, self-reflection, right?

Like, at what level of integration is that, right?

Like, so you do the action, you select the policy, and I like that my student teammates don't self-reflect, but, like, when you integrate at that level, there's agents that do, humans that do self-reflection, and then humans that just kind of don't think about it, right?

And so what is the better adaptation there?

It just provides evidence for that, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And similarly, it's like, you know, I want to be doing the right thing.

But then will that preclude you from having a thought that where that's actually being, that expectation is being violated, especially if there's sensory evidence that that's the case.

Those are really interesting situations.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

So like psychopathology, like, are they just missing some higher level integration, like for lacking that affect, you know?


SPEAKER_00:
We'll ask the authors.

Nice.

So then just the additional info section of the paper, as we kind of close out in the last little few slides here, there are four appendices and the code is available on Casper Hesp's GitHub.

And so you can see just from the top lines of the main MATLAB script.

Yeah, it's in MATLAB.

It uses Markov decision processes and it involves active inference and learning using variational Bayes, the factorized version in the SPM toolkit using MATLAB.

So check out the model streams and let us know how it goes to work with the code.

We kind of just had one or two more random areas to cover.

A few directions that this takes us in, which we've discussed a little bit.

One of them is more advanced simulations.

So can we have two dimensions of affect or could we have another summary variable that represents some other feature of systems?

Could we bring it more into alignment with computational psychiatry and translational research?

And could we embody robots that implement these kinds of algorithms?

How would that change some type of situational, like physical robot or even a software robot if it had these kinds of estimators internally?

then we're always just thinking about where does active inference come into play which is easy for this paper because that's the whole model but um where where are the next empirical steps which they mentioned in 5.7 a little bit and how does this relate to this realism versus instrumentalism question we're always getting at like is this what the systems are or is this how we're going to model the systems or are those one and the same thing um

any broad ideas and questions before this little freudian interlude yeah okay so thanks dave for pointing out um a lot of the recent work of mark solmes specifically this new project for a scientific psychology general scheme which the link's given down below but it's um pretty interesting work that has to do with integrating recent developments in neuroscience with some

freudian and uh ideas and beyond and i guess i just like ideas that aren't named after people because then it gets pretty much like oh who's doing darwinian evolution what does it really mean to be freudian it gets a little bit uh historiographical instead of about the ideas but the mappings that are made are clear and stand on their own and and put the sort of history hopefully um

the side when we see that there are commonalities across very disparate models and here we see a familiar structure which is kind of like that markov blanket separating the internal and the external states but the letters are a little bit different and so there's an abbreviations table given in this paper and also

For many years, Friston and Karhar Harris and others have been writing papers that are about different Freudian concepts and relating it to free energy and drive and a lot of other things.

points of contact with different psychological threads.

It's just not an area I'm super familiar with the literature and the debates around, but it's an area that's obviously important to many and influences a lot of areas.

And it's just interesting to see how these developments play into the absolutely still open for evolution field of psychology, psychiatry.

so that was uh pretty much what we wanted to cover in 19. so that's pretty fun and little little sprint to get the paper finished because it was somewhat of a long paper but it's really worth it so blue any final thoughts or what what are you taking moving forward or what do you hope that we discuss in the point one and point two


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know, I'm looking to really discussing the Bayesian brain integration or correlation here.

I really think that the ability to update your brain

beliefs based on what your previous experiences is like, this is like the perfect, like case study for this kind of philosophy.

And I know like the Bayesian brain catches some slack sometimes and Bayesian statistics catch a lot of slack, but in reality, like we aren't going to go to the shock side of the box.

If we know that the food is always in the left side of the box.

Like, so having that, that update.

So I'm looking forward to just see what, what people have to say about the Bayesian brain aspect of this.


SPEAKER_00:
paper if anything we get that far we can make it all the way through the model right nice yeah i agree i was also curious about okay well what if we could just associate a like you know like click share whatever on social media and then maybe you don't even need the shock or maybe you could add that or something but

With that matrix, could there be upvote, downvote systems where maybe the data already exists?

And then the positions that somebody could be in would be like, I have not seen it or I have seen it.

Something like that.

And they're moving around pages, seeing or not seeing things.

And that's influencing their beliefs about the world and their beliefs about themselves.

And how accurate am I if this is what the info I'm getting is?

And then that's without even going into the instrumentalism realism, at least it's something that it feels like to be searching for information or a question that can be useful.

So it's pretty cool stuff.

Thanks a lot, Blue.

And thanks also, Stephen, for joining for 19.0.

We'll see everyone for 19.1 and 2.

Thank you.

Bye.

## SMQvRspIzpQ

SPEAKER_00:
Hello everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab and to the Active Inference Livestream.

This is Active Inference Livestream 19.1 on April 6, 2021.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at our links and contact information here.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following hopefully video etiquette for livestreams, such as muting when there's noise in our background and raising our hands so we can hear from everyone who wants to speak.

You can go to this shortened link to see the upcoming streams of different kinds.

Today we're in 19.1 on April 6th, and we'll be having a follow-up group discussion next week on April 13th.

Hello, Stephen.

We're already live.

So today in Active Inference 19.1, the goal is really just to learn and discuss about this really awesome paper, Deeply Felt Affect, The Emergence of Valence in Deep Active Inference by Caspar Hesp, Ryan Smith, Thomas Parr, Mika Allen, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstad.

And we're really appreciative that Caspar has joined us today.

And any one of these other authors are free to join us next week or the following.

In 19.1, we're gonna go over the various parts of the paper in any order that people want to raise them.

And we can just start with some short introductions and warmups that will be culminating in Casper and giving a little, maybe just introduction or a background.

And that will be great to start with.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a postdoc in California and I will pass it to Sarah


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Sarah.

I'm a person stuck in Berlin because I can't update my visa.

Next.


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm in Toronto.

And I'm very much looking forward to learning more about affect and its relationship to active inference.

And I'm going to pass it to Dave.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, Dave Douglas.

I'm in the mountains of the Philippines, retired from

information technology including natural language processing and machine translation background in process philosophy whitehead especially and cybernetics and i will pass to dean if he hasn't spoken yet i'm dean i'm from calgary um retired but really interested in this stuff i don't know who i can pass it to other than maybe casper i'm not sure


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.

Yeah.

My name is Casper.

I'm a PhD student at the University of Amsterdam.

I'm currently being co-supervised by two professors at the University of Amsterdam and one being at the University College London.

So that's one you probably all know called Kristen.

my external supervisor and this paper was developed under his in his lab basically with a bunch of really wonderful people actually my co-first author is not here today but i am aware that he has been ryan smith has been with you on many of these sessions and

Yeah, so I think I'll just go into the intro of the paper.

And I guess it will be interesting because you can read in the paper itself the kind of formal motivation.

I will tell you a little bit more about the storyline, how this came about.

When I first entered the group, there was

most of the modeling that was done was with single layers and there was already some preliminary work on deep temporal modeling and that's essentially working out the implications of this kind of hierarchical models that start to look more like the one that you might have come across in deep learning research

But now with the Bayesian flavor.

And one of the things that I was missing personally was a meta cognitive aspect that moves beyond just estimating confidence.

It's one aspect.

But then reflecting on that confidence estimate to give you an idea of

something that can regulate other parts of the system.

So we ended up going back and forth on this topic with Carl and Thomas Barr was a huge help there as well.

And he's also on the paper.

Essentially, thinking about these action models, and active infants, and I'm kind of presupposing certain degree of familiarity, but I can

Suppose I can quickly recap.

Essentially, the way I presented it in paper is really meant to be something that you start from zero knowledge about active inference.

And I kind of build it up in steps so that people are not super familiar with it.

Yeah, I guess it's like these steps essentially

the the point is that these diagrams have a very mathematical meaning a very specific mathematical and when you just present people the whole diagram at once what we call directed acyclical graphs it usually is pretty overwhelming so for this paper i decided to kind of go back and just give the viewer the reader um a very

stepwise, an incremental primer, as we call it.

And we start with these first two states that are being linked is the types of states, these hidden states and sensory states.

And that's really the core.

And what's interesting is that it's very modular.

So if you go to the next slide, Daniel,

And yeah, so if you just ignore the maps for now, but the nice idea here is that these graphs are entirely, it's kind of like a Lego box essentially.

So once you understand the first piece of the puzzle in M1, where it's inferring hidden states based on sensory states,

you can basically understand all the other graphs as well to a certain degree.

At some point, we introduce links between continuous and discrete state spaces.

That's where it gets a little bit more complicated mathematically.

The one thing you can keep in mind when reading these figures is that downstream on the arrows is always about prediction.

So here, for example, the prior over hidden states on the top V predicts the hidden states below that S. So downstream on the arrows, we're talking about prediction.

Upstream, we're talking about inference.

So in this case, you start from the prior, make prediction about what the hidden states are a priori.

And then moving from these hidden states, make prediction about what the sensory states are.

And that's where the likelihood mapping comes in.

So that's one crucial aspect.

So downstream prediction, upstream inference.

Then there's another crucial part that you need to know in order to interpret these figures is that the circles are variables and the squares are parameters.

So in this case, hidden states and sensory states, those are listed in the circles, the S and the O. Those can vary over the course of the simulation.

If you set it up in this very simplistic way, then the squares are fixed.

So the values in the prior and the likelihood mapping are fixed in this very simplistic setting.

Once you understand this, you can start hooking these things up to each other.

So once we link another circle to a square, then the mappings become variable as well.

And you will see that coming back later.

But it would now generalize this reading of the figure to the second.

So M2 here.

Exactly the same maps is applied to this way the states evolve over time.

So generative model of anticipation is using current states to make predictions about future states.

That's where we come to the third part of these kinds of graphs that's pretty important to

know is that from reading from left to right it's supposed to be the temporal dimension so s1 is used to make predictions about s2 and based if you have knowledge about s2 you can make inferences about what s1 was the most likely state in the past as well so it works both ways

so that's perception and anticipation um obviously entirely reduced to the most simple yes simplistic kind of form that you couldn't come up with essentially sometimes often these models are criticized for being too simplistic well i think that's kind of the beauty in the sense that um we obviously

start with these components, the Lego blocks, so to speak.

The individual blocks are pretty simple.

But once you start hooking them up to each other, you get emergent dynamics that are pretty hard to already pretty, yeah, pretty quickly become hard to wrap your mind around.

So that's why we're presenting them in a stepwise fashion.

I would say if you're really interested in the maps, then

You would probably want to go into some of the tutorials, for example, that Ryan Smith recently made.

I can actually send a link to that right now.

But he works through the actual equations in step-by-step fashion.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

You can put any links in the YouTube live chat so that everybody can see it.

Otherwise, only we'll be able to see it.

Yeah.

Cool.

Thanks for all these clarifying points on figure one.

And I agree.

It'd be awesome to have Ryan.

He's been on a few times.

So yeah.

Okay.

Question related to figure one, Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just one question.

When you mentioned the predictions and inferences, do you tend to think about the downward predictions across all the components and then the inferences more, although it's happening at all components, more in terms of the big block

jumps between like what m1 and m2 is inferring in relation to each other so you do you tend to think about it more that way so you look at each piece as a as more of smaller ideas predicting down and linking and then the inference is more thought of in these you know broader sense of something that you could get your head around as a human so to speak


SPEAKER_05:
It depends on which level of description you're currently focusing.

But in a sense, the answer is yes.

Once you stick another layer on top of it, so to speak, that layer is basically perceiving.

In a weird way, you could say it's trying to perceive the perceptions.

And then that allows the system to report.

on these perceptions.

So that's like a kind of meta-level representation that gives the system its capacity to reflect on its own inferences on the lower level.

And we have also worked on paper where we apply this to the precision on the likelihood method.

and probably not get into that too much for now, but it's if anybody's interested.

So let me just, I found, I've gotten access to the live stream now.

Let me just post.


SPEAKER_00:
Say hello, and then I'll make you a mod so that you can post links.

But yeah, thank you for adding links to the live stream.

anyone else have a question on figure one otherwise it'd be nice to i think continue this incremental um unrolling of the model and then we'll definitely get to a lot of different topics i think in a broader discussion too and in the lecture so here's the paper by ryan smith and then there's

Okay, now you're a moderator, so now nice.

Okay, Steven, question on figure one or broader question?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just building on what was just mentioned a second ago with figure one is, you know, thanks for that clarification.

And so, like you say, this idea of like a meta level of inference is useful.

And I think, and this came up in the previous live stream with Ryan Smith, that there seems to be something about the updating between

So as well as like going from one chunk to the next chunk, so to speak, of M1, M2, and giving that as a way to get a handle on an inference, there's like something that can be done with whatever gets message passed up.

And so from my understanding, that looks like the two ways into the inferential piece, so.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

Yeah, so that's where...

Essentially, one of the core innovations that we present in this paper is something we like to call deep parametric active inference, where you're making inferences about the parameters of lower level models.

And then that is guiding your expectations.

We're going to get into that more once we go down this path.

Let me see.

So I've managed to get access, I think.

So what does the moderation help me?


SPEAKER_00:
You could post links.

I think people who are moderators cannot post links, but we got your links.

So the tutorial paper and the meta awareness paper are in the live chat.

So thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, good.

Okay, cool.

Yeah.

So just to illustrate the point, I think it makes sense to go further.

Because essentially what I think it was Dean was mentioning, or was it Dave?

I couldn't see.

It's my own site.

But anyway, so what was mentioned is that, yeah, you have these Lego blocks and you start building your hierarchy, so to speak.

One of the things that had already happened by the time I came around was this step presented here, where again, the circle here with the pie inside is a variable and the simple act of connecting this variable to the state transitions on the lower level.

basically the variable pi which stands for policy um starts to dynamically control your beliefs about how to stay how the states of the world equal all the time yes so this is um then controlled by the prior um

And this is really a little bit of a funky aspect of active inference in that formulation, because the prior on these policies is informed by the expected free energy.

The expected free energy I call is funky because it recapitulates the entire generative model down below.

The expected free energy includes the expectations of the organism about the world.

So there is this thing that Karl and Thomas Spahr have called the generalized free energy, where they reformulate this and unpack what's inside the policy variable in terms of a whole generative model that mirrors the perception aspect.

don't need to get too deep into that.

That's essentially unpacking what the expected free energy here does in the model.

It's very important because the expected free energy is what introduces what I call the phenotypic or phenotype congruent action model.

It's also going to be answering one of the questions that came up.

I watched the previous live stream that you had on this paper.

We'll get to that in a second.

But we can use it to answer one of the questions that came up about whether the effective charge, why the defense only arises when there is a difference between the prior and posterior action.

We'll get to that in a second.

So the expected free energy, you can think of it as recapitulating the entire action model with one big difference, namely that it's biased by phenotypic outcome preferences.

So it's essentially the phenotypic outcome preferences basically bring into active inference what the reward function does in reinforcement.

It does this because it's essentially biasing the way the agent behaves towards the world and trying to make it match its preferences that are specified here clearly in probabilistic terms.

So the phenotypic preferences can be

something that can be ingrained, that can be learned.

It's pretty agnostic where it comes from.

That's because it has this hierarchical nature.

So I have models in which these preferences themselves are state-dependent.

So let's say you're hungry.

When you're hungry, your preference factor for food is upregulated, essentially.

It's made more...

a stronger driver of your actions.

When you're tired, then you have a stronger preference against exerting effort.

So there's these kinds of, these preferences themselves can be made state-dependent.

If you just add another Lego block on top, you start having inferences about how hungry you are, how tired you are, and you can have an organism that's managing its energy resources.

Then there is this last component that I haven't really discussed is the E here.

The E matrix, you can think of it as a kind of habitual or what they call in reinforcement learning, they call it mobile free.

It's just counting the number of times a particular action occurred.

It's not evaluating it by any

like by any reward or something like that.

It's just

I mean, I actually don't like the term model-free because in essence, it is still a model.

It's just a model that has a separate parameter for every possible action.

So just counting, it's kind of like when you took your driver's lessons and I remember repeating mistakes, not because I liked to make those mistakes, but just because I made them before and my body and brain kind of

stored that information and I ended up repeating those mistakes just because this pathway had been explored before.

Okay, so that's like a little bit of unpacking here.

The way you can read this diagram is again from left to right.

So you start with the action model and the expected free energy guiding the a priori expectations.

this is a kind of crooked scientist i would say it is biased towards not what you believe the world to be exactly but more towards what you would like the world to be like um or what's if you are currently doing well what you would expect the world to do so it's pretty um

um it's it's an intentional by yeah like the bias is introduced in that site and then if you look on the other side and get the perceptual evidence it's the free energy you can think of that as a kind of reality check so i can have lots of expectations about what i want the world to be like and where i want to end up

or what I want my shoes to be like when I buy them.

I remember this example from last time.

But then I need perceptual evidence to actually see if the shoes actually fit after I bought them, let's say.

So this perceptual evidence is a very crucial component of how the whole perceptual feedback

Without that, your agent would be living in a fantasy world.

So unless there are any questions, we can move to the next slide.


SPEAKER_00:
Anyone can raise their hand.

Otherwise, Steven, question on this figure or a broader question?

OK, go for the question on this figure.


SPEAKER_03:
Just want to ask you one question there.

With your action model,

Because with expected free energy, you often have the risk, ambiguity, and pragmatic gain as three terms on one side.

So is it like that the pragmatic gain is built into the action model implicitly?

So it's kind of, you've rearranged it slightly with that in mind so that all action has some sort of pragmatic gain built into the phenotypical morphology of the animal or something like that?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so here the pragmatic part, so that's the kind of the C, the outcome preferences, so your preferred observations essentially, is built into, it's part of the phenotypic risk.

So if you look at this equation on the left, so the right-hand side with the left term for phenotypic risk, you see there you take the difference between the logarithm of your expected outcomes minus your preferred outcomes.

than in terms of units of nets, so information .

So what you're essentially, the risk here is just quantified in terms of the difference between your preferred outcomes and the expected outcomes given a particular action.

That makes sense.


SPEAKER_00:
cool and it's also interesting it's the natural log of o sub pi so it's conditioned on a policy so it's not like some sort of all by all chess boards all strategies all situations it's very constrained with respect to what actually matters which are in the end the affordances in the niche of the actual agents in the in its scenario so it's really cool to see how that gets

baked into the model, not like a secondary pruning or a heuristic.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So this, this just falls out of calculating the expected energy under a certain policy.

Um,

So this G is conditioned on policies in that sense.

And one interesting aspect here is that if you make the generative model more sophisticated, then this G is going to become more sophisticated as well.

So you can add, if you add learning for parameters of, let's say, the likelihood method, then the expected free energy also expands accordingly, and it ends up having a term for active learning.

So your agents can anticipate basically that exploring the environment can allow to reduce uncertainty about these perceptual mappings.

So then you get an agent that's intrinsically curious about the world.

You can do the same with them.

the B matrices, so the transition matrices.

So you get an agent like a child who kind of just experiments, exploring different states of the world, and then starts picking up on different kinds of control that it has.

And can even, at some point, can even learn to anticipate that if it experiments in a certain way, it might be able to learn new things about these methods.

So this is currently not in this particular model, because if you remember to do that, you need to add variables to the particular mappings.

And the nice thing about this Lego box of active inference, so to speak, is that you're completely free to make anything variable.

as long as you specify certain probability distributions, you can do the same trick again and again on discrete and continuous datespaces.

So I think this is a nice segue into, oh, here you first introduce in table three some of the equations .


SPEAKER_00:
Here we have table three up on the screen, or do you want figure three?


SPEAKER_05:
No, I think we can go on.

I mean, unless somebody wants to go deeper into this, but I think we already can discuss this.

Great.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

It was really helpful to see the tables laid out.


SPEAKER_05:
This is actually not the way I delivered the table to the journal.

It's just that they had three, I mean, it's crazy.

You pay them this money to fix it, you know, but then they make it work.

So like basically they had like a new layout and their web layout messes up most of the

So when you want to read it, I would really recommend downloading the PDF and not using their web layout.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yes.

This is their web layout.

It definitely makes sort of a false equivalence or a way of making it look like there's something missing on one side or the other.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so just read the PDF.

It's unfortunate, because it's supposed to be their job to do it.

Yeah, anyway.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, here we are on figure three.

And so we have just the figure three.

And then we also have that part with the AC, if you want to highlight that, because I know that's something we really want to understand.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, so we're going to continue our building of this.

We're adding these different blocks together.

And now what we add on top of it is we have g. This is the recapitulation of the entire action model.

We add a variable on top of it that modulates the extent to which I rely on this action model.

So the precision, the gamma, can take any value between 0 and infinity.

And it just tells me when I predict what's going to happen in the world and anticipate what's going to happen, how much can I rely on my action model that's biased by my preferences?

So that is not the same as...

I mean, that's kind of where it comes into story, why it's this effective charge that we're talking about ends up being depending on the difference between pi at the prior and the posterior.

So essentially, what this precision is tracking is tracking the match between

predicted value, you can say, of G, or predict for the actual policies that I end up selecting.

The actual state transitions of the world, and how well they are predicted by my action model.

And this is my crooked scientist model, right?

So it's like an action model that's trying to realize preferences.

And

effective charge is essentially the kind of we call it like that because later on it's getting a special role and when you go to hierarchical setup we add one more lego block on top of this but essentially um whenever my um whenever um

So if you unpack this effective charge equation, you see that it's calculating the difference between my prior policy vector.

That's just based on my preferences, my actual model and the posterior.

And that's the one that happened that I have after I integrate perceptual evidence.

So, and then that difference.

So that's where it's a little bit hard to imagine, but basically the difference between these two is kind of like the rate of change, you could say, over time of my beliefs.

And then you take the product of that with the expected energy.

And what what you essentially want to know is after integrating perceptual evidence, do they get closer to

matching the expected free energy, the distribution anticipated by that, or did I get further away?

So that's why I call this phenotypic progress.

If the expected free energy is a bad predictor, then this term ends up being negative.

If it's a good predictor, it ends up being positive.

And I mean, there's like a little bit of a play with science there.

And we just define it in a way that it's positive, that positive value is a good thing.

That's like always a little bit confusing because in some different fields they use, there's even fields where the energy is defined in the opposite way.

So the whole story clips on its head.

That's why you always have to be careful.

how you define it locally in each paper.

And when you come from a different field, you have to make sure that you've got your science in your science in a row, so to speak.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, if I can say that one major field there are differences that physicists often go downhill, gradient descent, optimization, we're going to minimize the loss function.

And biologists often talk or think about hill climbing and fitness peaks and optimization, maximization and congruence and the best possible world, that kind of Pangloss world.

So...

totally agreed and especially when there's a lot of natural logs and negative signs and differences and divergences that can only be positive and things that are strictly negative or bounded but when it's something where it really needs to be walked through slowly because it's so easy to get tripped up in how these things flip back and forth

So really important notes to kind of just go slow and really make sure that we're using the right tools to establish that we're connecting the right qualitative ideas with these variables, because it's not just like you throw up the equation and then it's going to be easy to define what each of the variables are for real systems.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

And on that note, we have interpreted this gamma in the paper as a type of subjective fitness.

And that's because literally it's tracking the degree to which your preference bias action model is fitting with the actual perceptual evidence that you're getting back.

That's why the effective charge can only be non-zero if there's some mismatch between your prior and your posterior beliefs about policies.

Because there's only when there's some mismatch between what you expected and what you got.

It makes sense to talk about updating your beliefs about proceeding.

It can be in a positive direction or in a negative direction.

So my fit can be actually better than expected.

or worse than expected.

And that's why I've described in the abstract that this lends a sign to these predictions.

Essentially, if you think about it just in terms of predictions, it's kind of, well, prediction is either wrong or very wrong, right?

So then, I mean, if you want to know, if you go to this meta level where you're estimating how wrong am I,

So is my prediction getting better or worse?

That's where the sign comes into the story and where you can talk about improvements or improving or worsening state of the world, so to speak, and state of yourself.

History applies to any kind of states, by the way, so it can

It can be about internal states, tracking, as I said, hunger and fatigue.

It can also be about the affective states of other or conspecifics.

So this kind of subjective fitness can be linked to any arbitrary state of interest.

And if you go to the next level, then the state of inference can be an observation for the next level.

That hierarchical trick is, I think, the power of it.

We have freedom to do what we want to do with our Lego blocks, so to speak, depending on this system of interests.

But we try to keep it simple while we're still just demonstrating possibilities.

But then the implications get

Yeah, really, really big once you start to release the simplicity constraints and you just go wild on constructing models, hierarchical models with different

you can have expected energies at different levels, you can have these kind of precision terms at different levels.

So you can have competing and affected charges, you can have the effective charge from your lower level, let's say you're trying to fight your addiction or something like that.

The lower level parts of your system are like kind of create and generating this creating in the higher level parts are like trying to

generates this kind of self-actualization or something like that, where you basically end up having conflicting drives.

So I mean, that's where we can go.

But to get there, we need to move to add states on top of this.

And I think, yeah.

If there are questions, we can.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm going to ask a question from the live chat and then anyone else who has been spoke yet or ask a question and then we'll ask a question about anything else we've talked about, Steven.

So in the chat, someone asks, can we relate affective charge with motivation as motivation can also affect policy?

So how do we think about motivation in this kind of a model?


SPEAKER_05:
affective charge is it affective charge yeah so um motivation in that sense is a very kind of fuzzy concept right but um if you think about the gamma term here it's modulating the extent to which you're relying on your action model

And the C, the preference factor, modulating the extent to which you're driven by your preferences.

Combining them together essentially means that if you have, let's say,

You need high confidence in your action model to actually allow it to influence your expectations.

So in that sense, there is definitely a link with motivation.

But then again, you also need preferences that motivate you to move towards them.

So what's kind of interesting is if you take away the preferences, then you can have an agent that's motivated entirely by epistemic value.

so I suppose to some extent it's kind of interesting because you get the precision starts to modulate curiosity and so that's the different kind of motivation

Anyway, I can't say much more because it's such a fuzzy concept.


SPEAKER_00:
Very true.

Reward motivation, curiosity motivation.

There's expressivity in the model to actually talk about motivation with respect to specific framings of it.


SPEAKER_05:
The way I've recently thought about it is also that if you add a higher level and you connect it to this preference matrix,

you can basically modulate the extent to which you're motivated by different kinds of outcomes.

And that means that if you're monitoring on a higher level, to which extent you're currently satisfied, for example.

So you're hungry, so you upregulate your preference for eating food.

And then you get your food and you get feedback, interoceptive feedback that you're satiated.

And then you're open for more epistemic drives, let's say.

So there's an extensive sense in which the various types of motivation have to be balanced by a higher level.

This current figure is not able to do that in a way.

I mean, our full Lego box can definitely do that.

But the current figure, I think, is still doesn't have dynamic preferences.

I think that's what you need to get more satisfying accounts for motivation in general.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that awesome response.

All right, Stephen, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_03:
just one question you mentioned dot product with expected free energy and just just if you could just clarify that a little bit because i think you've got something to do with the precision you got the the larger free energy piece so if you just clarify that would be helpful um yeah so this effective charge term is not something we came up with


SPEAKER_05:
right it's something that comes out of the maps when you start with this gamma distribution so the capital gamma distribution is a particular mathematical um yeah shape an exponential a natural exponent based on natural exponent

And when you use that as a probability distribution, so it has this kind of tail that goes towards infinity.

And the expectation value of this tail is regulated by what's called here the temperature parameter, also called the rate parameter in other contexts.

But essentially, the temperature parameter kind of regulates how

how strongly the distribution is shifted towards zero.

And essentially, what happens is that when you use that as the probability distribution and you try to optimize this beta parameter to best fit what's happening, you can do this pre-energy minimization.

to do that.

And what you get out of it kind of for free, once you write that down in probabilistic terms, you get this effective charge term.

And what I was talking about is essentially an interpretation of what, OK, this is what we got out when we took the generative model, let it minimize variation of free energy on this beta parameter.

then it just kind of spits out this affective charge term.

And then it's a matter of interpreting, like, what does this term mean in a mathematical sense?

And essentially what it's doing is taking dot product between two vectors.

One vector on the left is the difference between the prior and the posterior over action.

And the other factor is the expected energy for each policy.

And essentially, if the two factors are pointing in the same direction for an organism, that's bad news, right?

Because if my posterior results in larger expected energy, then that's bad because I'm trying to minimize it.

Wait, let me turn the light on.


SPEAKER_00:
Dark room solved.


SPEAKER_05:
What's wrong?

I just solved the dark room problem.

The idea is basically that the expected free energy, you can think of it as a kind of landscape across the domain of potential actions.

What I want to know is that after integrating my perceptual evidence, did what that vector looked like on the left, did it match the original vector I had in terms of the expected energy?

That's why if you look closely, it's the prior minus the posterior.

Because that's the negative rate of change, right?

The actual rate of change would be the posterior minus the prior.

But we flipped the sign there, such that you can interpret the effective charge as being positive when the precision goes up, and being negative when precision goes down.

Does that answer your question?


SPEAKER_03:
Satisfactory?

Yeah, I think that's very helpful.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
one one example that came to mind was like you're driving and you're having a maps application tell you it's going to take one hour and then as the estimate gets worse it's like it's bad if you want to get there if your preference is to get there on time now if your preference was to get there later maybe it is more neutral but then as the update is changing and your relative policy it could be like

oh, it's gonna be 18 more minutes because of this crash.

Oh, but then this speeded up this way.

And so we're always in a really specific situation, conditioning on policy and the information we're getting.

And so we're not doing the whole traffic city flow.

This is about like the person getting the info from the screen and then making decisions about, oh, maybe I should get gas here or not.

Not every possible decision they could be making.

So very, very interesting way to frame this variable.


SPEAKER_05:
And this dot product, the way, I don't know how many people here are familiar with the way this kind of vector calculus tends to work, but essentially you can just think of it as the dot product kind of calculating the degree of overlap between the vectors.

And if they're anti,

If they are exactly in the opposite directions, then the dot product is very negative.

If they're pointing in exactly the same direction, then it's maximally positive.


SPEAKER_00:
And are these, what are the dimensionalities?

So you're talking about them as vectors, but are they scalar or is there just one entry in the vector or are there potentially multiple or how do we think about, are these one number or is it a list of numbers like a long vector?


SPEAKER_05:
So in this older formulation of the expected energy, it was like one value per policy.

essentially, which is like an action sequence.

And so every policy has a total sum of the expected free energy associated with it.

So then it's a vector in the sense that every policy has its own element in the vector.

But more recently, we've actually extended this in the sophisticated inference paper.

Because anybody who's worked with policy spaces knows about this problem of combinatorial explosion.

That once you start considering forces of action in time, then every point in time you expand it further, the more, yeah,

the more untenable and intractable the problem becomes.

In a more recent iteration, we actually divided further in terms of the actions components.

Instead of having one single policy vector that has to regulate through all the machinery, every time step has its own action variable.

and you're forming inference, doing inference on that on every time step.

This makes the problem, prevents you from having to integrate everything right away.

The end result of that is again an integration, but because here it kind of allows for parallel computing, so to speak.

Anyway, but that's a different paper.

I can actually also post that one.


SPEAKER_00:
I think we actually read it, but, you know, it all blurs together.

But we did read sophisticated inference, I think, at one point.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, yeah.

Yeah.

Nice.

Yeah, you read lots of papers.

That's why you have to catch up.


SPEAKER_00:
We got to catch up.

You're leaving them as fast as we can get to them.


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, I made more recently in a paper on called Sophisticated Affective Inference, where

So you have another thing to patch up.

But it's essentially combining this affective inference story that we're talking about today, combining it with this research, which allows you to simulate an agent that has an affective response to imagined futures.

It would be cool to maybe at some point to come back to discuss that one as well.

Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So Dean with a question, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_07:
Casper, when you go from a 2D M1, M2 to a 3D action,

Is that, have you thought a little bit about the sort of the less about the integration, more about the deflation and inflation that happens when you go from fewer dimensions to more?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so that's kind of one of the motivations for going to new types of generative model, because this policy variable here can explode pretty quickly once you get to multiple steps in the future.

And you need somehow to reduce the dimensionality of the state space that you're considering.

One thought that kind of soothes me when I build these types of models is that

Even though, as we say, all models are wrong, but some are useful, right?

But even though that's the case, we know that the organisms that we're trying to model have exactly the same problem that we have.

Namely, they're trying to make something that's generally intractable, tractable.

So the simplifications, when we're trying to build a model of their model of the world,

you can actually justify the simplifications in the sense that they are trying to deal with, they have to do oversimplifications as well to be able to make sense, any sense at all of their environment.

I mean, I don't know if this exactly answered your question, but this was a thought that came up in response.

Sir had an interesting point about the dimensionality increasing.

And one thing that kind of happens is that you basically have to stimulate potential futures internally.

Once you start conditioning the states on your actions, that means every possible action has a parallel kind of process of inference that's happening to predict what's going to happen in the future.

And every dimension you add on top

can potentially make the whole thing intractable.

So we're always facing that challenge.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, Dean, and then


SPEAKER_07:
That's quick follow up.

So sometimes you hear the expression, oh, well, that problem is going to require some outside the box thinking.

And of course, that's so ambiguous.

Nobody really knows what that means.

But what you've done here, I think, is given people an opportunity to get out of the spatial envelope, get out of the

I'm an agent enveloped by the world around me, and you've given them a bit of an eyes of this perspective.

They can actually get outside and see how, as an agent, they're perceiving the world, how they can then

potentially act on the world.

But as you said, they're constantly updating.

A lot of this stuff isn't front of mind as they're doing it.

But I think that's one of the big things about going from 2D to 3D.

You're not just zooming in and zooming out.

You're

you're not just now you're able to look down on something, but if you hit the button on the Google map and you suddenly see a 3d, it doesn't, it doesn't stay at one position.

It actually circles around the thing that you're looking at.

And I think that's what this provides people is that sense of not just being inside of something, but actually being able to step outside of it as well.


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, that's something that, um,

Yeah, actually does happen in this type of model is when you add this pie, let's say, in M3, you end up expanding the whole thing.

And it's, like you said, like stepping from 2D to 3D in a sense, because you're expanding the whole number of possibilities, basically, in the model.

the same way it's kind of hard to wrap your mind around it and i think that's part of what makes these figures hard to read for people especially when you present the top level right away it's like asking somebody to step from one from one dimensional to three dimensional right in one go you kind of have to go through the the increases in dimensionality step by step

So this is also part of what motivates this whole incremental presentation.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Awesome question.

Thank you, Dean.

So Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
so we read this sophisticated affective inference like a long time ago and i always think about it and i think that i brought it up in the dot zero live stream actually but i thought it was the big five paper i think we read them like right at the same time and they they're very different but this um sophisticated active affective inference was really um

like prevalent with anxiety, like the future time steps, the further out you go in the future, like the more like you can't predict what's gonna happen.

And so that's like the underlying basis for anxiety.

And I thought about this and I also thought about the question about motivation and it made me think of Tony Robbins has like,

this um like theory that there's like six like driving factors that like influence people or motivate people through life and like you know depending on personality type or whatever and um their like uh certainty is one of them um uncertainty is also one of them like people who like variety or um

Then there's growth and altruism.

And I can't remember all of them, what they all are.

But it's interesting to think about the motivation, what's an underlying motivation for people and how that relates into this type of model, as well as those driving forces through life, how you might start to model those

Things like someone who's driven by uncertainty versus someone who's driven by certainty.

The uncertainty-driven people might place more of an epistemic value than an actual action reward value.

So it's just interesting to think about that.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

I mean, there's like a paper in the works that got stalled, unfortunately, but, um, I think where we're trying to do something like that, where you're talking about, um, the way the big five, um, have kind of emerged as apparently, uh, pretty, uh, strong factorization people's behaviors, uh, people's, um, behavioral tendencies over long periods of time.

So their personalities, um,

and why they tend to factorize like that, and to which extent you can capture them with something that looks like this, and with at least one more layer, I would say.

But to some extent, yes, you can capture these tendencies towards exploration, the kind of exploration drive versus... So risk aversion and risk...

um as we risk seeking behaviors


SPEAKER_00:
i'm actually seeing when it comes out um cool blue that was really interesting and it reminded me about how people prefer let's just say to read different amounts and to read different topics so for some people historical fiction versus fiction science fiction all these different genres and sub genres it's related to maybe what their regime of attention will latch on to and that's something that's different as you age uh and

and it's encultured and it's embedded as well.

So it's kind of an interesting example that we could go into.

And then we did a live fact check.

Act Inf 11.

way back when in 2020 we did do sophisticated uh affective inference the simulating anticipatory responses paper and that was way more anxiety driven no it wasn't just because it was 2020 and then also the first one of this year with um adam saffron and colin de young was the big five

cybernetic big five kind of free energy inspired uh are based as well so um yep it's just it's good you know you you did say we're kind of going through them fast but there's so many to read and just to even get a little bit of a grasp on it it's to read 25 in a year or one every two weeks

it's kind of a pace that we have to hold up to.

But I'm sure you read more than one every two weeks.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
I guess I did read it somewhere and I was like, whoa, you...

I wasn't sure.

I didn't remember whether it was like sophisticated inference or sophisticated effective inference.


SPEAKER_00:
But so it was the effective one.

It was just the conference proceedings, though.

So it was a very short paper.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it's a little bit too minimal, I think, to really.

It was more like a technical note.

And it would be hard to really get it just based on if you're not so familiar with the modeling.

actual like nitty-gritty you know like it's like in that sense conference proceedings are just a way to communicate to some uh people who are just in the exactly on this technical

for its domain and not best for communication to broader scientific audiences.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Well, kind of on that point, and anyone can raise their hand, I move the slide to the additional information where there's the code and

Maybe just what would you say about the code?

What are the inputs or the outputs?

What would somebody need to run this code or like what could they do with it?

And it's really cool that you did provide all this information, but to kind of bridge that gap that you just mentioned, what does this function do or what do these different scripts do?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so essentially you first need SPM 12.

um is that contains the core functionality for um yeah that it's based on and then these scripts are like additional um are like adaptations of scripts in spm 12. um and the only thing you need to do is run spm mdp pbx emo app um

So that stands for emotions factorized, which is something I worked on at some point.

But yeah, in the rest of the, so let me see.

So that's of course not enough for you to, then you just get,

model that we already have uh rerun to generate the figure yeah the one that's on this slide before so this yeah this one yeah and the one above it so let me just it's not by now it's so long but i would have to

This is cool, but... We're in the process of what I would recommend, actually, in the future.

I mean, I don't... To be honest, I don't like ModLog at all.

The only reason I worked with it was that the existing SPM active inference modeling was part of the existing SPM package.

But there's lots of...

Yeah, important work has been done by Alex Shams and Conor Hines and a few others to transform everything to Python and to do computational optimization while we're at it.

So there's this GitHub page called Inferactively.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, here we are on it.

P-Y-M-D-P.

Inferactively is the GitHub repo.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

So instead of trying to get ModLab running on your PC, I would recommend just working with and then in the future, we'll have a module in there that can do the same as what we did in this paper.

Awesome.

So that's something I think that is much more sustainable for the future.

We're working on integration with GPUs, et cetera, to make things that can be simulated in a scalable way, can integrate with TensorFlow.

So you can even do kind of hybrid modeling with what they call amortized active inference.

So it's like deep learning models that are connected to

components of these Lego boxes that I was describing.

But if you want, I can run you through this MVP in MATLAB.

It's just that I'm not a fan of MATLAB myself, so I think it would be a little bit of a waste of time.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, let's definitely have a model stream for the Python, because I know that will be something a lot of people are interested in.

Because the MATLAB, it has a certain charm to it, but I can see how you might want to develop

with other approaches, even though when Christopher and Ryan walked us in the model stream through the code, just seeing how the matrices multiply, there's something nice about how it was done in MATLAB, but it's not interfacing with all these modern tools like TensorFlow that you mentioned.

So anyway, but let me see.


SPEAKER_05:
I think we can move on.

But I think what I should do, basically, based on your feedback, is write a little bit of an explanation of what to do with those codes if you want to run it.

Let's say you do want to use mobile.

If you want to run it, what you should do.

That's actually useful feedback.

The reason I added these codes was mostly for...

Yeah, reproducibility, in case other technical folks want to look at what I did.

But it's not really out of the box in a way that anybody not familiar with it could easily use it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

My advisor, she would always say, make it so that the anthropologists from Mars will know what to do with that spreadsheet.

Because even for people in the field or even yourself, months later, it's like, wait, what?

That was my research.


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, the proper practice is to add like a how-to, like a readme page on the GitHub.

So, I mean, that's good that you noticed that.

Yeah.

I guess it's in my mind a kind of transitioning away from a lot.

I kind of felt like, you know, but I do agree with it.

should round up that part of the documentation.

Cool, yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Blue or Steven, either of you raise your hand.


SPEAKER_03:
Just one point about the effective charge piece that you mentioned before.

Can I just check, is that like an in-between level between one inference layer and the next?

Is that correct?


SPEAKER_05:
That's entirely correct.

Once we go to figure, I think it's figure six.

um let me see here seven seven sorry yep so um essentially now we connect um what's happening in a higher level connected to inferences about our predictions about what's happening on the lower level

And that's when the effective charge basically becomes like an ascending message that informs the inferences.

So there is an equation in the manuscript that I don't see here, because it was a separate table.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, this part?


SPEAKER_05:
We split figure seven into two.

These are the priors, so this doesn't describe the posterior beliefs.

The effective charge basically comes into... Yeah, I understand there's many figures in the paper, so we didn't include that one.

But if you go to... It's in multiple places.

essentially what we call affected evidence on page, in the files, page 420.

But the actual page is 23, you know, the PDF.

But just for... Here we go.

Yeah, to answer your question.

Yeah, yeah, exactly.

So just to illustrate what's happening or to explain,

And in this paper, we use bars to indicate posterior beliefs.

So here the bar is on the left.

The bar S is like posterior beliefs at time capital T. So this is the cross-trial time steps.

So large, yeah, cross-trial time, essentially.

The superscript here is indicating the affective state.

so posterior state the posterior affective state on the higher level is a soft max function of um it consists of the prior bully which is the logarithm of the previous posterior from the previous time step multiplied by the transition matrix so that's the where the prior comes from and then

This term that you see after that comes from what we call Bayesian model reduction.

And it's what happens when you want to connect discrete and continuous state-space models.

Again, this term drops out of the derivations that you can do based on this formalism, Bayesian model reduction.

this case this sort of pre-energy minimization assuming that changes are small enough locally are small enough to make this connection and then if you ask what's small enough well that's something you would have to test in in the world and see if this approximation holds and essentially what you see here

is the effective charge coming back to haunt you so to speak but now as a message that is passed upwards so the higher level state is consists of two kind of extremes and so the extreme positive side so beta plus and the extreme negative side beta minus and at any point in time the organism is somewhere in between

It's never extreme.

It's never like at the exact extremes.

It's beliefs, just like you can never have 100% certainty about anything.

Because downwards in the hierarchy, we make predictions.

That's where we do Bayesian model averaging.

Upwards, you have to gather these messages.

So that's what I call effective accuracy.

Let's start to use Bayesian model reduction.

Yeah, so that's essentially a very long answer to your question.


SPEAKER_03:
but yeah, no, thanks.

Just, just one other thing with that is this thing gives a way for somatic kind of processes, you know, in every day or even in trauma to be integrated in a way, because it could be that non cognitive processes could be at play in adjusting this effective charge or keeping a score of that.

Yeah.

And that could give a way for that to influence perception or action model selection.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, and this high-level state is not constrained in any way in terms of what you... You can add other types of evidence from other action models.

Other components of your system can add their own effective charge.

So...

That's at some point in the beginning, we mentioned this effective workspace theory.

So like, um, we call it effective charge because it's essentially a pretty domain general can be gathered from any kind of actual model.

It can also be used to model the way when you're listening to music, your attentional action model has, it's kind of being played around with, um,

with congruence and discongruence.

And you can kind of create mismatches and matches.

You can create fluency and disfluency.

And this all creates some kind of affective roller coaster, so to speak.

So these ups and downs can be gathered from an action model that would be guiding your attention states.

So the question of what to attend to when you're listening to music could be something that generates affective charge and then informs your valence state.

It can also be purely associative.

So it doesn't exclude purely associative types of valence.

So there can be certain things that

comes back in the contextual evidence.

If you go a little bit down.

I think it's up here.

Oh, yeah.

So you can also gather evidence from, in this case, we just talked about contextual states in terms of whether the food is on the left or on the right.

But you can also have contextual evidence being passed back up.

And that can

generates some kind of poplopian learning, where you just learn to associate particular contexts with particular positive states or negative states.

So there's also space to include these kind of

what I think are computationally a little bit less interesting types of valence, valence experience, because they're just kind of happy and learning in a sense, but it doesn't make them less important for experience.

So these purely associative relationships also come... Actually, we discussed that in the... There's a discussion set that's part of that.

and see how far we get today.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

I wanted to ask actually about Figure 10.

What were you showing in Figure 10 or how could we read this?

And does it apply to your model only or future models, other categories of models?


SPEAKER_05:
Everything that's happening here from the orange

uh orange level downwards let's say is is what we implemented but everything that's in the grade is basically something with we presupposed so we presupposed for example that this rat already learns how to how the mace works um we presuppose that they have some perceptual capacity that or as in some action control over

let's say, where their body is.

So all the things that we needed to presuppose in order to actually do the simulation demonstration are in the gray part of this box.

But the nice thing is that if you follow the arrows, this gray

part, so evolution, development, and learning, it's also imported in terms of timescales.

And the nice thing is that it's always a circular story.

So you get these different nested timescales that are all influencing each other recursively.

And once you get down to our actual computational experiments,

you are at the point in time where you enter basically on the left, this gray arrow that points into the affected box.

It's kind of you can think of that as the one that initializes the simulation, so to speak.

So this gray arrow is what initialized everything that allowed us to even simulate it.

And then we explore the dynamics of what happens within that.

And all the other arrows are basically illustrating that.

So the orange arrows provide priors of precision for the action model, for the perceptual state.

So that's all the orange arrows.

Then from the minimal meta cognition level, again, there's this arrow pointing down.

and to inform action jointly the effects end up informing perception and then it kind of passes through in the way that you described also last time in the last session and that's where it kind of connects to the world and then it passes back up again

And that's where this kind of perceptual integration happens and it trickles upwards into all these layers.

We could have simulated learning as well.

So that's where this orange arrow points back up on the right to the posterior phenotype.

We didn't simulate learning because there wasn't the focus of the paper.

But we have the machinery.

It's in our Lego box.

And that actually, I think, will make the story much even more interesting because then you can think about active learning and how that influences affective states.

So how people then enjoy learning just for the sake of learning.

or how they can learn to associate affective states and contextual states and how that recursively influences their system.

There's one simulation that I've been preparing where we have a setup like this and we actually simulate the development and learning as well.

And the idea there is that

you have a child, you can simulate a child, and it has these hyperparameters that influence different parts of its lower-level model.

But in the beginning, these hyperparameters are very unstable.

And then there is a kind of parent, simulated parent, that labels the states, like basically kind of reflecting and giving the system labels to work with.

And in the end, the idea here is that the labels end up stabilizing the inferences.

And this is kind of to simulate the idea that, as we know, that social interaction is crucial to develop any kind of emotional control, emotional self-control.

So there's these famous stories about children growing up in the wild or something like that, and then never really reach a level where they can

exert this type of self-control and reflective capacity, communicative capacity that we have.

Anyway, so that's another tangent, a very interesting one.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, very interesting.

Stephen, and then anyone else with a question?


SPEAKER_03:
And in this diagram, you mentioned minimal metacognition, and then you've got affect and context.

So would that minimal metacognition be the sort of phenomenological consciousness, the kind of awareness that you can't necessarily take a perspective on, and it goes up into affect and context?

And that's where it's consolidated enough to be able to sort of take a perspective on it.

Would that be correct or?


SPEAKER_05:
And that's how I do tend to view it to some extent.

I mean, the actual representation of these precisions is often assumed or hypothesized to be, to occur in a,

in a localized fashion in the brain to some extent in this trade.

That's just a hypothesis that can be tested.

And it's actually an interesting thought that other biological systems can have entirely different kinds of representations for this precision term.

Daniel works with ants colonies.

They might have their own way of encoding this type of reliance on action modes that maybe has to do with weather conditions or something like that.

There can be some kind of shared, very minimal way of encoding that reliance.

Nice.

It doesn't necessarily, it's not, in that sense, pretty agnostic on how it's represented.

And you can just test hypotheses on how it works in real.


SPEAKER_00:
And also, it's really interesting how we can draw out that link to qualitative concepts or to phenomenological experience, but that's not part of this model.

This is a claim about a modeling architecture that lends itself

to certain kinds of calculations that maybe previously would have fallen within the domain of information theory or just control theory or cybernetics or just Bayesian inference or just multi-scale systems modeling.

And I know that those are some of the areas that you've drawn on in your work, Kasper, which is why you could kind of see that there was kind of like one, two, three, but not four, five, six,

for where the active inference model was going, because you even discussed how before some of your recent papers, the active inference model had less temporal depth and less metacognitive depth.

So it's just really cool to hear about how it kind of remaps where the questions and the modeling approaches fit in with respect to maybe previous disciplinary approaches.

So Dean, and then anyone else with a question.

Oh, you're muted, Dean.


SPEAKER_07:
So because you've got the time flow from left to right, and that's pretty much consistent, and you've got the parabolic introduced from top down and then back up,

Can you see, Caspar, the idea that around perception, around action, around minimal metacognition, and around effect and context, there could be a counterclockwise spin?

because I actually saw that in the way that people were working, not even aware of this model, but that that's kind of the direction where you've got the flow across the bottom and then the introduction of the parabola from top down and then back up.

And that's where you could actually get people looking through both directions.

That's why you had the effective valence.

That's part of where the charge came from.

Or am I sort of confusing the matters?

Because when I looked at that figure, I actually saw how people in that flow state were able, what direction the spin was actually going around the middle of your figure.

Hmm.

Hmm.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, this figure is more like, yeah, it's not, it kind of moves away from the very precise mathematical meaning of the other graphs, right, the directly cyclical graphs.

But it's a little bit of the same ideas here, like you said.

In that sense, it doesn't really matter where they're moving.

The reason that I put the upwards arrows on the right is that in temporal sense, it's representing the posteriors.

So you're moving from the prior to the posterior.

But then if you would, because it's nested, every next level means that you already cycled from basically yesterday's posterior is tomorrow's prior, or like yesterday's posterior is today's prior in some way, right?

So the capacity to integrate to the next iteration can also be itself a problem.

So you see that a lot with people with traumas that actually integrate an experience too strongly in the way they work.

And this actually comes to very interesting questions where it's like functional forgetting, something like,

a lot of maybe a lot of these meditative practices actually are able to do it's like help us forget the relevant the irrelevant bits or the things that we shouldn't take to the next integration right um that's sort of the the counterclockwise spin is is just essentially


SPEAKER_07:
making expressing reflection and so sometimes you choose to reflect on something sometimes you over reflect on it which is what you're describing but all i'm saying is is that when i saw this it was it was just more confirmation of yeah i i think it's i think it's correct that's not just one yeah it's a nice idea and how it's uh i mean the reflection part and kind of becoming aware


SPEAKER_05:
of the things that you want to, so how you want to learn, basically.

It's something that we did try to capture.

It's very interesting.

You start to be able to simulate processes like meditation and what's happening in the mind when you develop control on these attentional processes on a higher level.

Anyway.

But I think Stephen wants to say something.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just following on from that, and what's interesting is how this brings in this idea of affective representation and how we think of representation normally as something, as a thing,

in the head as opposed to maybe objects in the niche which we act on or create or interact with and now you've got an idea in ST of ST2 I suppose of this kind of what could be stored in an accessible form where the prior phenotype may not be entirely accessible except through science

you know, is this effective representation?

I just wondered how you see, because we've had quite a lot of conversations about this, is what do you see representation being in all of this, or the possibility for active inference and representation?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so what I like about this approach is that we basically don't have to pin down exactly

and what the effective state means, as long as we're just trying to figure out how it can be inferred for an organism.

And the organism can use very limited cues to infer that.

And then you have a whole kind of organic

uh states of the system that that will correlate with that inference to some extent but just as the organism is doing is doing that internally um usually we think about this in terms of animals but it's interesting to think about more abstract types of representation and three just in the end the statistical concept so

I work with models where you add a layer on top of this affected contextual layer, so like here, but just in terms of to link it back to verbal expressions.

And if you ask me, what does the representation mean?

In this case, it just has a very specific computational effect on how

think of it as a generative model generative models so each affective state would be correspondent with a certain mode of cognition and action all the way down to the lowest level the model doesn't have to integrate or like specify all of those details as long as you know how let's say the connections

in each level happen, the rest becomes like an emergent whole.

And I think I've tried to be sensitive of the way in which the internal representations are not necessarily the same as the actual affective state if you look at all the different layers combined.

And that's when you think about that, then you start to get into really interesting domains like this disconnectedness between your beliefs about your affective state and the way your system is currently behaving and the different kinds of affective disorders.

You can start thinking about basically hallucinations or like self-reinforced anxiety as in one of those papers.

I guess I don't really have a very concrete answer, because these representations are meant to be abstract until you start to model them in specific contexts.

And I think

Oh, yeah, you want to?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, no, I think that that that makes a lot of sense.

And also, if our represents if what I see as being a representation or models that we people think is in people's heads are actually always something in the niche.

that we work with, so to speak.

So what we know is the action model for how to act and perceive to recapitulate.

It just feels like we have that also in the brain, but if it's actually

to some extent, this would be the most concrete model is the emotional imprint that helps then undertake the interaction with the models that we work with.

But those models don't need to be in the brain in that representational form, but you might need some affective

code it possible to know how to and that ties in a lot with some of the work with micro phenomenology and some of the work with um working with mental space psychology so it's quite interesting um yeah so um thanks for this comment yeah i mean um what motivated me actually to move in this direction is something that's not really included in the figure that much here that's super important is the social dimension um


SPEAKER_05:
And then once you think of this affective state, like kind of internal representations that are inferred on any number of cues, any number of arbitrary number of sources of data, so to speak.

You can also think of the facial expressions of my own specifics as being informative, my affective state.

You start having a very natural way of modeling things like contagion.

and just in general this kind of empathic responses where if you're also kind of tracking the group affect and that has places priors on your in your individual experience basically have a very natural way of moving from the connecting kind of the bodily

interaction with the world in the niche, as you described, to this abstract social relations that we're tracking all the time.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm involved in a project right now that's primate foraging.

And it's really interesting to think about the group dynamic versus seeking out your own epistemic knowledge.

So this is just foraging, and it's an agent-based modeling project.

But I wonder, to what extent, instead of knowing which trees have fruit, for example, if I could just follow a group member.

So I wonder, just what you had said about the social dynamic, is this kind of interchangeable, just following the group?

I mean, we're modeling contagion and so forth.

So following the group, is that interchangeable for epistemic knowledge, really?


SPEAKER_05:
So there's different things you can do.

I mean, one of the ways you could factor that in here, it's like where something that has been worked out in the active inference communities in terms of deontic cues, basically cues that other conspecifics give you to kind of indicate what contexts you are in, and then your action model specifying for this particular context, what is the appropriate action.

So,

a very simple thing can be like in whether you are in a context where you're following another con specific or not.

can be something that I think bees have their kind of dance that they do to indicate whether other bees should be following them.

So there's like a kind of way in which these levels can talk to each other through signaling basically the appropriate what the context is.

And then from that inference about the context, you can have the whole action model kind of rolling out on the lower level.

And I think the following behavior that you described does have a pretty direct analogy to our innate tendency to synchronize affective states with our non-specifics.

Even with other animals, it's actually pretty interesting.

Something that other animals also seem to be able to do, to pick up on nervousness across species.

Stress, markers of stress, we seem to be able to pick up on those across species in a generalized fashion.

It's like an endless number of rabbit holes you can go down.


SPEAKER_00:
Here's one more little rabbit hole.

Looking at this figure, it reminded me of concurrent programming languages like Golang and the idea of having nested processes that were defined by interfaces.

So we've been talking a lot on the interfaces as Markov blankets or holograms with Chris Fields, but interfaces are also programming

patterns that make nested processes that can be effective or tractable or run on distributed computation without halting or spiraling out so uh in addition to the python potentially there could be something like a concurrent implementation and then it relates to this question about representation like is the representation a static object

Is it a dynamic process?

And I don't know what the formal answer is, but it reminds me of what we did talk about with Chris Fields with the types as processes and the choose spaces.

So maybe by defining these interfaces with the right dimensionality or bandwidth or structure, however the screens are defined,

then there will potentially be model ability not philosophical clarity on whether oh is the group is the party conscious or the person or the part of the brain it's like the ant question those are going to be potentially perennial debates but the model ability of the ant colony evacuation is going to be more akin to the model ability of these other higher level processes because of how um abstractly but also excessively defined the interfaces are


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think in a similar way, the way I see these representations, I'm kind of fine with just thinking of them entirely as implicit descriptions of something that implicitly occurs in the system, basically, like a kind of tool, essentially.

And if you make it explicit, it ends up being amenable to modeling.

doesn't mean that there's ever this kind of explicit representation in the system, actually.

All we're doing is making these things explicit so we can actually compute things.

I'm pretty happy with being agnostic about whether there's anything.

I have no doubt in the fight of representationalism versus an activism, I think.

They're both pretty, I mean, they both have points, and I'm pretty happy with the models being agnostic on this question, because models can't speak for themselves in the end.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

It's almost like you're putting up your code and your model as an evidence.

And if they want to prosecute the case, if they want to have their debate and debate whether your evidence is supporting their notion or this notion or some future notion, it's a second level question.

And the first level is actually what you're just laying out here and how the variables are linked to each other.

And then there's alternate architectures that are possible.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, every model is, in that sense, just a very elaborate hypothesis.

And you can just test it by doing empirical work.

And then every architecture can be compared to each other once you have.

And to do that, you need to go explicit.

And that's the only part, I think, where

we're doing being reductive to make it to get a computational grip on it a scientific grip you could say actually I have been working on getting more observational constraints and these types of things but there's such an amazing

richness of things to explore by just even just capturing the phenomenology that we already have accessible in the first person.

That often you can already get very far by just making sure that whatever your model is going to be, it has to be able to recapitulate

our lived experience that we have directly accessible.

It's actually one of the more recent paper that I could share is from generative models to generative passages.

I don't know if any of you are familiar with that kind of work by Varela.


SPEAKER_00:
if i can ask one question on this figure casper so you mentioned that models are hypotheses which might be really interesting to people because they might think about the model as generating hypotheses which it also can do but actually you're talking about how the architecture and the way that the variables are connected is itself not some authoritative claim or final uh

description of the system but it's a hypothesis so it makes me wonder if somebody says well i think that there's you know letter um you know insert your favorite letter here and i want to hook it up to e i want e to be influenced by a new letter r or something like that is that going to um

keep this nice mathematical tractability?

Are there certain kinds of wires that if you cross them, just the script is going to die?

Is there certain pieces where we know that we can build the Legos really well?

Or are there certain, just how do we know which pieces can be tinkered with and what structural changes could even be done?

Or is it like all by all?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, one of the constraints is this

Basically, the way it works is that you can have only local interactions.

And that's the Markov blanket.

So in the end, the way it's kept at least close to biological plausibility is by asserting that you only specify

local interactions between variables.

And that's what these errors do.

So one kind of forbidden thing to do would be to connect this policy variable directly to the observations.

Because then you're breaking the market.

As the policies are directing in this case, the relations between hidden states, and the hidden states are

generating, or like, based on the hidden states, you're generating observations, predictions about them.

So there are certain kind of forbidden things in these directed acyclic graphs.

That being said, it's pretty universally, I mean, as I said, whenever there's an error, it actually implies bidirectional interactions.

you're completely free to add an high level state that modulates your e matrix so the yeah the sky is the limit so to speak i mean in the end you should be able as long as you keep this marco blanket structure intact so you ensure that it's biologically possible what you're doing um then

You can make any number of states connect to each other.

And if there's redundancy in your model, that should show up because the pre-energy can be decomposed as complexity minus accuracy.

So any increase in the number of states in your model will result in an increase in uncertainty about the parameters.

And that's the complexity.

So like Occam's razor is built in to the way these models work.

So yeah, in some, yes, you're free to do almost anything here.

But if you look at the model evidence in the end, it will punish you if you made your model unnecessarily complex.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for this awesome response.

We'll have a question from Dave and then any closing thoughts and then that will be it for 19.1.

So Dave, go for it.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, two points about the point of local interactions only.

They're kind of at odds with one another.

First, is that actually the definition of locality?

Whatever interacts immediately

is by definition local second in one of the computer simulations that was put together at the friston lab several years ago the dots on the screen where he's trying to get up uh no i assume a simple model of how market markov blankets work he found that the distant portions of the simulation

were more accurately modeled than the nearby ones.

And in my mathematical illiteracy, I cry out, oh, so it's all working holographically.

The intermediate entities are focusing the more distant ones.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so this is really interesting that you picked up on this, because this is why we kind of start with this marble blanket,

criterion.

But then when you kind of go into the way these dynamics work, it actually gets more interesting once you're able to predict things that are outside of your system.

And the further away, the harder it gets usually.

But like you described in this, so I think you're talking about the Markov blanket, the kind of soup,

emergence and the emergent life paper.

And in that case, for some reason, this also has to do with the way he set up the state space system.

But the way he identified the crop, basically, he did it just in terms of cross correlation.

between the states of these chemical particles and the locations of the particles outside.

And it was an emergent effect.

I'm not sure.

I think it has to do with a particular simulation study.

But if we kind of abstract it a little bit away from that particular simulation, when you go to deep temporal models, actually,

what you're trying to do is you're trying to, you could call it the hologram, I guess, in some way, you're trying to create an image of what the future looks like outside of the current blanket.

And that's why they call these the temporal models in the sense semi-Markovian.

So lots of these interesting cognitive

phenomena actually emerge when you start to hack your way out of your blanket, so to speak.

And you're trying to get a grip on what's happening outside.

And that can be spatially, it can be temporary.

So temporary would be in the future, spatially would be places you can't reach.

So yeah, that's a very interesting question.

I think the semi-marked open aspect

It's something that has been actually discussed recently.

I think that it holds an important key to the way our cognition works is that by kind of absorbing information over time and combining with the right priors and the right, so nature and nurture have to be like kind of coalescing in a way that

gives you a grip on things that are not immediately accessible.

Anyway, so that's a very interesting question that I can't directly answer because we just know that for any physical system, like a biological system, to work, we can only assume local interactions.

And then the rest of the story is trying to figure out how far you can get.

it's just local interactions and to create those what you call holograms i guess you could call them like this is a particular literature you're drawing on you use that term i think chris field actually talked about holographs specifically dave what were you thinking of a holograph okay interesting well i got that from the chapter of mark soln's book that just came out in the last number of weeks


SPEAKER_06:
where he first is talking about actually visiting Carl Friston, but he doesn't use the term holographic.

The only place I've seen that in this kind of context is some discussion of using interferometry to see around corners.

This is something that presumably people can't do, but instruments can, that the

There's a holographic or holograph-like effect that allows either with sound or with light to image objects that can't be seen visibly.

But you have to have a corner.

As long as there's a corner, evidently that induces the kind of self-interference that allows distant perception.

You know, more relevant probably is the way that conspecifics in flocks and so forth convey information, mediated information.

Sorry, I don't have anything more specific than that.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome, awesome point, Steve.

Thanks for sharing it.

It's time, and that was an awesome point one discussion.

Really appreciate having you on here, Casper, and everyone else who's joining live.

So we kind of just close with little, you know, pause the video or pause time, whatever your affordances.

Think about these questions.

See you.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks for organizing.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Oh, for sure.

And just fill out the feedback form in the calendar.

Invite.

We'll see you next week.

So just keep thinking about the paper and other topics.

We'll be back for a follow-up discussion on the same paper next week.

So bye, everyone.

Thanks.

Bye.

## z_hArARMQ20

SPEAKER_08:
hello and welcome to the active inference lab this is active inference live stream number 19.2 on april 13 2021 so welcome everyone and thank you for joining we are the active inference lab we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing active inference

You can find us at the links that are listed here.

This is recorded in an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can be improving on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Today we're in the follow-up discussion 19.2, our third discussion following on the .0 contextualizing video and the .1 first discussion last week with Casper and everyone else.

And so today in 19.2, we're gonna be continuing this discussion on deeply felt affect

hearing some slides from Casper, bringing up some of these questions that we're having about implications and other topics.

So really the goal is just to learn and discuss, and we'll be going through whatever we need to, and next week and beyond, we'll be discussing different papers.

So let's just do a quick round of introduction and then we can see and hear what Casper has brought to share with us today.

So I'll start, I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc in California and I'll pass it to Scott.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi there, folks.

I'm Scott David.

I'm the director of the Information Risk and Synthetic Intelligence Research Initiative at the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab.

And I'll transfer it to Alex.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

I'm Alex.

I'm a researcher in Systems Management School in Moscow, Russia.

And I pass it to Blu.


SPEAKER_01:
Good morning.

I am Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico, and I will pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary, Canada, retired, trying to keep up with all this active influence stuff.

And I'll pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Steven.

I'm in Toronto.

I'm just working on a practice-based PhD.

I do a lot of work with participatory theatre and social topographies for exploring community development.

And I'll pass it over to, I think it's now Kasper.

Is that right?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

So my name is Kasper Hesp.

I'm a PhD student at the University of Amsterdam, focusing on

and the emergence of social cognition in development and evolution.

And today I will be continuing, as Daniel said, from last time.

So I'll be mostly assuming that you've already listened to that livestream as well.

But just for everybody's sanity,

I'll give a short intro on what we've been discussing so far.

And just to describe the context of this research, when I started this particular topic, Deeply Felt Affects, for this paper, I was in the process of setting up the topic of my PhD research and focusing on social cognition.

But then in doing that, I realized that we were seriously lacking.

There were serious gaps in the literature on how we actually connect from our bodily existence to an abstract social world.

Our expectations about our social world shape the way we feel physically and how that recursively shapes the way we think about our social environment.

And that's where I actually got into this kind of, well, you could call it a rabbit hole, of affect and emotions.

Because I think that affect is basically the kind of, through emotions is what links the social world, the abstract social relations that we are expert at, innately, you could say even, to a large extent.

If you look at the efficiency with which children in elementary school kind of track each other's popularity and whether they're part of the group or not, and this kind of, I mean, of course, we're not making, I don't like the dichotomy of nature and nurture.

It's an emergent system.

It's like there's an interaction going on.

You can say that one of the things we teach each other to do and that our system is kind of prepared to do to a large degree is to track events happening in our social environments.

And from an evolutionary perspective, that's a very logical thing to do because for hundreds of thousands of years, you could say each of our...

Our survival would be entirely dependent on our capacity to be part of the group, so to speak.

Our capacity to function in a group context.

Not just on the individual level, but also on the group level.

So our ability to survive as a species depends on our capacity to coordinate and distribute tasks and specialize in different directions.

in the very same way, shaping and basically forming a body at a higher level of organization.

And just like the cells in our bodies are differentiated in different directions, we as humans have to differentiate ourselves to form one large functioning body.

And you think like, what does this have to do with the paper?

Well, essentially,

The idea is that the affective states, as we talked about them last time in terms of kind of subjective fitness, we focus largely on the affective states of a single agent doing some task in like a teammates.

But today we'll kind of move towards steps beyond that.

And in particular, the way in which tracking the effective states of others in the body, so to speak, in the unit of organization as a group.

how that tracking can allow you to find your place in the body, just completely analogous to the way in which cells track each other's stress signals in the body.

So the pain...

Basically, our capacity to empathize with others would be very similar to the way in which cells respond to each other's stress signals.

Yeah, Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
I'd just be curious to know, in your sort of journey, often affect is tied to sensory feelings, you know, at the kind of personal level, and sort of so that it becomes a kind of a macro-social experience

sort of measure?

Was that something that you already had in mind?

Or is that something that sort of evolved as you were exploring this, these questions?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I was essentially interested in that connection between the very strong like experiential aspects of affects, like when you feel embarrassed, you're literally getting you can get a red face basically.

So it's like a very much an embodied aspect of that.

And somehow you're able to connect that to, let's say, your beliefs about how other people are perceiving you.

So that connection between the bodily states and those abstract beliefs about social environments is something that has kind of driven this effort.

Scott?


SPEAKER_03:
One thing that's fascinating to me is that the notion that there might be multiple levels of that harmonic coupling, right?

And multiple pathways so that the dynamics of it, it's certainly, you know, it's everything, every relationship and interaction is describable potentially as a binary.

And then you can elaborate on it.

right?

And so there's all sorts of nested affordances that have direct and indirect qualities to informing those interactions.

And so that picking apart and disambiguating the general relationship is fascinating, right?

And it feels like just anticipating the surprises that active inference continuously brings us, that there's going to be a

guess i would not just say a scale independence but also a local independence to some aspects of it so what i mean by that is there'll be analytical interoperability i would expect more broadly than we might get with other analytical framings simply by nature of the manner in which active inference approaches the questions of relationship

So what I guess I'm saying in that is I think it may be possible, and this is my years as a lawyer, it may be possible to insert rhetorical, artificial, or let me use the word synthetic instead, linkages in there.

And that's something I'd be very interested in understanding what your thoughts are and how we can, you know, we assert them into being, right?

And so describing them, if it's efficacious to describe them in a certain way,

then they become adopted those things don't exist in nature until we describe them so we have an opportunity now to describe and disambiguate these things in a way that i'll use the it's like tempering with the buck and the well-tempered clavier we get to decide on the notes or like when they decided on 360 degrees in a circle because it divides well

I think that was the reason the Phoenicians or whoever did that.

So here we get to maybe get to decide without doing an injustice to reality on how to parse the truth.

linkages anyway it's it's exciting because i love the way you you introduce that possibility of starting to pick apart those things and call and name them in a way that starts to do like david bohm stuff where every reality is first a thought and here we're having the thought so thank you for inviting us into that space it's fantastic


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you.

Thanks for joining.

We'll get more into that in a second.

But I read it like it's kind of refers back to what I talked about last time in terms of compositionality or the kind of Lego box in the sense that yeah, this abstract relationships can be applied on different levels of organization.

And that gives you a freedom in the sense that if you're able

to capture these relationships and the way they talk to each other on the different levels of description.

That's really essential.

I think also Blue was putting up her hand.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm anxious to see how this model unfolds in tracking others.

I think that that's a great way to add an extra layer, but I wanted to kind of ask first about the model as we discussed it last week.

It's just something I've been thinking about.

we talked about how surprise is related to like negative affect, right?

So like, you know, whenever your prediction doesn't track that that's the negative affect or that's the, as opposed to the positive valence.

And so I just was wondering, like,

Do we ever leave room for pleasant surprises?

Like, you know, if I don't go food shopping, I don't expect there to be a chocolate cake in my fridge, but I come home and I find a chocolate cake.

I'm like, this is awesome.

So is there room for that or is it like incongruent or how do you resolve that?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, in fact, it's a necessity that comes out of the fact that we talked about last time that the effective charge only

emerges when there is a difference between the prior and the posterior.

So like you can be pleasantly, you can be positively surprised.

Your predictions can be better than expected.

Essentially so.

Or let's say reality can be closer to your preferences than you thought it was.

Or like further away.

let's say, so pleasant surprise is when you get a nice present from your loved ones or something, but then basically there's like a kind of surprise in the sense that there is a certain preference being met that you hadn't anticipated.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah.

It's like, thanks.

Thanks for the gift card.

Oh, wow.

It's so much.

It's like another surprise after you renormalized it to the fact that you were receiving a gift, you made an expectation.

Oh, maybe it'll be $20 and then it's more.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, there's that aspect and then there's also purely on the information processing level, so to speak, when you're listening to music or some kind of something that's aesthetically pleasing.

There's often these kind of stimulation have some patterns that have inherent predictability.

So like there, you could say there can be surprisingly easy to resolve.

So it usually starts with setting up some tension and then suddenly resolving that.

You can see that in many art forms, in storytelling, in jokes, telling jokes, you basically have to create the tension and then suddenly the punchline resolves that tension.

And that's exactly the unsurprising, or sorry, the surprising part of that reduction.

in the free energy essentially but yeah that's a very good question i mean i think that's a very common misunderstanding also um that's uh yeah an understandable misunderstanding but that's because once you get to these hierarchical models things are often kind of get much more nuanced and you can't just say like surprise is always bad

but is surprised with respect to a particular generative model that specifies your ideal world, so to speak.

That's what creates this negative effect.

But then once you, on the meta level, start to create expectations about how close you are to this ideal,

Then once you get surprised on those expectations, it can be negative or positive section.

Um, anyway, so that's the long winded answer to your question.


SPEAKER_08:
Let's have a question from Dave and then maybe Casper will go through anything you want to present.

Cause we could definitely just keep on peppering with questions.

I totally feel it.

So Dave, and then continue on.

Oh, you're muted.

Dave continue.


SPEAKER_07:
Apropos of Blue's question, some of the older researchers on affect, notably Sylvan Tompkins and Jaak Pongsepp, go into a lot of detail on the differentiation of the emotions and sensations and affects and drives and so on.

One of the things that Tompkins did a lot on was the speed of change, very specifically.

A rapid change in a sensation may have a very different effect from a slow change.

Also, that's reflected in the face and in what he considered inborn facial expressions underneath all the layers of acculturation.

A rapid smile is sometimes directly contradictory to a slow smile.

A fast smile means, oh, you idiot.

A slow smile means, oh, you got it, too.


SPEAKER_04:
Very good point.

I mean, there's indeed

temporal dynamics they come into play are really really important as well and especially because these nested levels they tend the higher levels tend to be slower so for um feedback to trickle down let's say you need some time um so then

if it's a slower kind of moving change then your top down let's say priors can already adapt a little bit before the next step happens um i mean that's what you see in for example in music where to really make something give to

have an impact on the listener, you need to have some kind of temporal slowness to the piece where there's like an intro and like different stages to really kind of prepare your expectations, so to speak.

Or actually, the joke example is also a good one.

Some people are bad at telling jokes.

They tell the punchline too early, whereas don't give the tension time to emerge, basically.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes, Sarah actually just made a comment in the chat about how this model might be associated with humor.

And then can we think about humor in terms of surprise only?

Or how do we think about these complex layers of emotion, like catharsis, surprise at different layers of the model, like you had mentioned?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think humor, of course, many different levels.

There's this really simple jokes, right?

It's like one question and then a surprising answer.

Sometimes in lectures, I use this example like, how do you call somebody without a body and without a nose?

Nobody knows.

So there's like a really silly one, but it's kind of nice as an illustration because you can think basically the free energy is accuracy.

Sorry, it's complexity minus accuracy.

So when you get a question like that and you get two concepts without the body and without the nose and you try to find one unifying concept and it doesn't work.

And then you get the answer, and the answer is both truthful, it's accurate, and it's like a reduction in complexity.

So you get like a double bonus in this case.

But that's an easy one, because the more interesting types of humor, I guess, emerge when you have like complex storylines, and there are certain, I don't know, like satire and all these kinds of things.

So that's where it's not as easy to describe, but I think it's also possible if you had some kind of

generative model of the social environment and then certain things are kind of inappropriate and then certain things are so inappropriate that they become funny or something like that like uh yeah there's every country has those comedians i think that they're able to to walk that thin line of uh extremity and so there was another question i think um can we do one more question oh yeah


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, Scott Scott you want to go for it a question so much is just on that on the measurement of the subtleties of the free energy There are books on rhetoric and I'm trying to find the title here, but it's specifically list dozens hundreds of techniques of

rhetoric like the juxtaposition of words in a sentence does one come before the other as priming or whatever a conceptual linking of multiple sentences paragraph structuring use of foreign languages French tends to indicate certain thing of style German tends to indicate accuracy whatever and so those notions of metrics from

There are things that can be observed so they can be measured.

So the metrics from the humanities, let's call it, linguistics, psychology, they are positioned and ready to dive in to inform those variables in that space, right?

And so that is the next interoperability.

It's not going to be technical interoperability.

We got plenty of that.

It's going to keep going.

But what we have is this deluge of interactions as a result, the true exponential increase in interaction volumes because of fifth order effective Moore's law.

And what we need is meaning now to be interoperable.

And that's where we get to the drive here of the shared framings of rhetoric, right?

And so one other point, 100,000 years ago, we were one village in the horn of East Africa.

We radiated out around the world.

We came up with different food, different language, different politics, different gods, et cetera.

And now the internet brought us together for show and tell everyone's got everyone's work and active inference on each other, whether we know it or not.

And if we name it as such, it gives us a sandbox to play in at massive scales.

And I, so I love the way you're naturally.

And I think appropriately you,

And not by analogy, but by direct application of the concepts, bringing in our behaviors that are beyond what are seen as base of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, basically.

It's beautiful.

You're doing beautiful work.

So thank you for inviting us into the space.

It's great.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Actually, that comes back in a sec.

Kind of needs, hierarchy of needs, or how to deal with that.

So that's...

I did see one more question.

Until we find a break time, we can, yeah, Dean, or you.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, mine isn't really a question.

In this, I'm curious whether or not, I have a question later, but what I wanted to find out was when you discuss implications, whether or not my question gets answered before I have to ask it.

Because I think from an effective standpoint, that's the part that's going to get really interesting.

So I just wanted to put that out there because I actually do have it written down because it's a long one, but I want to ask it yet.

I want to see whether or not in the implications that you're going to share with us, whether or not my expectations align with what you think we want to kind of find out more about.


UNKNOWN:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Then I'll try my best to, I mean, it's impossible to be exhausted, but I will try my best.

Yeah.

Actually, about the book, The Rhetoric of Style, of

There's actually another interesting example of this.

It's like the art of movie directing, like choosing the shots and which shots are kind of cognitively fluent, so to speak.

And if you're creating a horror movie, you do the exact opposite of that.

And there are certain ways you can create anxiety or different kinds of emotions based on how you move the camera around and which parts you do and don't show.


SPEAKER_03:
I guess it's also a type of rhetoric with images.

And one reason I just, this book in particular, just advise that anyone take a look at this if they're looking at this, it has hundreds of different examples.

Each one's one page.

It's like sentence construction, sentence basics, etymological things, tropes, blah, blah, blah.

It just goes on.

It's like a checklist, but it's this thick.

And so this is things to measure.

for influencing other groups and so this is i really this is gene fawnstock f-a-h-n-e-s-t-o-c-k i really thought this one was a really helpful one from a checklist and systems approach because we're really doing processes here trying to anticipate those processes that we can make interoperable so good stuff um uh what was the title rhetoric or style someone's describing this

Rhetorical Style, the Uses of Language in Persuasion by Jean Faunstock, F-A-H-N-E-S-T-O-C-K.

And in fact, one of the things just we're doing in our program is we're trying to come up, we're not trying to come up with, coming up with metrics for business operating legal, technical, and social variables.

So we take technically feasible systems, like what we're talking about generally here, AI and others, and then test them for Bolt's reasonability.

And the way we get there is just by rhetoric.

Because it's storytelling.

It's folkways.

They're just folkways for the future.

And that's why the active inference gives us that framing.

It basically says, you tell us what your things are in your minds, you group, and we'll take them and synthesize them and feed them back to you.

And then you get to decide whether you like them or not.

And so it's just really an interactive element.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

You're really interesting.

All right, so let me try and get to the actual slides that I was going to share.

But I'm sure we can find many of these slides.

Let's see.

I'm going to share my screen.


SPEAKER_08:
On the bottom left, the middle button.

And then I'll resize it so it can look however it looks on everybody's computer.

I'll make it look normal, so no worries about that.


SPEAKER_04:
Looks good.

Yeah, OK.

So just to kind of recap a little bit, I mean, we already did that, but last time we were talking about this nested set of inferences, essentially, that happens or appears to happen, actually.

And pretty much to kind of hint at the instrumentalist discussion, I'm pretty much fine with being completely instrumentalist in the sense that I don't mind if it's

As I said, I like to always say that all models are wrong, but some are useful.

So I think this is a very useful way looking at it.

So it's instrumental.

Whether it's true in a realist sense, I don't really care that much, I guess, in the end.

But mostly because I just don't have a way to make that

claim um i'd say that there's no way to prove it i mean there's a way you can believe in it or something but um and you can say that you require some amount of evidence to believe in it but as long as it works i i guess um for most

applications that I'm interested in or maybe all occasions doesn't really matter whether it's yeah what's what the philosopher thinks about whether it's real or not as long as it works so that's my I don't that's why I always say I don't have to talk in this fight but yeah just to recap a little bit

Last time we talked a lot about valence, but there's also other types or dimensions of affect.

And some of them are like, there are like three fundamental dimensions, like arousal being like kind of your activity level, your current amount of resources that your body is expending for

the current task at hand or current context and power control.

So the perception of agency, you can say, whether you are in control of the situation or not.

It's not exactly the same as valence in a sense.

Last time we talked a lot about control as well, but you can have a highly positive experience, let's say, if you're

able to, if you trust that your needs are being met, even though you don't have control over them yourself.

So there's these different dimensions that to some extent can correlate with each other.

and but don't always and you have another one something like approach and avoidance which is often related to valence but you can think of cases like anger where you have an uh or aggression you have an approach reaction but you're angry um you're so you have negative valence high arousal um and an approach response

So there's these different dimensions that sometimes correlate, but not always.

And there are ways to, let's say, in very simplistic organisms, the dimensionality is very much reduced.

When you're, let's say, a baby, you start out with very simplistic dimensions.

You feel content or you feel discomfort.

As you get older, you start to get more of this dimensionality starts to become more nuanced, so to speak, so to say.

And the way I'm relating this to take this one step further,

is to think about what this means for when we have internal generative models, what those generative models, what kind of influence they have on your affective state, your current affective state.

And that's where it gets an interesting application in psychiatry.

Because as we all know, there is a dark side

to our imagination, and that is that imagination induced affect plays a role in all kinds of mental conditions and also just in everyday life.

So these are the extremities, of course, the psychiatric diagnostic categories, but everybody, I think, to some extent has experienced at least a few of these

types of.

Affects inducing thoughts and basically I can just run you quickly through them, but imagination of imagined threats and flashbacks to some bad experiences and PTSD cravings.

So that's like imagining obtaining of drugs that you have and that you're attached to, but can be also other types of addiction.

OCD is obsessive compulsive disorder is a really, really strong example of people who basically, um, kind of, you could say they're, uh, the effective responses that they get when they have certain thoughts are

reinforcing the thoughts so they are afraid of breaking their own rules and they they get this kind of dread of breaking them so there's like a cycle and this kind of cycle is very self-reinforcing cycles of affective states and that then guide the way your imagination works

And then that triggers more effective responses in depression.

And actually, I mean, you can go on, I think almost, I haven't really found any disorder in psychiatric, like the DSM that doesn't really fall into this, except for perhaps the really more like physical problems, but those are often psychosomatic.

So there's also a connection there.

Anyway, so just as a very abstract analogy, we can construct a generative model to give this some flavor.

It can be of some social environment.

Let's say you start in your four locations.

You can make this as complex as you want, but just for the sake of the simulation that I'm going to be showing,

You can start neutral, so some safe space.

There is a place that's safe, relatively safe, but you get only a small reward.

There is a place that's a little bit risky, but you can get a higher reward.

And why is it risky?

Well, because it has the probability of transitioning to this absorbing painful state.

You can think of this as like...

Asking somebody out on a date, you have the risk of getting rejected.

Or as a hunter, hunting a big prey can be dangerous, can get hurt, can also do something safer, but you get a smaller reward.

So there's many types of situations in the world where this kind of structure comes back, where the higher rewards are often associated with

potential adverse events.

The problem with this type of state space is that it very quickly explodes.

When you want to search into the future, the events as they unfold is something we call combinatorial explosion.

But let's say you want to plan ahead.

And for a few time steps, in this case, four time steps, you want to anticipate what's going to happen.

Very quickly,

the number of possibilities just becomes hard to track.

And the types of generative models that I've been working on and Carl Fristen recently did a paper with me and Thomas Parr and Danijar Hafner developed a new, it was basically sophisticated inference, something I mentioned last time as well.

a way to do this kind of research without having the whole thing become computationally intractable.

And I'm not really going into the technical details here.

But essentially, the core idea is that instead of having the whole policy space, which is multiplicative, so you have, in this case, the policy space, if for each transition you have three options, here you have four.

So you get something to the order of four

to the power of four, a little bit less in this case.

But this is just for four to the power of three, just for three time steps.

And of course, in reality, we often anticipate more steps into the future just without even thinking about it explicitly.

So there needs to be a way to do this in a way that prevents overloading the system with anticipating too many possible outcomes.

And what is interesting is that you can design a model in which the way you explore the future is guided by your affective states.

And this is what I did for this simulation where you have this exploration of the future is itself an action model in a sense that you're experimenting internally with potential futures.

And the way you basically travel through the decision tree is guided by this action model.

And because it's an action model, it's guided by your affective state.

And because it's

And the way I've linked that in my research is by having this action model precision that we talk about in terms of the valence states.

So what you get as an interesting example of what I simulated here is a model that can do over thinking and basically is something that you

may have come across when you discussed sophisticated affective inference a long time ago.

Essentially, this model, action model precision is guiding the way the tree search is performed.

But then at some point this agent starts to imagine a little bit, yeah, some negative, uh, events and starts to, um, basically the precision starts to drop of that the way they explore in the future.

And they start, start to become more likely to, um, imagine negative outcomes because when the precision on their actual was high,

They basically have a confident kind of course of action in mind and where they would go and would automatically down-regulate unlikely negative events.

But once this precision started dropping, this agent started basically

imagining these negative outcomes and that's made the precision drop even more and then this agent yeah you can see i kind of calculated in terms of the fraction of imagined events that were negative and negative outcomes call it like threat perception or something and and just an illustration of how you could simulate some process something like what we could call rumination um

or at least negative consequences produced by overthinking the situation.

And that's interesting because it means that you actually can also model too much.

You would think in machine learning that the longer you run your model, the better it gets.

But once you get this kind of recursive relationship, you can actually get a kind of breakdown in

in the way the future is imagined or anticipated.

You bring this one step further, it can also, actually I have a picture here as well.

This one.

So this is where something that looks a little bit like Maslow's hierarchy can come into play, especially when you start to make this with extra layers.

But here I just connected this sophisticated affective inference to high-level states that in this case describe exhaustion, hunger,

And the point is, and that's something I also highlighted last time, didn't show them.

So that's the more hungry you are, the more strongly you're driven by preferences for foods, the more exhausted you are, the more strongly you are driven to prevent expanding energy.

And valence is then

a kind of summary of how well you're able to manage all these different kinds of preferences.

And here I just show an example simulation where you have these three different high-level states and they're kind of, yeah, failings, sorry, exhaustion and hunger are kind of competing in a sense because the agent needs to get food.

They need to expend energy.

But yeah, while they're at home resting, their hunger increases, the energy levels, yeah, the exhaustion decreases.

So there's this kind of cycle, cyclical behavior where, yeah, if you follow, it's kind of interesting.

You see that there's hunger is in this case a very strong driver of negative effects.

You see that whenever hunger is high,

And the best situations are in this kind of cases where you see that both of them are low at the same time.

So they're basically not hungry and not exhausted either.

I mean, there's different kinds of balances you can implement here.

And this is, in that sense, just an illustration.

But you can already think of ways in which

This also relates to things like depression, for example, where these people with depression would often report, or that have experienced depression, would report that they have a lack of interest, a reduced appetite.

Because if you're really exhausted, that means that you have a strong preference against expanding energy.

And that means that you can't anticipate the pleasure of eating anymore and you can't even experience it because you have this extreme and exhaustion or, um, in this case, the express, yeah, the depression states will be associated with, um, experience of lack of energy.

Um, I mean, this is like a, an example of, um,

how different kinds of phenomena that we know from psychiatric conditions actually emerge once you start to construct these types of models in detail.

Let's see if I can.

So there is this aspect.

So this is kind of on the individual level.

And as I said, I wanted to share with you how this works when you start to think about multiple

Um, unless there are any questions, um, I'll just continue.


SPEAKER_08:
Um, you can hit, um, hide on that.

Stop sharing thing to move it.

And then I think let's have Dean and then Steven.

So Dean go for it.


SPEAKER_06:
Well,

Boing, bing, bing, bing.

My question fits perfectly with what you just talked about.

So essentially, comparing a T-search to a tree search, which I think of as natural order, and your slide about combinational explosion.

My question was, in simple likelihood mapping, the binary is what it is.

The explorer action is limited in answering what is good and what is bad on some version of valence continuum.

Past that, one wonders about what happens when trade-offs become trade-ins.

This would add a layer of complexity by keeping what is good, what is bad, and adding what if to the mix.

In the team A's example, there would be a third option, trapdoor, with optioning as function being the key.

That third door would contain, say, four times reward and two times pain, so not enough to cause permanent consequence, but still exponential relative to the queued outcome.

There'd be no queue to this option, only the barrier that is either charged or not is transparent.

you can see the reward, you can see the lightning bolt signaling that the barrier could be charged based on what if, which extends the epistemic and specific of the simplified likelihood mapping to now include distribution, which is third possibility and perception sensing, which is the potential shock just as part of a 4x result.

Do you think effective charge remains continuous

in terms of the path to renewed confidence.

I know that's a really long thing, but essentially, I thought this was the direction you might go with this work.

And as it turned out, way to go, because this is exactly the kind of question when you have a learner who's thrown into a novel context, they don't tend to only have a binary choice.

So how do we model for it?

Because we want this to apply in real situations.


SPEAKER_04:
clap clap that's perfect thanks I mean the continuous versus discrete state space problem is pretty universal yeah I think the way

Our minds tend to deal with it by coarse-graining it first in categories, and then later on when you're locally in the situation, you end up sorting out the details on the continuous level.

Exactly.

I kind of ignored the continuous state-space story here, just for the sake of the simulation.

But what's nice is when you start to look at the parameters, actually, you do get the continuous, or the way the variables vary over the course of simulation, you get the continuous part back.

Cool.


SPEAKER_08:
And also, Dean, in that, I saw you're approaching a T-turn.

It's a discrete choice in the moment, but when you pull back and when you include what if, it almost makes continuous

through the generative model of the learner, in this case, it makes that situation go from discrete to continuous.

And also when you're learning, you could rest or you could eat.

And so it's actually like our affect as learners, as we're optimally foraging, it really does need to be considered in an embodied sense, because at any point, when reading Casper's paper, we all could have thought, wow, we're a little tired.

And then that changes, that's a binary decision, but it's part of multiple overlapping continuums.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, it's reflect, reconcile, recover.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

So thanks for the question, Dean.

Stephen, go for the question and then anyone else.

And then if not, Casper.


SPEAKER_00:
I'd just like to get your thoughts on how context comes in.

I see that often we think about scaling, and it's very tempting to sort of, oh, this can scale in many ways.

But this almost speaks to this idea of, they talk about transcontextuality.

We need to think about different ways that we're in the environment.

And I think that the way that also ties in with the psychiatric challenges is that, like you say, the affect

starts to run away from itself so that unlike someone who maybe doesn't have that disorder and can recalibrate or reattune to the new environment someone with the disorder it's sort of like you say it runs away from itself but i'd be interested because one of the things with this work is it it puts the environment into this the potential treatment regime and it doesn't just make it all about the mind and the body so just context and and how that that that has an impact


SPEAKER_04:
And yeah, so in this types of models, in this case, I simplified it.

But as we remember from last time, this D, high level D would also include contextual states.

And then those contextual states can be inferred based on other things like external cues.

So for example, me observing myself

sitting at the dining table and smelling foods could trigger a kind of hunger state and then that increases my appetite basically or like increase my preference for eating food so there's there's actually yeah there's space to include um

just things like where the context determines the way your preferences are structured and or at least influences the way they're structured so and this has done interesting implications for things like um ptsd where people would get flashbacks when they're in a certain context that they associated with this experience for example or addiction as well it's like um

people on the first line of treatment in strong addictions as just take people out of their contexts so that these cravings aren't triggered.

And I think when you say transcontextuality, that's a really interesting word.

I guess what you mean is that you have a different version of you for every different context in a sense.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and it's also it's it's that that that that piece and then they're talking about that a lot now with um developing um gregory bateson's work in terms of um looking at multiple contexts and warm data they're talking about warm data so data it's not just dead data but is alive in a way the sort of stuff we talk has affective content and

transcontextuality means if you want to understand different contexts and not just deal with them separately and interrelate them then there has to be some way that they're the living component of context is somehow held alive um yeah yeah this comes actually maybe that's a nice segue unless there are other questions that's a nice segue to the um culture part because um great yep go for it yeah okay um


SPEAKER_04:
Because the most stable part of our context, besides basic physical variables like temperature, et cetera, but our body temperature, for example, but once you move beyond that, one of the most stable components is other people in our environment and how we coordinate with them.

um and it comes back to also some of the points that um were made on the rhetoric and story but just on the i i guess i kind of like to start bottom up so i just start with the way um the yeah the affected states translate um so shared effects

and cultured emotions.

So in this case, I construct a few generative models.

I can have the ones that are associated with competition or with cooperation.

And there are different kinds of models.

And it would be, if I believe somebody is an opponent, then I have a certain expectation about what they prefer.

If they're antagonistic, so in the sense that they prefer

They like to observe that I don't I don't get any reward or they may be just competing in the sense that they just want to maximize their own game and different kinds of generative models I can have for the way other agents behave.

So that would be like the antagonistic and competitive versions.

And then there's like cooperation

can also have different flavors.

You can have agents who genuinely have preferences for maximizing your gain as well.

Or you can have agents who only cooperate just because it happens to maximize their gain.

These kinds of preference factors is basically what you can infer based on how people behave and what kind of situations they want.

it's something like an altruist altruism versus egoism access.

Uh, you could think of it like that, but, and then beyond egoism, there is something like, um, uh, Machiavelli.

No, it's something like you want the other person to have less.

So that's something, I guess, even beyond egoism.

Um, anyway, there's different kinds of, um, generative models that you can, uh, apply to make sense of the behavior of others.

Um,

And just wanted to share with you a dynamic model that I made quite a long time ago, before actually I got into active inference modeling, per se.

And then it took a while to get it out and published.

But this is work from 2015.

And it was a pretty big challenge to get it published because people, yeah, it's like a dynamical model.

It's not very easy to sell to just psychologists who are used to their t-tests and everything.

But this model was about child play, or actually play can be any interaction between agents.

Actually, child play was more like the immediate application.

What is happening here is that every agent generates a decision, just a binary decision in this case, 0 and 1.

As was mentioned before, you can often reduce it back to binaries.

And in this case, it's about playing.

So are they playing together, yes or no?

If the agent tries to play with the other agent, then only if both of them are trying to do that.

they have the emergent play outcome is playing together so there's a kind of conditionality embedded in their environment if one of them tries to play together and the other one doesn't then they then you get a zero outcome um since that they both end up being low this kind of

I built this dynamical model context, I built different self influences on the cell.

This based on a motion theory by Nico, right?

I don't know if you've heard of him, he's kind of famous in the Netherlands, but motion theorists, but then kind of revamped for dynamical system theory.

And the basic idea is that you have these concerns that was also referred to as

muscle pyramid.

And these concerns tend to drive behavior, but they also tend to drive or tend to generate appraisals in terms of whether your concerns are being met.

And that can trigger emotional expressions, which then influence the other person in the environment and vice versa, of course.

So that was something from previous work.

But then I started to use this to translate it to Active Inference, essentially.

It's pretty easy to do.

You can do this with almost any dynamical model.

If you're interested in Active Inference, but you already are familiar with some other dynamical models, usually it's a pretty straightforward translation.

just means that you're reinterpreting certain parts of the maths.

Sometimes it means that you're reorganizing certain equations, but often the core notions underlying the model, because I mean, most, yeah, the models are always, I mean, usually they're thought through quite carefully by scientists.

So I tend to think of every model as a potential,

Yeah, that has something of value that can be translated into this interpretive framework.

And here it's about what kind of preferences the agents have.

And this is the lower level.

So I make it fixed.

They have preferences for being alone, being together.

And then this parameter here would be something like a symmetry bias.

So there's a preference against doing something else than the other person.

It's more of an hypothesis, as I said before.

Every model is a parameterization is a hypothesis.

It can be tested whether there's such a symmetry bias.

In practice, there does seem to be such a thing.

Anyway, just not to overwhelm you with numbers, but we can then make this hierarchical and let it play out over

over time steps.

And then this agent starts to be able to manage their concerns over time.

So some agents might like to play together a lot more than others.

So then you get something like a baseline concern for autonomy or that playing alone.

versus a concern for togetherness or belonging or something like that.

And those would be, I think, in every person are kind of competing.

So the idea here is that you're gathering evidence for each of these states.

And they are driving your preferences.

But when you start to feel too lonely,

then you might be willing to sacrifice autonomy.

And when you start to... And if I was a person, when you need more autonomy, I'd be willing to play along.

I mean, this is a basic concept.

It can be applied to any kind of balancing act between preferences.

And you can also apply it, actually, I anticipated another slide here.

Anyway, I have applied the same concept to model things like trust, so trust games, where you're trying to get a sense, are we in a context where we're working together, or are we in a context where we are against each other?

And it's actually the same types of models, but then with one additional twist.

that now you're also inferring um yeah the the preferences of the other agent in a sense um with the same model supply so there's one i in addition to this there's one final thing i wanted to share let's see how much time oh we have quite some time that is nice um

I just wanted to share with you a few slides from finish this from a talk I gave with Maxwell Ramstead in Canadian neuroscience spotlight was in September, somewhere in September.

Just to go a little bit more in depth on what you do when you have this type of model that characterizes some

psychiatric condition or could characterize it.

So there's always a different kinds of domains of the state space.

And we start with something, we kind of presuppose a functioning or at least the potential to function for the model.

And that's the kind of starting point.

But then you look at, okay, in what ways can it break down?

and what types of combinations of parameters result in different kinds of what we call computational phenotypes that could be associated with affective disorders in this case.

And what's nice there is that you can now start to do computational phenotype to get a kind of map of different kinds of problems that can emerge.

this map doesn't need to be strictly categorical in the sense that the parameter space can be largely continuous.

So you can get clustering, but it doesn't have to be absolute.

You can code morbidity.

You kind of get it for free because there's like this kind of coupling.

You can get, yeah, basically combine it with things like RDOC.

I don't know if you're familiar with that, but it's kind of...

Alternative to the DSM, which has mostly a categorical approach, our doc tries to focus more also in the underlying mechanisms that generate these different phenotypes.

And in that sense, this type of computational phenotyping could be the underlying statistical tool that could guide

different kinds of investigations of not just affective disorders in the basic level, but also social emotional function.

Because of course, as we started out in the beginning, those are intricately linked to each other.

And that's where the context becomes important.

And the way, this is the final slide that I want to share, is that we can now use these types of tools.

Let's say we can fit them to individuals based on a wide variety of data.

It can be self-reports, it can be objective measures.

Can be also things like even the more traditional measures could be used to kind of initialize the model.

There's different approaches you can take there.

The basic point is that now you can have, if you want to have a model of the model, right?

It's a meta model.

It's a model of the model that tends to describe the way a person generates their behaviors and their thoughts.

and the way their feelings evolve over time.

Once you have that, you can use that to employ, to basically forecast their weather conditions, so to speak.

And those can be context-dependent.

They can be to kind of tie it back to a question that was posed on transcontextuality.

we know that the chances of rain are dependent on certain contextual factors that don't really, yeah, that depends on a higher level dynamics on the scale that are not local.

Yeah, it's not local.

In the same way, what's happening down inside your body, or let's say your heart rate can be contextualized by what's happening in the rest of the system.

and in the end what's the kind of dream for this psychiatric application of an affective inference would be that therapists and psychiatrists etc don't have like a static thing like a book like DSM that just puts people into boxes but instead they have this dynamic tool that updates itself by

through feedback with the clients, then relates that to help the therapist, and then the therapist can also improve that tool.

So in that sense, you get a triad where the, and this can be applied not just to therapist-client relationships, but also can be applied to, let's say, help clients within their home environment to relate to their clients

Yeah, their loved ones in school and their work environments.

This would be a personalized treatment prediction tool and treatment monitoring.

So there's the different levels of application.

I mean, I focus here a lot on psychiatric applications because I think personally that's one of the

Yeah, one that I find the most fascinating.

There's loads of other applications.

You can think of these types of models can be used for all kinds of commercial purposes.

If you think about entertainment industry, how to generate an output that is kind of personalized to entertain somebody.

I mean, there are so many steps that you can take.

I just focused on the psychiatric side.

Yeah, that's pretty much it for now.

But I'm sure that we can find some nice rabbit holes to...

Fun.

Let me see how I can stop sharing.

Yes.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, awesome.

Thank you, Casper.

Super great to have you just kind of help us revisit the paper and also some of your past work and some of this other work.

And it really just struck me that you're talking about moving beyond the DSM into dynamic systems modeling, the other DSM.

So it's a little acronym overlap, but it just shows how when we have general principles,

it helps us descend into the nuance and the context, the subtlety of a clinical relationship, an entertainment relationship, the educational relationship, and actually do full justice to the complexity of the embodied situation, rather than thinking that we're going to just have some sort of meso-level theory that ends up actually falling in between sometimes general dynamical systems theory or complexity theory, and then on the

actual specific.

So it was awesome to hear about these cases.

So we have Steven, and then Scott, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks.

This is really exciting with I've been I've been reading some of the work around the dynamical sort of options for psychiatry that you've been doing.

And I think one thing I noticed is you talked about the self the other and then the outcome.

And

like the outcome it seems that as people get immersed in the outcome it gives a way to dissolve this self other dilemma which is in a way that the trap of modern psychology and psychiatry is you name someone the self because you can analyze the self and the other because you can name and analyze the other and then everything else just goes from there and the model is just like is is dominant but never spoken about whereas here the model center stage but if you start to make it about the outcome and the context

now suddenly the self and the other can start to take a more dissolved space you know and and the positive psychology and the client can start to have more agency in their own life so i just yeah it'd be interesting just how you saw that relationship to self other and outcome yeah i mean um


SPEAKER_04:
In the interaction, the distinction kind of dissolves to some extent in the sense that they are co-creating each other's models, so to speak.

And they end up having like a shared reality to a certain degree.

what makes this reality real of when like shared expectations is the fact that they have them together and many of things in society are actually function only because other because we all to some extent believe in them like money is a very clear example but like the only value money has is that other people believe it has value um and

Again, I mean, the self-other, I guess you can't really escape it in the end.

I don't think we need to, because it's just a matter of the level of description, I guess.

Just like the cells of a body are clear units, but at the same time, they are part of one whole.

I mean, yeah, this is like the Gestalt, basically.

Gestalt psychology kind of comes back to haunt you in a sense.

There's the emergence hole that's other than the sum of its parts.

I don't really mind talking about the units as long, but I think what you describe is really important that you keep in mind that there is like, it's just one level of, yeah, in the end, a reduction.

I think there was another, is it a follow-up question?

Agnes?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that makes sense.

I think just like you were saying, if the outcome is being measured, does that change the way that we think about, like if we start looking at the space, the environment, the outcome, the context, are we in a whole different paradigm for treating disorders?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, yeah.

That's a really interesting one because I mean, I know some really interesting research on the way in which psychiatric categories have influenced cognition and behavior across cultures.

Basically, people believing they have a depression or they have depression and then they can't get out of it because they ended up believing that that's their disease, like a kind of discrete thing that they just stuck in.

So that's a really interesting example where categories in that sense are kind of like mind where, and they program, they kind of specify the way you structure your worlds.

Um, and what I like about this kind of individualized modeling is that you can move away from those categories.

You don't even have to tell a person that they have a clinical diagnosis.

You can tell how you know how to help them because they have individualized predictions for treatment.

You don't have to tell them like, oh, we're putting you in this bin.

There's somebody that's like it becomes like a spectrum and there's different.

Attractors in that state space.

We don't need to make this strict dichotomies anymore.

I mean, maybe for the insurance, that's the only limit.

It's like the insurance companies want to know, do we have to pay for this or not?


SPEAKER_08:
it's so true that the implicit story of diagnosis is you know you got two kinds of people the diagnosed and the undiagnosed and if you have three of these five symptoms you're in this box and it almost made me laugh with this last point about insurance how about uh pay per affective charge let's uh continuously tune that dial if they just need to like you know a little bit pay a little bit or something there's a whole level of nuance that's when we're thinking about

this in a big way.

So thanks for that answer.

Scott, go ahead.

Casper, then Scott.


SPEAKER_04:
I wanted to respond to that because that's an interesting point where it was something I also was trying to, I gave a talk in my psychology department or like the brain cognition meeting in my university where I was basically saying that in principle, if we can automate this, we can treat everybody to the extent that they're interested in like

improving aspects of their life i think everybody has some things they would like to improve so there's like don't even need to just limit it to like the kind of model where you just wait until things go horribly wrong and then you start to try to help like preventive treatments that are not based on this kind and this kind of disease model essentially


SPEAKER_08:
And those prodromes might be revealed through these inferred parameters like uncertainty.

So before the real situation begins, it's really a good point.

So Scott, Dave, and Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
So fantastic.

There are so many things, so many threads here.

Let me pull a couple together.

And it's on this...

uh space of social and internalized norms and folkways so dsm-4 used to list the cultural phenomenon that weren't considered disorders like tarantella or you know the or the different things that you know they were cultural not considered disorders but that always seemed to be very um imperialistic uh the way they did that but it's kind of interesting when you start to move into the um

You mentioned insurance companies and what they will pay for.

The naming of disorders, many of them are just called disorders because they don't let you function as an industrial worker.

You know what I mean?

There's all sorts of context outside that dictates whether a disorder is a disorder.

I love that notion you were talking about, about the clustering and the predictive elements.

There's people in public health, non-mental health and physical disease health talk about 40% of the global health effort for any emerging pandemic is repeated from one to another.

So imagine the cost savings and resource savings.

If you can start to do predictive mental health, like people have been talking about the COVID is causing the PTSD generation.

So you can have these clusters of things that need to be dealt with and scales of billions of people.

And that idea about merging treatment into norms.

So really not talking about treatment, you're just talking about a continuity of existential support

in in society that's that really is fascinating here's the question so it's kind of an interesting there was an article on soft paternalism a number of years ago in the economist that idea that for instance if i have a gambling problem i can register with the state of missouri to not let me into the gambling ships that go up and down the mississippi when i have a moment of clarity i could say don't let me on the ships and then i'm registered there and then they won't let me on the ships when i'm

feeling the urge to go gamble so there's this kind of inviting that externality in one of the things i wanted to ask you about is your thoughts your gut thoughts on sovereignty and so i define a sovereign as something that doesn't need to ask for permission or forgiveness and it's always an external teleology it's always a projection out whether it's a deity or royalty or a country or a company we project it out so we can self-bind to it okay that's my assertion okay

So I'm looking at that sovereignty has to have an abstraction of its subjects because that's the notion.

So we project out it to be abstracting us so it can deal with the big problems.

And then the anomalies we take care of with a mass customization of localizing it, right?

So it feels like you're,

clinical notion about psychological states could be employed for political purposes.

And I'm talking about in a positive way, not in a bad manipulation, but in a good intentional manipulation of affective states that are positive for civic engagement.

And then you basically use the same notions as psychological disorders, but you start correcting for, let's call them political disorders.

Right?

Because it's just normative states, right?

So that's what I'm curious about is have you done any thinking about how to project cultural states from a group?

Like projecting it on the screen and then everyone watches it and says, huh, that's us up there.

Let's go move towards that now.

Sort of a question.


SPEAKER_04:
It's a really interesting question.

I have a student that works on like cumulative cultural dynamics and simulating the way in which beliefs kind of in a kind of minimalistic way that can be seen as, um, yeah, model today, quite similarly to viral spread of, um, but then there,

the perspective of the beliefs that are spreading it's kind of like every time it's trying to be it's somebody tries to transmit it to the next person the question is how well does this fit with the next minds and only then only if their fit is close enough uh it can be it can reproduce essentially um so then your question is kind of like one level beyond that where you're like

where you're trying to predict which message will fit to which group of people.

And then that can be taken in very evil directions, but you can also kind of use it maybe to break political bubbles that lead to extremism or something like that.

So there's different kinds of... Because in the end, it's a tool.

That's right.


SPEAKER_08:
And one note on that political side that some people bring up is we're not simply talking about the communications or just the rhetoric display.

It's actually about doing a systems identification and potentially finding latent areas of agreement that are just two terms being used by two communities, for example.

So, yeah, but very important and interesting topics.


SPEAKER_04:
was just wondering uh sorry you talked about sovereignty so i was wondering how you view that connecting to sovereign because the way i see sovereignty is just like a sovereign body is like something that has complete power over certain domain and then talking about people within that domain so they are completely under the sovereignty of that


SPEAKER_03:
governing body right the way the way the link happens is my assertion is that all sovereigns are projections so they are they're gods oh i don't say we invented god because i'm an atheist but it might be a blasphemy to other people so we invented deities because there's different things you know yeah so it's like we invented royalty we invented

We invented companies.

Name another sovereign.

They're the things that don't ask for permission or forgiveness.

We invented them so that we can organize at larger levels.

Now, we didn't say it explicitly, but that's why we did it.

And so all of them are projections.

So they're all stories from us.

Now, they take on a separate life, sort of.

but they can never be identified.

That's the thing about sovereigns.

There's always a metaphysical element.

They can never be identical to the subjects.

That's why when a sovereign dies in office, it's a real difficulty for the sovereignty when a human who represents the sovereign dies because it has to be separated out.

You have a state funeral, but then the body has to be separated from the body politic.

It's Hobbes.

It's a Leviathan thing.

Leviathan can't be composed of the individual parts.

It takes on a separate nature.

And anyway, so that's why this is so interesting, that projection and that act

of collective projection is totally where we are right now.

Think about all the problems, climate change, global resources, water resources, finance, things that can't be done by nation states.

We need new sovereign levels.

Active inference is going to be the way that we synthesize them.

It will be, whether we call it active inference or not, because it's all we've ever done as biological and living and social organisms.

And it's a way of framing it.

And so it's a way of now, to me, it's a new teleology.

We can project forward, just like you're saying, predicting on psychology.

I think we can predict politics and social states because we can use predictive analytics of clustering.

It's the same thing.


SPEAKER_04:
You take a bunch of... Another student who was modeling the elections, American elections, the same.

I like what you said about it's kind of subjective.

It's like the attribution of power.

But then it's like a totally imaginary thing, just like we had to build power to money.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, money is a de-risking consolidator.

It's one form of money.

Wixel and Smith and Hume, they all have different ideas about money.

But one way you can look at it is a de-risking consolidator.

So it takes all risk and makes it into one risk, which is how can I get more money?

And if that's the case, it's an interaction de-risking tool, right?


SPEAKER_04:
Actually, it is one.

This could give us a way to discuss, to bring it also to the earlier point of instrumentalism and realism, because the fact that money has instrumental value, does it make it real?

I mean, that's like a kind of interesting question that I don't have an answer to.

I mean, I guess in practice it's real because people believe, you know, it's like a thing.


SPEAKER_03:
One thing I just suggest you look at, somebody just apprised me a couple of months ago about Christopher Alexander's work in architecture.

If you haven't run into that, check it out, because what he does is basically looks at patterns in architecture through deep time and through space.

And the idea is that existing practices are captured in patterns of practice.

And if you want to look at a solution for an earlier for a problem, look at patterns of practice from other situations and bring them into the situation here.

Similarly, it feels like we can in your work, it's revealing

that we can look at patterns of practice, and then take them as predictive models.

And so that's what Chris Alexander does that in architecture.

And it's very straightforward there, because it's physical instantiations, like an archaeology of the mind of architecture in a way, or the archaeology of the problem space.

Anyway, something to look at it might be fruitful.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you, Scott.

So we have Dave blue, and then a question from the chat.

So go ahead, Dave.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, if you could turn toward the realistic side of your experience with these questions.

Do you, Kaspar, have the feeling that people's real models are

of the same structure as these transpersonal models or person to environment or organism to environment, folks in this field seem to kind of assume that, oh, yeah, it is all turtles all the way down or it's blankets all the way down.

And I don't know that I'm convinced of that.

What's your intuition?


SPEAKER_04:
Interesting question.

I think that it's kind of similar to the way that you can last time we talked about dimensionality and you can project from 3D into 2D space.

But like understanding a 3D space while you're in a 2D space is kind of impossible.

Essentially, in the end, it's a little bit similar, like looking down on the hierarchy, I think.

It's much easier, makes things feel much realer, more real, because essentially they can, they're within your, yeah, your mind can grasp them.

And when you move upwards, your sort of transpersonal part, I think it's, our minds don't have, yeah, the capacity to fully grasp something like that.

can so it doesn't have the same experiential um yeah i would just say um detail maybe um so yeah i think you're getting at an interesting point where there seems to be a difference between the way what experientially feels real and what

from an instrumentalist perspective, and there doesn't seem to be much of a difference if you can move through the transpersonal level.

Just like, as I said, I think in principle humans can form higher levels of organization, can form bodies together, and every human is this unit in this body.

just like every cell and every organ in the end has its own local experience, so to speak, its own local data, maybe, that is being integrated to inform their states and their decisions.

But then there's the global pattern, and that's the local elements never have direct access to it.

And I think that's something that

um gets at this point that you're describing um but yeah i guess i don't have a real answer just but i understand experientially what you're saying in the sense that definitely there are things that feel real there are things that don't exist but feel real that's also um so there are ways in which transpersonal concepts can start to


SPEAKER_07:
trigger hallucinations in people for example and there's all kinds of um edge cases i don't know does that answer your question i think it's a really interesting one but i don't have a good answer actually it does yeah i think it it is an elephant in the room perhaps um yeah and if i could just run off on a tangent on that um the relation between inner in the sense of what's inside a frestonian blanket

and inner in the sense of what's going on in various parts of the nervous system or the organism.

I tend to come at this by thinking that what the physiological, the anatomical correlates of what we've been focusing on for the last two weeks are largely going on in the midbrain, the brainstem.

Some of the lower structures in the cortex

But the modeling goes on in the neocortex.

So the inside is actually executed outside in the portion of the nervous system that's really good at doing algorithms and pattern matching and reinvestment of pattern transformations.

But the purpose of doing the whole thing is largely, especially in a small child or a non-human mammal,


SPEAKER_04:
outside the cortex so that probably blows the whole thing in principle yeah from the models that i built it usually doesn't really matter where the data comes from like uh can be inter internal signals external it's more important what the inference is about so like um extra reception is is perception about external states of the world

an interoception about internal states of the system.

But I can have external signals that may give me information about my internal states and vice versa.

So this distinction is pretty important.

But yeah, that doesn't entirely resolve the issue.

I like the fact that the models are kind of agnostic about it.

where it's actually the information.


SPEAKER_08:
A lot to say on this blue, and then a question from the chat, and then anyone else in the chat or here who wants to ask?


SPEAKER_01:
So I loved the diagnosis or the elimination of diagnosis and clustering instead of diagnosing people, except like when it comes to insurance.

And so, Kasper, I'm going to charge you with obliterating this in the minds of insurance companies also, because I think that there's this fundamental thing that happens

And I mean, maybe I'm wrong, but if I display some behavior of someone with ADHD and I display a lot of those behaviors.

So if I display some of this behavior, but then I go see a psychiatrist and I'm diagnosed with ADHD,

I think that there's a large degree, especially in younger children, like as they're coming into themselves and dealing with identity crises, teenagers and so forth.

I think that there's a large degree of excusing or perpetuating my behavior because I have a diagnosis, right?

So if I'm diagnosed with something like ADHD, like maybe that will...

I'll give myself permission or excuse or I'll cluster more strongly into the group of people that have those kinds of behaviors because I have a diagnosis.

I think that this is very plausible.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_04:
That's also what I was trying to get at in a sense that people tend to use these internal representations to structure their experience and then to

to generate their responses.

And then these boxes become self-filling prophecies, to a certain extent.

Then there's that side, but there's also, then there's another side to it, is that there are also positive reports that people, when they can

Attributes the effects to something and it makes them feel less anxious so they can kind of explain it away And yeah, I don't know what's yeah, it has downsides and upsides I guess yeah Yep a very


SPEAKER_08:
sensitive and interesting thing but it reminds me of the 12 steps and the first step is to acknowledge the kind of person that one is obviously we're not going to go into this and it's for others to investigate but it's a trade-off between having a narrative certainty a diagnostic confidence versus the alternative and so there's our teammates in meaning or a narrative space

which one of these bifurcation paths narratively will we then have the lower levels of our model like whether we exercise or not or whether we have a job or not those kinds of things come into play

I just want to ask the question from the chat and then Dean and Steven and Scott.

So in the chat, someone wrote, can free energy principle based models reach a level in the future to be able to precisely predict when emotion or valence happens?

And more importantly, when in the temporal dynamics of that cycle, does thought subside?

So how is our experience of thought related to some of these simulations with the countervailing affective chart or countervailing hidden states?

Where does our experience of thought come into play?


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, it's to some extent already being done in the sense that there's applications in Amsterdam.

They have been treating OCD with deep brain stimulation.

And they identify the locus of intervention using fMRI.

And fMRI is driven by DCM, which is driven by pre-energy minimization.

So we're already doing that to some degree, identifying the kind of recurrent self-destructive loops of behavior in the brain, essentially.

So internal behavior of the system.

And then identifying ways to break those loops.

So they implant, they just try to find the kind of nodes at which the loop is, through which the loop is circulating and then they break, yeah, they disturb that node once in a while.

And that actually...

leads to an improvement in function it's kind of funny because when they remove it and loops tend to return pretty quickly again so it seems not to be an it's it's kind of it's not a full treatment it's more like a prevention it gets more interesting if you have like real-time way of getting into that then you don't yeah you would need not just like an electrode in there but like a whole

a whole array of electrodes that are like tracking and it's a little bit scary but in principle you could have like a whole weather tracking system inside and then if there's a hurricane emerging kind of blocking the i mean they tried to do that already for people with epilepsy i guess

then we all become like a cyborg or something if you start to go that and that's where it's maybe not i mean what i guess i find more interesting or like more appealing is um if we start to become more aware of how these feelings are generated by our relation with the external world so there's this use case of um

tracking warehouse workers that I've been seeking to apply some of my work to where you could track their affective states over the course of the day.

And every person has a different chronotype.

Every person has different times of day when they feel most energetic.

And it depends also on how well they've slept recently, et cetera.

So if you had some intelligent warehousing system,

then you could basically you could distribute tasks and the schedule of the warehouse could be adjusted to suit the preferences and to maximize um well-being um of the the workers and potentially uh in the process also increase productivity so there's like kind of capitalistic potentially

If we could construct things like that, we could use our modeling of these affective dynamics over the course of day by day for each individual.

We could use them to care for people, to make them, to prevent burnout and potentially make that appealing for people who are just driven by money, by profit.

Unfortunately, they're always in the end just

Most companies are just driven by profit.

So to make that realistic and scalable, you need to show that also is good for the business.

Anyway, so that's like some thoughts I have in reaction to that question.

There was a sub component.

What was the second part?

Could you read that again?


SPEAKER_08:
More importantly, where in this temporal dynamical cycle does thought subside?


SPEAKER_04:
Hmm.

That's a very nice question.

I wish I knew.

Let's keep thinking on it.

I guess there are certain parts of our system that are able to, are kind of contributing to our verbalization.

And the way I view thought, at least the kinds of introspective thoughts that is verbal tends to be

internalized social skill, essentially.

You first need to learn about how to speak with others, and then as a child, I guess when you're really young, at some point you start to be able to have these dynamics run internally.

And my suspicion is, and I think there's some research actually confirming this to some extent, but

that in order to create a verbal thought, you need to access the verbal pathways.

But you just attenuate the actual motor execution.

That's how they tend to think about it in the literature.

And then there's imagery thought, which is, in a sense, even more amazing, maybe, because that's not something you can

I mean, verbal, that's an actual action that you do.

So it's kind of easier to imagine how you could have this action unfold internally.

But imagery is not something that you actually do in life.

It's something you can somehow... You control your own internal...

pathways that you normally you would use for for having a visual sensation your mental actions can somehow control your visual processing pathways which i i have a hard time imagining how exactly that thing i mean i can build a model of that i think but yeah how it works in like biologically i find it quite hard to


SPEAKER_08:
Well, that's the instrumentalist tango.

We can build a few model architectures.

We could think about some differentiating experiments.

We could imagine some informative observations.

Go from there.

Continue the discussion from there.

So in our last little bit, let's go with Dean, Scott, Stephen.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

Real quick, you talked about personalized stuff and the loop seems to come back on politics because I remember a couple of weeks ago, the first thing I think I said to you after high was, we can't unlearn this once we start using these diagnostic tools.

We can't unsee it.

So there's a lot of politics involved when people have this ability to see things.

One reference I wanted to mention, and especially I think helpful to Scott if he hasn't already read it, about this personalized versus political, is an author by the name of Paul W. Kahn.

And his book is called Origins of Order.

And what it does is it tries to bring those two ends of that continuum into some sort of a, not like there's no balance between the two, but there's kind of a back and forth.

And it's very looking at rules, but not just on a legal level, but on much bigger scales.

So it kind of fits nicely with what Blue said about the diagnostics, what we've touched on a couple of times about the instrumental stuff.

But I still think that if you try to apply a lot of this stuff to, which is what I did before, I used very rudimentary ways of expressing this, but I gave young learners these tools and boy, was it political, the results of that, because they could just see things.

and started doing things.

And there was a whole lot of people that went, Hey, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.

They're getting way too much power from this.

But anyway, that's just an aside.

I just wanted to share the reference because I think it really ties in nicely with some of the stuff that Scott was talking about earlier.

And obviously I don't think the political part of it goes away, no matter how much we want to be agnostic.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, uh, yeah, in a political,

context in a sense what we're trying to determine is what what is the generative model that governs the body so like this conflict and tension and tension resolution and it's kind of like the price we have paid for being able to

to organize.


SPEAKER_08:
It's the body politic, the Leviathan, as brought up earlier.

Will we turn left?

Will we turn right?

Will we look forward?

Will we look backwards?

There's a lot to this multi-level political approach.

So Scott, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, thanks.

So it is a big, it's like moving a slime mold, but from outside.

A couple of things that jumped in in the last bit and where I'm going with this is the notion of a capitalist enclosure of consciousness with the categories of abstraction.

So the painter Kandinsky, and I've said this before, it just prays in my mind, painter Kandinsky said that violent societies yield abstract art.

And one of the things I've always wondered about is, is the reverse also true?

Is abstraction a form of violence?

And so here, one of the things that I was thinking about in the last couple of comments was symbolic synesthesia, right?

We don't really have a perceptual synesthesia, but we take symbols and we substitute them in for things.

So like if I drank tequila when I had a bad experience with something else, a bad tequila experience with something else, then I'll remember the bad tequila experience as associated with that other thing.

Not that I ever had a bad tequila experience.

I'm just saying if it ever happened.

So that abstraction, you know, we had to kind of becomes our prior or whatever.

And it goes back to that notion of the humor element to the abstractions are taking us to a place and then revealing the reveal comes.

Right.

And so one of the things I was wondering about on the capitalist side, we don't want surprise.

We don't want punch lines for jokes because that's risk.

Right now that you don't have innovation, then that's the problem is there's this tension between innovation and stasis, right?

And so they want innovation, but they don't want somebody else to innovate and take the risk, but then they want to benefit.

But anyway, so from a capitalist enclosure perspective, one of the things I'm wondering is does active inference, and this is the question, does active inference, we were all taking care of each other's active inference exhaust.

We're all taking the, everyone's doing active inference on each other and we're all the externalities for everyone else.

And so we're all having to internalize everyone else's discovery pathway in a sense, right?

We're loading on each other.

So that space of exhaust management is a commons in a way.

We're co-managing risk.

So when I talk about money as a universal risk consolidator, might the metrics of value in markets

give us insight, not entire insights, because markets don't tell you everything and not everything is measurable that way, but give us insights into preferences in a way that starts to give us the insight into that co-management of the active inference exhaust, essentially.

So it's really treating commons not as a fisheries commons, like with an asset commons, but as a risk commons.

And it's basically consciousness as a commons.

So imagine that the mind exists in language rather than the brain.

The brains are tuned into the shared mind.

And now we got to manage that shared mind.

So we get nonsense in there, something that's wrong science or bad politics or not functional economics or whatever.

And we want to get rid of that because it's spoiling the commons.

So that was what came to me, this idea, the sovereign feels like how we synthesize an externality to say, whoa, whoa, whoa, we got to get this right because we got some big scale stuff we got to do like ants and bees can do without memos.

We have memos, so we got to write the memos.

So what do the memos say?

And that's why you get the DSM and stuff like that.

And what they're saying is just like Foucault said, pastoral control is what drives people together with certain behavior.

Right.

And so it's that same thing.

Are we being driven?

Is it is are we being driven to be industrial workers or now we're being driven to something else?

And how do we manage that that commons of our inference, active inference commons to aspire to what we want to be?

Now, there's a question.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, it kind of makes me think about the way in which

the major religions have mostly merged as soon as, at least during the same amount of time that they ended up being able to write it down, basically.

So it's like a recursive relation, of course, but you basically need a culture for that level of unity.

There's two directions you can go, and I guess it's probably both ways, but on the one hand, you need to be organized enough to have a culture that you're able to write things down.

And once you're able to do so, you can basically, you can kind of hard code the structures and you end up having a competitive advantage over other potential models, essentially.


SPEAKER_03:
So maybe the mind and culture are emergent phenomenon of complexity, right?

Maybe complexity causes the mind because we need to, when we say we need to do something,

we often think it's in response to something but maybe that thing itself is another instantiation of complexity itself and so maybe what we're doing is merely red queening the whole thing right just keeping up we think we're actually innovating and doing things but really what's happening is with increasing exponential increase in interaction volume and this and this is not this is what i actually believe in pursuing

If there's a raw increase since the big bang in exponential increase in interaction volume, maybe all we do is just keep up and keep dealing with that externality as living organisms in order to maintain negentropy states.

Maybe we just have to keep rushing into higher levels of order organization in order just to not dissipate.

Anyway.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Scott.

There's also opposite ways of thinking about it, like where these organized structures are like the best way to dissipate energy.

So there is like a kind of.

Just like the convective bubbles in in some kind of.

It is.

volume of water or fluid um the substructure basically helps the system to dissipate the energy um so there are certain it's like interesting two ways of looking it's the same thing in the sense


SPEAKER_03:
It's that structural dissipation of risk is what you have in law.

And that's, that's all it is.

It's just, it's a time machine that predicts the future.

Everyone can look at the prediction in a contractor law.

It's enforceable and they can rely on it.

And so it saves resources.

So it's exactly what you're saying.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

Steven, if you want to make a really quick last comment, cause we're out of time and then we'll close out.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks.

I was just going to say, I mean, it sort of ties in this idea of abstraction and the, is I do a lot of work with action methods and ways of working in space.

And I think it ties into this question.

I think it might also tie into next week's talk is there's certain things that we can realistically get a handle on.

if we can take a perspective on it.

So for instance, you talked about exteroception, that sometimes it gives you information you take a perspective on to reflect on your internal states.

And maybe you look at your internal states.

But I think there is this danger that this abstraction starts to take over.

Because there's a whole load of levels of

particularly when it's the embodied, which we can't see, and that's okay.

These blankets of blankets can go down and it's beyond our perception to take a thought on

And the reason that I think that can be interesting is because in action methods and psychodrama and these types of action approaches, rather than the Freudian approaches, which basically took over, is, OK, you can't take all these perspectives and analyze it in the way that we've got in this habit of doing, but these other ways of knowing

embodying exploring i think that that also is another direction which often is not thought about so i just think that um as we go into this um what you're saying and the way that we think about instrumentalization is that you know we might need to instrumentalize using the the sort of the more embodied

effective methods and processes as well as this kind of other approaches because i think that we will hit the limits of an analysis and i think that might be something that this conversation sort of talked about so anyway i just thought i'll put that there if you've got any thoughts on that and i'll thanks a lot for a great presentation yeah i mean i think you make a very good point and that's uh and thanks for the compliment and i mean this um


SPEAKER_04:
the connection, the integration across levels, let's say, that's important for your well-being, then what you describe is a very logical pathway to improve people's mental state in the end as well when they're more connected with their embodied existence instead of living in that abstract space.

I mean, I think I have, as a scientist, I have probably increased risk of going down that path because you're always thinking about this.

I totally agree that that's probably in many treatments, actually.

I mean, that's why meditation appears to be such an effective tool as well.

Yeah, thanks for the thoughts.

Yeah, very good point.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, thanks so much, everyone, for participating.

And Casper, you're not always thinking.

Sometimes you're coming on and hanging out with us, I guess, but maybe thinking during that too.

But really fun discussion.

We hope to have all of you on again, whether it's a paper you've authored or not.

So thanks a lot.

And yeah, until next time.
