## Y6qx6C1tmjs

SPEAKER_09:
Live streaming.


SPEAKER_05:
Hello, everyone, and welcome.

This is Team Calm Podcast 4.1 on September 15, 2020.

Welcome to everybody.

Hello, all participants.

I'm going to share my screen, and we will jump right in.

This is Team Calm Podcast 4.1, and this is Team Calm.

TeamComm is an experiment in online team communication and learning related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active.

You can email us.

You can find us on a public Keybase team, as well as at the YouTube channel.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide us with any feedback, participants as well as viewers, so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And also just on a note of video etiquette, if people are muted in a noisy background or raising their hands when there's this many participants in the chat, it would be excellent and help us with our turn-taking and reduction of uncertainty about who's to speak next.

So here we are in stream 4.1, and the structure of today is going to go like this.

First, we're going to have a few check-in questions and warm-up discussion.

Then we'll get to the paper itself, which is Ramsted et al. 2016.

We'll talk about the big aims of the paper, go through a roadmap of the paper to see how the authors get from A to Z. We'll go through the abstract to understand how the authors represent their own work.

Then we'll go through the box of definitions as well as the figures.

At that point, we'll have time for questions and other insights, and also we've

implicitly prepared for a podcast 4.2, where we'll be able to have further discussions on some key quotation or anything arising that we don't get to this week.

So thanks for that part.

Here we are in the check-in and everybody can feel free to introduce themselves and their location if they would like.

The first question is pretty broad, but that's what the warmup is about.

So what is culture?

That's a good question.

Or in the sense of this paper, in the sense of culture that's being scaffolded within a kind of framework that we might want to build out, what would that kind of culture refer to?


SPEAKER_04:
So I'm Maxwell Ramstad.

I'm the first author on this paper, Cultural Affordances.

By the way, I'm really grateful for this podcast.

You all have been so great just in general over the last few weeks, and I'm particularly touched that you're giving the work that we've developed so much attention.

I'm just so full of gratitude.

This is so cool.

So culture, at least in the sense that we're using the term here, means something like the taken for granted.

I think is sort of the heuristic way that I like to think about it.

It's sort of like in a given local frame of reference, in a given environment shared by a group of people living together, what are the things that are taken for granted?

What are the sets of expectations and beliefs and sets of practices and norms

you know, that are shared and that essentially structure people's intuitive grip on their shared social world.


SPEAKER_05:
Any other thoughts on culture there?


SPEAKER_08:
In sociology, we define culture as kind of three different dimensions.

You have the symbolic ideal dimension, which is really, I think, equivalent to semantic knowledge.

We break it up in terms of norms, values, and beliefs.

We have a psychobehavioral dimension, which is really about in body culture, how your body moves, the skills that you have.

In terms of psychological kind of terminology, I would really say your skills and habits in kind of that non declarative memory sense.

And then the third dimension is really our material dimensions of the physical things that we create the tools, the buildings, the fashion, which I think

The degree to which I understand the affordance literature, I think all three of those dimensions definitely have versions of affordances that could connect to that.

I think that was one thing I did see in the paper that it did seem to be very much focused on just that semantic kind of symbolic dimension and not really explicitly incorporating the other dimensions that, at least in sociology, we would kind of include in that definition of culture.

Cool.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thanks for that.

That was very rich, actually.

Very interesting points that you're raising.

Yeah, I should just give maybe some historical background on this paper.

This was the first in a series of papers that have been developed into

basically like a variational or free energy approach to culture.

And I think a lot of the elements that you're mentioning were only sketched in this paper and were developed in, I think, further iterations of the model.

So everything that you just outlined, Richard, I think are very essential and crucial things that need to be tackled when studying culture.

So it's great that you're raising them.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool, and I think the question about multiple kinds of culture ranging from the semantic concepts to the externalized production to the artifacts of culture bring us this idea of scaffolding culture.

So what is a way that culture is scaffolded?

Someone can raise their hand, maybe someone new, but something that guides the construction, just like a scaffold.

I'll give one way, which is education, because pedagogy is sort of the guide rails for how individuals learn about those norms, as well as how to use the artifacts and construct new artifacts.

These are ways in which culture is scaffolded because it provides structure for the growth to happen within.

Any other comments on that?

Okay, and then the last warm-up question is, what is shared intentionality?

Or what's a way in which somebody has seen shared intentionality play out in their recent experience?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, so there are two parts to that, right?

There's shared and there's intentionality.

So intentionality, at least in the sense that we're using it in the paper, draws on the philosophical construct of intentionality that we can basically, you know,

You can draw lineage all the way back to Brentano, effectively.

So by intentionality, we mean orientation towards a world.

We don't necessarily mean intentionality in the sense of having the intention to do this or that.

It's from the Latin, I think, intensio, which is the word that was used to describe what a...

what an archer is doing with his arrow to hit the target.

It is in tensio with the target.

And so it's this that we're trying to get at.

And one of the things that we're trying to argue here is that part of what makes a shared social world just that, a shared social world, is that there are forms of relating to that world, so forms of intentionality that are also shared.

among the people who live in that world together.

So that's what we were trying to get at ultimately, I think.


SPEAKER_08:
I think what's interesting in terms of if you take that definition and you look back at the scaffolding, you know, if you look within the individual, there's this network of semantic and episodic memory and non-declared memory that's organized in the brain.

If you put me into contact with another individual from my culture who shares my language and we begin to construct this we space, if you look at the phenomenology, and then now what happens with this dyad, either we introduce a third person or we then one of us leaves the relationship and we go,

interact with someone else, if you spread that dyadic interaction out to a network, and then you look at the fractal scaling of that network, there's this way to, I think, to very deliberately keep track and build up from organized memory in the brain to an institution of 25,000 people dynamically interacting by following these mechanisms by which you create the shared space and looking at those emergent properties and trying to model them mathematically.


SPEAKER_05:
Couldn't agree more.

And there's a quote from the paper, which I'll spare Maxwell from reading is near the end.

It says to address more complex social situations, it is useful to revise current socio cognitive models of joint attention to encompass fundamentally triadic situations in which the third is the socially constituted niche of affordances supported by local ontologies and abilities.

So we're just jumping in today.

But that's sort of where we're wanting to go with this paper and in discussion.

is towards understanding what is that third space and how does the aim or does the intent play in?

Yeah, Stephen.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, and I think this cultural piece also brings in that intersubjectivity sort of space between.

And I like how this work with Maxwell and the four of us is, and I love this paper as well, that's great, is it gives a way to understand how to approach it beyond education.

beyond sort of the banking of programming people and saying, well, what's in the environment?

Particularly now that we've got situations of cross-cultural understandings where cultures have to try and understand and work together.

Is it all about teaching us how to tolerate each other?

Or is it about understanding how we perform in the environment?

So I think it's got a lot of applications.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Well, here we are, finally, at the paper.

Cultural affordances scaffolding local worlds through shared intentionality and regimes of attention.

So we'll definitely want to unpack each of these concepts, and it's in Frontiers in Psychology from 2016.

The big aim of the paper, grasped from the abstract and the

introduction section is to better understand how culture and context interact with human biology to shape human behavior, cognition, and experience.

So kind of all of it, kind of things that Richard was bringing up early on.

And from the introduction, the integrative framework we propose bridges cognitive and social sciences to provide two things.

First, an expanded concept of affordance that extends to sociocultural forms of life, which we'll unpack in box one.

And two,

a multi-level account of the socio-culturally scaffolded forms of affordance learning and the transmission of affordances in pattern socio-cultural practices.

So the key piece there is that multi-level account because we're not going to have an individual level account by which collective outcomes arise or a group level account by which individuals are shaped in their behavior uniquely.

Those are sort of two sides of the same coin or some of the sides of a many-sided coin.

that constitute this top-down and bottom-up relationship that we see in a lot of multi-scale systems, like the brain being nested within a body, inside of a niche, inside of these institutions that last beyond the lifespan of the organism.

Any thoughts on the aim here?

Or questions about anything?

Cool.

Well, then let's get to the roadmap.

So the roadmap, I just copied out the section headers

and how that takes us on a journey or on a narrative in our learning odyssey, in a sense.

In the beginning, there's an introduction and a theoretical framework for affordances is provided.

And that includes, I know the font may be a little small, perspectives, affordances and phenomenology, landscapes and fields, meanings and affordances,

And then we reach figure one, which has a basic cognitive formula for automatic intentionality and figure two that expands on that formula slash comic format.

So that's a theoretical framework for affordances.

Maybe could anyone chime in what, what is an affordance in this context or in the cultural context or in the context of whichever field you're familiar with?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So I,

I guess just for a simple definition, it's something that invites action or interaction.

And the cartoon example is always a chair affords sitting.

But in the context of a social interaction, it could be some environment that affords or that elicits our interaction, maybe conversation or music making with another person.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

And it makes sense to start the paper off with this framework for affordances because action opportunities are so fundamental to active inference and to action oriented frameworks.

This is really what defines action oriented frameworks is they focus on actions and the stimuli or the cues that lead to action.

So affordances are opportunities.

The second section here is the neurodynamics of affordances.

So this is the integration of the cognitive and the neurosciences with the more behavioral, ecological concept of an affordance.

Computation, representation, and minimal neural models is addressed.

And also many of these ideas, later papers include other or different depictions.

And this is already four years past.

So that equates to about 400 papers in between us and here.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah i should say um like this is probably the weakest section of the paper as it currently is formulated um i mean yeah as you're pointing out it was published in 2016 and we started really working on this in 2015 and i mean since i did a whole phd focused on the free energy principle and what it what it entails and how it works and so on and i think uh

I mean, I wouldn't disavow what we say here, but I think that definitely our understanding of the representational implications of the theory have been refined over the years.

But I mean, this is basically in a nutshell what we tried to pursue since 2016.

So as you're saying, like several papers have been published since and the, you know,

the framework has moved a little bit.

Absolutely.

Richard?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, I think definitely when we look back on our earlier papers, we're always like, oh, I should have said all these different things.

But I actually really appreciate this paper because for me as a complete non-expert in a lot of these fields, the free energy principle is very, very difficult to find an entry point into.

And so to have something that I think was very conceptual and grounded in neuroscience that I think a lot of social sciences could wrap their head around relatively easily, and then to trace this as breadcrumbs to the more advanced free energy principle stuff, I really appreciate it.

I thought it was a great entry point into this literature and kind of gave me a foundation to kind of start to wrap my head around how these concepts are being applied in that more mathematical context.


SPEAKER_05:
I really appreciate you saying that.

It's one of the reasons why we chose this paper other than Shannon suggesting it is for me, at least when I can see the path in the literature.

OK, here's what they thought in 2016, which means in years leading up to 2016.

And then, yes, it can be refined or presented or enriched in later work.

But seeing the breadcrumbs for the pheromone trail is how I get a calibration of the derivatives of how the ideas are changing through time.

And I've found that, yeah, one way maybe weaker, but the most growth has happened here.

And this is one of the areas where the most growth can happen.

So this is why we continue to dip back into the literature even longer than four years in the past.

I know it feels like forever though, because sometimes there's a uniqueness to that cultural artifact.

that isn't just about how well it conveys what the relationship is between neuroscience and free energy, but rather how well it conveys what the researchers were working on in that intersection.

So we're thinking through other minds.

For some of us, it was us in the past.

For some of us, it was just another paper.


SPEAKER_08:
I will say this just really quick too.

A lot of the affordances, that concept of affordance in sociology is very much grounded in a pragmatic process philosophy, white head, the idea that reality reaches out to the other reality.

And so if that is where our literature is grounded, to be able to have something like this that's very conceptual, to work through those philosophical ramifications and then begin to ask, how would this fit with the free energy principle?

And I think vice versa as well, having the free energy principle community kind of understanding some of these philosophical concepts and ideas to kind of ground more conceptually, not so much mathematically, what it is that their perspective is offering to other disciplines.


SPEAKER_05:
Well said.

Then we move to figure three.

Now I found that figure three, four, and five make a really nice sequence and we'll go through them in sequence because it enriches one level of detail on top of one level of detail of a hierarchical prediction error minimization framework.

Figure four diagrams it a little bit more clearly from a Bayesian perspective, and then five brings on another level of realism.

Then we talk a little bit in this section about predictive processing and attention, and that returns our attention to the idea of culture as regimes of attention from the title.


SPEAKER_04:
I should just say at this point, if I had to rewrite this paper, this would be two papers and this would be the split.

So I really think that the first part of the paper really tells a story about affordances, the affordances that are available in the human landscape,

in terms of the dependence of certain kinds of affordance on convention, whereas others are more just dependent on the kind of spontaneous action biology of human bodies.

And then the second half of the paper turns to this concept of attention

And with all this in place says, okay, so how is culture acquired in these, what we're calling regimes of attention, which are effectively shared patterns of allocating your attention to this rather than that as being salient.

So, and this all is, you can read this as kind of computational Goffman for Richard who's done, comes from sociology.

Yet it's an attempt to kind of spell out how,

What would a mechanistic model of regimes of civic inattention and so on look like effectively when you're trying to bridge these different levels?

I think there's a lot in this paper, and this is a good kind of split point if you want to see what the paper is doing effectively.


SPEAKER_05:
nice, very helpful for us because it just reads as a Turing tape to those who are reading it line by line.

But to know that there's a conceptual demarcation is helpful.

And regimes of attention I just think is a great term to capture it because it's kind of like saying, well, where's the regime?

It's everywhere and it's nowhere.

It just is the water that culture is existing within.

In this section, we have figure six of a diagram of the looping effects or the rolling loops.

that mediate cultural affordance learning.

There's a discussion of skilled intentionality and affordance competition with some nice citations to other work about the skilled intentionality framework.

There's a section on shared expectations

local ontologies and cultural affordances.

And we think a lot about ontologies here and about the words that we use to locally organize our thought and cultures, this kind of multi-scale ontology that helps organize stimuli in a sense.

And the section closes with a discussion of shared expectation and implicit learning.

Then the last section, major section of the paper is the regimes of shared attention and shared intentionality.

Reflecting gating abilities and affordances and moving the loop regimes of shared attention and skilled intentionality before a conclusion.

So that is the roadmap.

That's how you get from discussion of the ecological, psychological or behavioral inactive concept of an affordance.

Then into the neuroscience of affordances.

And then, as suggested by Maxwell, there's a bit of a intermission conceptually here.

before turning to a second half of the paper that has to do with the actual ways in which culture is scaffolded through these regimes of expectations and attention.

Any questions on the roadmap?

Cool.

All right.

Here we are in the abstract, which I often find helpful to read because I know that authors put a lot of care into the abstract because it represents two

in-group, to the field, as well as to the out-group, to the reviewers, to the editor, to the reader, it reflects what the paper is going to be about.

And people get surprised and even disappointed when the abstract is off-base relative to what the paper actually delivers on.

They write, in this paper, we outline a framework for the study of mechanisms involved in the engagement of human agents with cultural affordances, which we're going to define soon.

Our aim is to better understand how culture and context interact with human biology to shape human behavior, cognition, and experience.

We attempt to integrate several related approaches in the study of the embodied, cognitive, and affective substrates of sociality and culture and the socio-cultural scaffolding of experience.

That's the first half of the abstract.

Then they write, the integrative framework we propose bridges cognitive and social sciences to provide

One, an expanded concept of affordance that extends to sociocultural forms of life.

And two, a multi-level account of the socioculturally scaffolded forms of affordance learning and the transmission of affordances in a pattern of sociocultural practices and regimes of shared attention.

The framework provides an account of how cultural content and normative practices are built on a foundation of contentless basic mental processes, definitely something we'll return to,

that acquire content through immersive participation of the agent and social practices that regulate joint attention and shared intentionality.

Okay.

Any thoughts on the abstract or questions before we turn to the box?


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, box one, I thought it would be helpful just to list out the terms of the different types of affordances, then go through them.

What is an example?

of each of these kinds of affordances, or what are the differences between these types of affordances?

So maybe we could start there.

If someone could raise their hand and pick one of these types of affordances, natural, cultural, or conventional, and then define what it means to them or an example of it.

Yep, Maxwell.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, essentially what we're suggesting is that, well, cultural affordances, by the way, I just noticed that my camera's frozen.

Is that the case for everyone as well?


SPEAKER_05:
Your screen looks dark.

You can either toggle the camera on and off or just reload the page.


SPEAKER_04:
After talking, I might try to rejoin just so the camera freezes.

What we're essentially arguing is that in humans, all affordances are at least minimally cultural in the sense that, I don't know about you, but as I was growing up, my mother told me not to slouch while I was at the dinner table.

And so something as simple and natural as sitting does actually come with a cultural scaffold.

And what we're saying is that there's basically a spectrum of affordances.

you can think about the space of affordances with which humans interact as going on a kind of continuum from natural to conventional, where natural affordances depend mainly just on the biophysics of the human body in its interaction with the environment, whereas conventional affordances depend on these implicit or explicit sets of conventions or shared beliefs

So, you know, an example of the latter would be a king's throne, right?

You don't sit on the king's throne unless you're a very specific agent.

So a king's throne doesn't afford sitting for everyone in the same way that, say, just a chair or a stool might afford sitting.

There are conventions, shared conventions, that kind of structure

which affordances are available and which are not for a given agent.

Cool.

Richard?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, I was just curious.

I've heard literature in the neuroscience about, like, actually distinguishing that.

So if I see a cup, my mirror neuron system fires, and I begin to kind of enact the act of reaching out and grabbing it.

But then semantically I know that, you know, as a –

a lowly serf, I'm not allowed to touch that.

Is there actually any research showing the conflict between semantic knowledge about, you know, and self-related knowledge that I'm not allowed to do that with the automatic kind of reaching out mirror neuron system simulation of touching the cup?


SPEAKER_04:
That's really interesting.

I'm not sure.

I don't know if there's any data about this particularly.

It would be very interesting, though.


SPEAKER_05:
One thought I had was some experiments, I believe by Michael about an elk with hands grasping cups at incorrect ways.

So it was something when your mirror neurons see, oh, that's not how you're supposed to grab a cup.

Well, why not?

Well, because I can't rotate my wrist again to drink it.

So it's the wrong way to hold it because it's not really a cup of water if I can't drink from it in that functional affordance-based sense.

But I agree, it would be interesting and we'll follow up on that.

And Stephen, did you have any thoughts?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I actually had a workshop when I was working with a group with a disability who, and I mentioned about affordances as part of it, and partly having done this paper, and one of the participants, she was saying how when she sees a cup, because she can't pick it up, and she doesn't see it as a cup unless it's one that's got a handle that she can reach her hand into and do that.

So that kind of sense of things presenting is quite true.

And I like this breakdown because

i get a sense that the following on from the later work that maxwell did like natural affordances it's like you know if there's a cliff it doesn't afford me to walk any further whereas cultural is a bit more of like this mixing sort of a gothic kind of space where it's conventional is like the throne it's like it's not up for negotiation it's like you don't sit on the chair it's like a fixed rule there's no

kind of intersubjective piece going on.

So in some ways, the cultural piece seems to have some sort of negotiation associated with it, which is quite cool.


SPEAKER_08:
Would it be accurate to say that in a sense of if I had the simulation to reach out and grab the cup, but then my semantic memory says, no, we're not allowed to do that, could that almost be like a prediction error in the sense of like, I'm predicting that I'm going to do this?

Well, no, we don't do that.


SPEAKER_04:
Precisely.

And the way that you would do that is probably by having a hierarchical model where basically the notion of hierarchy, I mean, it has political implications and we can kind of ditch those.

So I prefer thinking about it in terms of center and periphery.

Right.

Where like the.

The periphery is the end of it that's closer to the sensory motor interactions.

And the center is something more like what we would think of as the top of a processing hierarchy, where representations are progressively more compressed.

If you look at the hierarchy from periphery to center or from bottom to top, what you have represented there, if you'll allow me the language of representation for a second, we can finesse it later.

But what's essentially represented there is as you progress towards the center, slower and slower, more and more abstract regularities.

So you might think that, yeah, as you see the chair,

at a kind of more automatic kind of sensory motor level, you see it as something that you could sit on.

But as that ascends the processing hierarchy, at some point it registers an error, as in like semantically I'm not allowed to sit on this because it's a king's chair.

So precisely that's how that would work.

And you can accommodate for this kind of conflict by allowing the system to have a layered or hierarchical structure.


SPEAKER_05:
And great.

point, and this relates to how it's a spectrum of affordances.

So for example, a violin, when I look at a violin, I have the biophysics to bend my fingers, but I can't play violin.

So I see an affordance for something I could pick up potentially, and not everybody may see that affordance.

However, somebody else sees that and culturally they think, oh, I could play this song or I could play that song.

And so what song they see the device as being able to be used for is going to be part of their enculturation, part of their education, which builds upon the biophysics of the human body.

And that's why we have different dance styles in different places from different cultures, even though everybody's elbows still move the same way.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So in trying to understand affordances, I tend to think of it as the space of what is allowed.

But in walking through the different kinds of affordances that we have, it becomes pretty clear that it's not just what is allowed.

It's very strongly gated by the top-down priors of what you think should be allowed in your space.

And it just kind of reminds me of this...

an anecdotal understanding of how children interact with an environment versus adults and how children would use or sit on objects that adults would never think of sitting on and kind of the different ways that they see and use the world because they don't have these top-down priors of what one should and should not do.

And so that's a nice way of kind of circling back to the point of this paper that everything is embedded in culture and you don't just start from kind of the biophysics of sitting and work your way up.

You're always going back and forth with.


SPEAKER_04:
This is such a great point.

Thank you for pointing that out, Sasha.

Like the agenda here is to pursue this kind of

excuse me, this kind of cooperative turn in the anthropology literature, which is to say that as Joseph Henrich, who's one of my favorite anthropologists slash psychologists out there, as he puts it, we've crossed the evolutionary Rubicon in a way.

Our survival as humans depends on our ability to reliably access and use

stored cultural information effectively.

And that's had an influence on the way that our biology has evolved.

So, you know, compared to chimps, for example, we have really weak digestive juices.

And that's because we've been able to offload the metabolic cost of, you know, having this extremely elaborate digestive system

uh to our technology effectively you know so tool use the use of fire cooking technology has allowed us to process food in a way that then co-evolves with our bodies and takes the kind of processing load of the food off the body itself towards these cultural artifacts and practices that have co-evolved with our biology and that's really the the point is that uh all human affordances are cultural affordances

which exist on a spectrum from more natural to more conventional.

But human biology is a cultural biology, and yeah, culture is a biological phenomenon.

I think that the two are kind of irreconcilably joined in the case of humans.


SPEAKER_05:
And I'll build on that to describe the difference between the field and the landscape of affordances.


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, I meant insurmountably or irreducibly joined, not irreducibly.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, sorry.

Oh yeah, no worries.

So the field of affordances are the affordances in the landscape with which the organism can dynamically cope and intelligently adapt.

So that's at an organismal level.

The field of affordances is like the field of play.

It's the field of action for that agent.

The landscape of affordances, on the other hand, like the landscape exists beyond me, even when I can't interact with it directly.

And similarly, the landscape of affordances

is defined here as the total ensemble of available affordances for a population in a given environment.

And so the concept of chair, just as Sasha was bringing up, the landscape of affordances of chairs includes things for little people, for tall people, for people with small hands, for larger hands,

The landscape of affordances is at the population level, which means it includes all these differences that are biophysical and developmental and cultural as well.

So the field is what one individual agent is able to interact with.

And that's sort of where the rubber hits the road of action oriented frameworks.

And then when we pull back a level to this evolutionary perspective on action oriented frameworks, we get to this landscape of affordances idea.

Any thoughts on that?

Yes, Stephen?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think that that way that things are embedded, it comes back to that piece with the throne as well, is where that chair is, for it to be ascribed as a throne that you don't sit on, is partly processed by what's going on around in that setting at that moment.

Like if there's no one around and it's an empty room, you may sit on the chair if you don't think anyone's going to see you.

but when the cultural kind of rules of the game are in play, or if you see, you know, if it was a room where there was only children in there compared to a room where there was an adult watching.

So there's this kind of negotiation going on, which is quite complex.

And I think previously without free energy, I don't think there was a way to be able to take that many different parameters and sort of integrate them.

Richard?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, I think what's really fascinating too when we talk about this is that the role of language and the role of imitation and the role of just watching other people where I can walk into a room and know absolutely nothing about the norms, values, and beliefs that constrain it.

But if somebody just tells me four or five words, they can immediately bring me up to speed.

And to use the terminology that Sasha was using earlier, those top-down priors, I can gain a lifetime of experience

in 2,500 words and watching four or five people seeing who's rewarded, who's punished.

And I think that

I'm curious to see, and we don't have to talk about this now, but just rhetorically, I'm curious to see how can you take in that notion of symbolic communication and quickly affect somebody's prior understanding of the situation?

How do you fit that into a network of free energy or agents running off this free energy principle?

Is there a synchronization of oscillators on a network?

How exactly do you model that process?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I'm just imagining you're walking with somebody to a meeting and right before they open the door to reduce your uncertainty about what's behind the door, they say, hey, it's going to be tense in there.

Or just so you know, it's a non-smoking room.

And just like you're saying, with four or five words, the way that that person unpacks those words symbolically and the way that that communication channel is utilized to attune the agents on a narrative level, that's what dictates how well

the scene is going to go when the room is actually being enacted.

And so there's so much that we tell each other when we're leading into events that does set the tune and that has to be unpacked within each person's own perspective.

And also one bonus word that's not here, but umwelt.

Does anyone have a sense of what that means?

But I figured I'd just throw it out there as a sort of compliment to affordance.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, if I can just comment on Richard's point before getting to Ungveld, I think the way that you can understand it from a free energy perspective is, I mean, Andy Clark, I think, and Andris Robstorf have called this top-top effect.

So basically passing information from the top or the center of one's hierarchy to the top of another directly through these kinds of linguistic tokens that we're exchanging.

I think that's a powerful intuition.

What we've done in more recent work is extend that to a kind of horizontal top

kind of communication where it's literally the shared physical structure of the niche, whether it's in terms of shared artifacts, like stories that we create and share with one another.

So these, effectively, these parts of models that are offloaded onto the physical structure of the environment can also come and have these kind of top-down structuring effects where we're

we're effectively installing shared environmental priors into the top levels of our hierarchy through enculturation.


SPEAKER_05:
Nice.

And how about Maxwell?

What's your take on Unveiled?


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I think, you know, so I think those of us, you know, working in more specifically on ecological psychology will have some beef with the way that I kind of just generally put all of this together.

But I think like,

affordances, umwelts, phenomenology, and I'm sure many people are not going to agree with me, so feel free to discuss this, but they're all perspectives on the same kind of thing, which is that if we're trying to talk about the meaning-making of organisms, living organisms that share a world, we can't just not talk about the first-person perspective and the way that meaning appears from a specific vantage point.

And that's sort of what the affordances and Umwelt stuff gets at and effectively what we tried to do in this paper.

And that's why I think it's a kind of contribution to the broader project of neuro phenomenology is we start from the kind of first person perspective.

So we were kind of trying to cash out some

some subtle social effects like enculturation in terms of learning affordances.

And then we ask the question, well, what's going on under the hood and as it were around the hood, uh, for that kind of affordance story to be cashed out in mechanistic terms.

Uh, so umwelt is a term, uh, by a biologist, I think it's pronounced von Ushkul.

Uh, yeah.

And he, uh,

I mean, it's essentially, it's very close to the affordances story, although it's more directly centered on the perspective of the organism.

I mean, so Gibsonians, I should say, like, you know, the ecological psychology was introduced by, you know, J.J.

Gibson, the famous psychologist, and a lot of ecological psychologists take issue with our use of affordances here.

I think for interesting reasons, for ecological psychologists, the idea is that perception is the direct perception of a possibility.

We're directly picking up information about our environment.

They're trying to emphasize that we don't have to go through this elaborate inference process.

There's a sense in which we just directly read off the regularities in our sensory array, what is possible and what is doable.

And so in Gibson's original formulation, this is what affordances meant.

What we're doing is more drawing on Tony Camaro's reinterpretation of this concept as affordances 2.0, he calls it, where an affordance is a relation

between some relevant features of the environment and skills ultimately, expectations and skills had by an organism.

So this is already a more inactive embodied reading of affordances.

And I mean, we've gotten into some very interesting disagreements with people from ecological psychology precisely about this difference in interpretation.

So I say this because Umwelt is very much focused on this kind of affordances 2.0 perspective, where what we're trying to do is really capture what the world is like for the organism that inhabits it from its perspective.

This is also where I think it connects with phenomenology, which is also this kind of more systematic attempt to describe things from the first person perspective.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

And that, okay, Alex first and then Shannon.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah thanks as usual i'm trying to connect to my domain is the engineering domain and it's more like a question about could we consider affordances from some kind of functionalities view as for example if i need to drive in a nail the hammer provides me affordance

use it but if i don't have a hammer i could use even microscope to do the same only one or two times but anyway for my engineering task it could be enough and if i see a chair and it's providing affordance to sit it's like a basic function of the chair to to to sit on it

So from this perspective, how it could be considered like when agent need to do something and need some kind of functionality and this functionality or maybe service to do it, how it's possible link?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, absolutely.

This has been pursued by a lot of work.

There's a really cool group based in the Netherlands.

Eric Rydveld and Julian Kiverstein in particular work from this perspective where Eric Rydveld's work is in architecture and affordances.

So he really tries to bring this whole affordances perspective into the design of the spaces that we live in.

So what you're saying is totally consonant with at least some really interesting uses of the concept of affordances in the literature since the early 2000s.

Cool.

Shannon?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I'm just thinking of this field landscape difference and umwelt, and it's really helpful considering the perspective of the agent you're investigating, especially so I'm in music neuroscience.

So we can learn a lot about how people or brains interact with music by putting a person in an fMRI scanner and

playing some music, but that's not exactly how we interact with music in our day-to-day life.

Maybe now more so, because we can turn on our iPod and just, sorry, iPhone, we don't have iPods anymore, and listen to music alone as this solo endeavor.

But in general, for the history of human evolution, music has been this really interactive participatory activity.

And in order to understand

from where I am, how we interact with, understand, or process music, it really is also a question of how we understand and interact with other people.

And so when we bring in these affordances, we can have an affordance for music in a certain field that's, you know, us listening to music alone, but as soon as the landscape is

is a little bit bigger and maybe our small field incorporates one other person or one more other person, then the perspective that we need to take needs to change to adapt the perspective of each of those individuals or of that musical sort of environment as a whole.


SPEAKER_04:
That's such a great point.

I don't know if you're familiar with this paper that I just linked in the chat.

It's by Anna Anderson and Tom Zimke.

called Exploring the Multilayered Affordances of Composing and Performing Interactive Music with Responsive Technologies.

And it was one of the first papers to pick up our cultural affordances work.

And in precisely the context that you're proposing, Shannon, like what they're saying is our concepts need to be enriched with a kind of intermediate scale concept.

So their idea is like when you're performing live electronic music,

there's something intermediary between the field of affordances that each individual is coping with at any moment and this evolutionary level kind of landscape of affordances or this population level landscape of affordances where there are special affordances that open up in this performance context, kind of a mesoscale

in between the landscape and the field uh i forget the precise term that they that they introduced but uh yeah the music is definitely one of the cooler domains of application of this uh this stuff nice sorry great shannon and then just saying this is really great thank you cool sasha


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just a brief comment to follow up on what Alex said.

From the engineering perspective, if you have a hammer, everything's a nail.

It kind of made me think about crime, where if you need something and you're not inhibited by law or social norms, you can just take it.

And maybe that's an overly simplistic understanding of why people commit crime.

But in that context, if you're not inhibited by laws, then your affordances are quite different than if you are.


SPEAKER_05:
OK, and perfect.

Richard, your comment?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, in terms of the field versus the landscape,

Would it be accurate to kind of conceptualize the field of forms as kind of the episodic knowledge of the individual?

So what are their personal learned experiences, their personal body capabilities, kind of this really episodic self form of memory, where landscape of performance is more about the semantic knowledge.

If there was a way for me to kind of look at the population and ask, what are all the skills and habits that this population has, that would be the landscape.

If I was to drill down on one person,

How well do you know how to ride a bike?

That would be more of your field of affordance.


SPEAKER_04:
Precisely.

That's precisely the idea.

And the idea also is that not all affordances are equally salient at a given time, but they're still there in a sense, right?

So I don't know.


SPEAKER_05:
24-7 coffee shop.

There's times a day where it's a salient affordance to some people.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I was going to precisely give a food and coffee-related example.

Yeah, I drink coffee in the morning, but I tend to have insomnia if I drink it too late in the evening.

So there are times in the day when coffee affords drinking more than other times in the day.

And so it's still the case that at any moment I could go into the kitchen and make myself a coffee, right?

So the field of affordances has more to do with those affordances that are soliciting me at a given moment.

you know, it corresponds to more the phenomenology of interacting with affordances, whereas the landscape is more an anthropological or sociological statement, as Richard, you were just saying, about the kinds of things that a population can do in a given space.


SPEAKER_08:
It's interesting that you talk about that idea of salience in the moment, because one thing we talk about a lot in sociology is identity.

And so if you activate my identity, prime me to think as a professor, I'm going to notice certain things in the environment differently than if you prime me to think of my identity as a husband or a son or a brother.

So that kind of, but then again, but identity means, you know, my identity as a professor may be different from any one of your identities as a professor based on socialization and culture and disciplines even as well.

Right.


SPEAKER_05:
So.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay.

Interesting.

Thank you.

Yep.


SPEAKER_05:
And just one paper to tie back.

They write as Heidegger famously argued, it is only when my smooth coping breaks down, say when I run out of coffee or when the cup breaks, that the objective properties, the cup becomes salient.

present in perceptual experience at all and depending on if you're at home you run out of coffee maybe you go back to the coffee machine you set up a new brew if you're in a restaurant culturally maybe you raise your hand or maybe you whistle or maybe there's some other thing that's done culturally to signal that somebody else should see that as their affordance to come over and ask you what you need so the landscape of affordances is a very role specific uh it's realized through specific roles but it represents that population level and that's

So yeah, lots to say here.

That was an excellent discussion.

Let's turn to these first two figures that are cartoons about basic cognitive formulas and a little bit more of a full formula.

So in this first three panel cartoon, I'll read out the captions and then maybe somebody can give an example or a thought.

The first caption is the person thinking, I think they think, I think the second panel says, what would others expect me to do here?

And the third panel says,

I inferred that they intend that I should think, feel, or do X. So what is a thought or an interpretation or a punchline to this cartoon?


SPEAKER_04:
What would mommy want me to do in this context?

And I think this is, sociality is kind of scaling that up to an anonymous kind of third

or other or that is, you know, yeah, this kind of anonymous sociality is kind of scaling that, that kind of, you know, parental expectation thing up a bit.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

It's like peer pressure made me do it.

Well, did they move your joints for you?

Well, no, but people expected me to do it.

Well, just because they expected you to do it, even if that's true, why did you do it?

And it comes back to this.

That is an account of what peer pressure is from this perspective, even if the actual biophysics of the joints are not being pushed by other people.


SPEAKER_04:
And the point that we're making here, I mean, it's really developed in our BBS paper, Thinking Through Other Minds, but that

It's that human thinking really is not just thinking about other humans, but thinking through their own perspective.

And that much of our social interactions actually are structured by the beliefs that we have about other people's beliefs about our own behavior and beliefs.

So you get this kind of nicely recursive intentionality structure.

Yeah.

So that's like the simple kind of, you know, the basic cognitive formula that we're calling it.

But we think that this really applies to almost all human thinking.

We're really always kind of trying to understand a situation from the perspective of, you know, shared beliefs about what's appropriate in that situation, which implies the ability to kind of perspective take and to think through the minds of others.


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.

When someone's talking to hear themselves talk, as we say, it's off the rails because it's not in feedback with other minds.

But when somebody is attuned to the narrative and the culture of the local world, the local actual interaction, not just the hypothetical, then there's the opportunity for communication to be targeted and direct and actually move towards shared goals and under shared values as well.

instead of just individuals biophysically running their mouth, which is an affordance that we also have.

So how do we move our communication patterns towards this higher level instead of just using the opportunities that we know that we can also have?

Any other thoughts on figure one?

Figure two is related.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, one thing I was going to say as well is that we talk a lot about perspectivism and we go up to higher and higher levels.

But I think you see a point at which you can only take a perspective on what you think to a certain level.

It gets too complex, too multisensory, too many inputs.

And it is that kind of phenomenological embodied feel for what you need to do, which is not something you even have a perspective on, that idea of the flow.

So there's this inferential kind of approach as well as a perspectival approach, which just comes from just feeling what you should do.

And I think this kind of shows that because I think you can only go up so far

and take perspectives on things when how you act in the moment.

Sometimes you just have to be there and feel it.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, and we can't perfectly emulate what somebody else wants.

And it's just not that simple.

We're in the bodies that we have with the affordances that we see.

And so to try to over-engineer what the other person wants or should want or should want to want, it's a good thought experiment.

and it helps in a lot of situations, but it is not the end game of relating.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, it might also explain some of the difficulties that we're having currently in our political landscape.

uh so i mean as a as a canadian i'm very sold on the idea of multiculturalism and diversity and pluralism but i think these are not intuitive modes of sociality precisely because they oblige us to multiply the different perspectives through which we're trying to you know relate to a shared social world and you know like

Things like Dunbar's number.

I'm sure you're all familiar with Dunbar's number, right?

If you basically plot the size of primate brains against the size of their social groups, there's almost a linear relation.

And if you extrapolate that to humans, we would live in groups of about 100, 150-ish.

And that probably has a lot to do with the kind of sweet spot where it's easy to kind of share

a bunch of beliefs and norms and patterns of behavior with the group, and things get more and more complicated as the group expands and diversity is included, which is not to say that diversity is a bad thing.

By all means, I think we should move in that direction.

But I think it speaks to some difficulties that we're seeing politically, that it's not an intuitive mode of sociality.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.


SPEAKER_05:
We'll return to that when we can.

And here in figure two, we're almost rephrasing figure one a little bit more from an improvisational perspective.

So the left panel, the person is thinking, how much can I improvise here?

The middle panel is, what do I know they know about me right now?

And how much room to improvise does that give me?

And the third panel reads, how much can I improvise here

given what the local cues tell me about what others expect?

So a lot to say and think.

There's probably other ways that these recursive questions could be formulated.

But is there anything that we haven't addressed in one that people might want to address here?

Cool.

This just reminded me of fellow Jitser.

Yes.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I was thinking that maybe in the adolescent period, we are kind of rebels.

We are rebels against society.

And trying to find our identity, maybe in other words, minimizing our self-prediction errors.

So we are trying to test these norms

by being a rebel.

So actually by inferring what others intend that I should think and feel, maybe if I do the contrary, I'm going to learn something about me.

So how can we deal with this?

like landscape affordances and cultural affordances or even what our mom is saying and what we are really trying to find out about ourselves.


SPEAKER_05:
Nice.


SPEAKER_04:
Maxwell.

Well, yeah, so I thought that was very insightful.

Thank you very much for that.

Very, very interesting.

Well, I would have just added that

So the point here is to kind of say, well, it's not merely just about inferring what others think I should do.

It's really more about the situational coping, right?

So it's about learning different contexts.

and learning about what's allowable in all of these different contexts, and then being able to juggle that and to reactivate the right constellation of, you know, semantic knowledge, for example, or rules and norms that pertain to each context.

And, and also then, you know, moving from one context to the next and seeing what kind of flexibility that allows for ultimately, uh, because you know, human reality is improvisational.

Like it's,

It's about coping with a situation given the constraints of that situation in real time.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it's a controlled novelty question, like a lot of improvisation.

It's on the edge, the bleeding edge and the trade-off between explore and exploit, where successful systems are at.

And so the teenage rebellion, if the teenagers just mindlessly

fell into the line of whatever was happening before, maybe in some niche that was unchanging, that would be a successful evolutionary strategy.

But the niches are always changing, not for the least of which is ecology, but also improvisation has this always moving dynamic.

And so the teenage rebelliousness is there's the element of the individual coming to precision about who am I and who am I in this broader sense?

And then at the higher level, there's this explore, exploit,

where some element of contrarianism, it comes across like a negative word, but if you'd ever had contrarian models, then you couldn't know if you were just in a very, very local optima or whether there are other realms to explore.

So there's so much there, and the details are all in actually formulating these specific situations and understanding what are the affordances, what is precision doing here.

So maybe in...

The next bit, we can pretty briefly look through the figures three, four, and five.

Maxwell, it will be helpful to have your perspective on these, but let's start with three.

Figure three is a hierarchical prediction error minimization framework.

Maxwell, maybe could you give a shot on what was being summarized here?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

We're just describing Bayesian predictive coding here.

most predictive coding schemes are hierarchical as we were just discussing above where basically what I mean this is more explained in I think figure four or five but essentially what this figure in particular is supposed to illustrate is the kind of bi-directional message passing that's implicit in all of this.

As we were discussing, you know, the top or the center is where the more kind of abstract or slow regularities are represented.

And they effectively, the top layers provide context for the bottom layers in the same way that slow regularities provide the context or the embedding against which, you know, faster regularities unfold.

Well, these slower regularities or priors

uh provide context for the the ones below so what you have descending or you know coming from the center to the periphery is effectively predictions about the kind of data that each subsequent lower layer should be receiving and the way these schemes work is i think consonant with the phenomenology

Essentially, if the brain doesn't have to process something, then it doesn't.

The brain is a lazy organ.

The thing I often say to drive this home is, what was the color of the last door handle you opened?

there's a high probability that you didn't register that at all.

Well, because there's no reason to, right?

Like you just smoothly coped with the door.

What you needed to do is open the door to get to the other side of it.

And, you know, there was no reason to even register the color of the door handle.

So what this kind of framework says is the signal that the brain is processing at any time is the discrepancy between the data that it was expecting to register and the data that it actually does.

And this difference is called a prediction error.

And if you can go just back to figure three for one second, I just want to make the point that, well, so this relates to Bayes in the sense that descending messages

carry prior probabilities.

So essentially, you can think of this as the base rate for a given phenomenon independent of the data that I'm collecting.

And then the prediction error kind of combines that knowledge with data.

So it's something like the likelihood.

If the prior is just the probability of an event that I'm considering, the likelihood is the probability of that event given some data that I've actually registered effectively.

So this is why these frameworks are often called Bayesian.

The ascending messages carry prediction errors, which are likelihoods, and the descending messages carry prior probabilities, which are the predictions that the predictive brain and so on are all about.

Perfect.

And then from here, we move on to a specific hypothesis to predictive coding.

I'm not sure 100% the degree to which we're still committed to this functional distinction.

But the idea is that, at least in the brain, there are going to be two kinds of neural populations.

The ones which encode effectively these generative model units, which

are the ones that are encoding the kind of base rates about the phenomena that you're interested in.

And then another functionally distinct subpopulation of neurons that's responsible for computing the difference between the data you expected given these predictions and the data that you're actually receiving.

And again, the unexplained signal that the part of the signal that wasn't predicted by the descending messages is passed upstream

in the hopes that it will be explained away at some point.


SPEAKER_05:
And also one note that can help understand this is this caption.

In the empirical Bayes framework, the system can then use the posterior obtained from one iteration as the prior in the next iteration.

And so the empirical Bayes framework is in a way what it cuts the Gordian knot.

It prevents us from just saying, well, it's just simply priors all the way up.

And we start somewhere.

by starting our prior for one level with just empirically what we're getting from the posterior at the lower level at that time point as a starting point.

And so this can be instantiated in physical, not infinite systems because there's a possibility that empirical Bayes, just as it's used in data analysis in a variety of fields, you can use the data to inform a prior and then have a generative model that starts working from there.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, precisely.

And what Bayes does,

in this context is just provide a way to optimally combine what you knew before sampling any data with what you've learned from that data.

So as you're saying, what you're essentially doing is multiplying your posterior.

So you calculate your posterior by multiplying your prior by your likelihood and then normalizing, which can get a bit hairy at times, but that's effectively what you're doing here.


SPEAKER_05:
And let's just look at this example.

So here we have the same architecture as figure four.

So we're building it out.

Figure three, it's a graph.

It's just nodes and edges.

It's the pure representation.

Now we're thinking about a little bit more of a plausible neural architecture.

And maybe in some brain regions, it is this way.

And maybe in other brain regions, it isn't this way.

But this is a plausible architecture.

And now we have an example.

So what is being shown with the dog?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, this is just to re-illustrate the center versus periphery distinction.

So the image of the dog has just undergone a Fourier decomposition, which basically means that you're kind of separating out the different spatial frequencies that are used to generate the image.

And I mean, the hypothesis is always sort of the same is that the closer you are to the sensory periphery, the more you're dealing with faster changing regularities.

So high spatial frequency information is represented at the bottom or the periphery of the hierarchy.

And as you ascend the hierarchy, what you see is essentially lower and lower spatial frequency information.

Uh, so this is the kind of idea here is that like the, the, the fast regularities are represented closer to the sensory periphery, slow ones closer to, uh, the center.

Uh, yeah.

I hope I said that right.

And, um, and, and yeah, uh, most sensory modalities are going to be, uh, deconstructed in this way.

I mean, you know, for the visual, uh, brain regions, uh, you start off, you know, detecting, uh,

essentially lines and, you know, like grading patterns and the more primary visual areas like V1 and everything.

And then as you ascend the cortical hierarchy, what the neurons become sensitive to are groupings of these patterns.

So things that change at a slightly slower timescale.

I mean, if you did one of these Fourier decompositions to an image of the face,

what you'll see is that the gross morphological features of the face, like where your cheekbones are and where your jawline is, are much coarser than the fast-changing things in your face, like your eyes and your mouth.

And so again, you might assume that this is represented hierarchically in the brain.


SPEAKER_05:
And let me add one more level to the specific visual example, because it's in the specifics that we can see what we're getting out of this framework.

So low spatial frequency is like a blur filter.

It's averaged out over large regions of visual space.

In contrast, the very high spatial frequency, it looks grainy.

And that's kind of like turning the contrast very high up to overemphasize differences between neighboring pixels.

But when you do that, you lose the global structure.

So we know that from playing around in Photoshop.

Well, it would be really cool if we could just see the world in total high resolution and just optimize this with one level.

But it turns out that in the retina, the cells are activated even before the lines detection.

It's like light

It can only detect whether it's on or off extremely locally.

And so how does that signal, which is ultimately an extremely local contrast signal, how does that percolate up in the context of deep priors about regularities in nature?

So look at deep mind, look at the images that are produced from deep dream, these regularities that appear natural.

They're not just any kind of natural, they're human, visual, niche natural, like grass and clouds.

These kinds of things have structures that certain other kinds of repeating, like a grid, just doesn't appear in nature.

And so this is a structure by which the hyperlocal contrasts, literally between pixels in this image, can be passed up and you can end up getting this full spectrum Fourier resolution on the image

And then to add one more level of detail, what we experience isn't any single one of these levels because we experience a world in full color, though there's no color receptors at our periphery, and also a world that's at full resolution, though we have very, very different resolution as far as the pixels, the retinal detection units are concerned in this phobia in the center of the eye versus the periphery.

So that to me is demonstrative that we're experiencing our deep generative model of the world, which is that the world has similar resolution, no matter which way my head is looking and there's color everywhere.

And then subconsciously or sub personally, our eyes are engaged in an oculomotor informational forging task.

And where do the eyes secade?

It turns out that they look where the most informative place to look would be given the structure of this Bayesian algorithm.

So there's so many things that are suggested with just this architecture, and there's so many aspects of the signal processing cascade, and especially the top-down priors, that aren't reflected by this idea that the eye is a camera, and the brain is a CPU, and it's just doing image classification like a convolutional neural network.

There are convolutional elements, to be sure, in vision, but they're playing out in this type of a framework, not in a tic-tac-toe framework.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, absolutely.

Couldn't agree more with that.

That's a great point.

I mean, I think an often overlooked element of this picture is that it's not just saying, like, this is a criticism of bottom-up passive, you know, a passive picture of the brain that just kind of bottom-up aggregates, you know, simple properties until you get something like a percept.

So we're not just saying that this is a top-down approach.

It's the bidirectional processing cascade that really gets you where you want to go, ultimately.

And as you were just saying, Dan, the experience that we're having implicates all these different levels.

And it's precisely because this whole multilevel architecture is implicated at all times that you get this kind of rich, equally multilevel experience.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Maybe we can turn to this last figure for the last section of our discussion.

So now we've built out this Bayesian framework from the previous images, first from its most austere framing to something that looks a little bit more naturalistic.

And now we're going to bring it back to our discussion about culture and about expectations, norms, and affordances.

So here we have the same

structure where we have predictions moving down and prediction errors moving up or in or out.

These are just spatial metaphors and there's only in and out, there isn't top or bottom.

And then we're adding a few more levels of details to the model.

The first is this blue and that's the precision weighting.

And so that's entering this hierarchy at a few different places and it's tuning the temperature, so to speak,

on the precision.

So how much should we value?

How much stock should we take about this information that's coming up?

Although there's a lot more nuance there.

And then also there's a top down modulation of attention.

And that's where this regimes of attention enters.


SPEAKER_04:
So the precision story is really key to all this.

And, you know, honestly, as I was learning this framework, you know, like five years ago, initially, I was hoping that the precision stuff wouldn't be so central to the argument because it's really complicated.

But it turns out that you get you get some of the most interesting effects from the precision stuff.

So it's it's it's a little bit it's a little bit difficult sometimes to wrap your head around.

But I think the effort is worth it.

The idea is just to say, at every level of the hierarchy, the brain doesn't just register a signal, but it evaluates how confident it is in that signal or how reliable the signal is.

And this is what this precision construct effectively quantifies.

And Dan, you were relating this to temperature informally.

That's correct.

A more intuitive way, perhaps, of framing it is as volume.

So it's sort of like the brain's volume on each of its different kind of sensory streams, sensory and predictive streams effectively.

And yeah, so precision weighting is what allows you to, according to this story at least, arbitrate different sources of information.

So for example, 2018, 2019, I spent a lot of time in London and London was surprisingly foggy.

As a Canadian, I never experienced anything like this.

I think once when I was a child, there was just so much fog.

There were days when I would come out of my flat in London and I couldn't see two feet ahead of me.

There was so much fog.

In circumstances like that, what you learn to do is to rely on your other senses like your hearing, for example.

There's a story about the way that the brain is kind of dynamically, it's sort of like a dynamic balancing act.

In a sense, the brain is trying to see which of the signals that it's dealing with are the most reliable.

So I'll stop now.

Richard has questions.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, so this is the criticism I get a lot when I present at conferences and even when I publish on ideas related to this.

In the sense of, you know, if I'm, let's imagine I'm a master burglar and I walk into a neighborhood and I'm looking, I'm casing the neighborhood to find out what I want to break into, which house I want to break into.

And so I have these priors, I have this sensory information, I'm highly motivated to steal things.

And then there's always that old guy in the back who raises his hand and says, that's really cool.

So how do I test any of that?

How, what do I measure?

What variables do I need to collect?

And if at the end of the day, all you're giving me is a more refined version of what I'm already talking about.

Who cares?

And my gut tells me that's wrong.

I mean, as we've been in all these different disciplines, we can go back and forth and translate our concepts back and forth and see that we're all talking about the same thing.

But if it doesn't lead to something empirical that then we can then start doing critical tests and show this version of the theory is wrong because my particular priors or whatever wouldn't work differently if it had been that way.

So I guess, to me, that's the thing that I'm always struggling with, and I'm hoping to get some insight from everyone here, is how do we translate this figure six into an empirical test that I can write up for an NSF grant and then gather data and show my theory is right, Parsons from 1950 was wrong, right?

Or something along those lines.


SPEAKER_04:
That's a great question.

I think where this has been done the most extensively is in psychiatry.

where, and this is why, you know, this is what really drove the message home for me that the precision story was so central to this, is that you can understand a lot of psychiatric conditions in terms of, you know, altered precision weighting profiles.

So like, I think a kind of well understood

example has to do with the cycle the course of schizophrenia uh so we think that and phil corlett uh has great work on this uh i mean several people uh have worked on this uh from different kind of perspectives but all kind of relying on uh this construct of precision and backing it then then backing it up with fmri data so the course of schizophrenia for example

it's thought to maybe start out as a physiological break in your dopamine signaling.

So say D2 receptors start to misfire for no reason.

So they're generating what we would consider to be a spurious prediction error.

So like a prediction error that isn't really tracking anything.

And initially this gets resolved perceptually in the lower levels of the hierarchy.

It's kind of contained through hallucination.

Like the brain's generating a prediction error signal

And what it ends up doing is underweighting its priors or overweighting its prediction error because that's essentially what's going on.

Like there's a breakdown and these prediction errors that aren't tracking anything are given too much importance.

And as the condition worsens, they're given more and more importance because they're consistent.

The brain is just consistently generating this prediction error.

And at some point it gets so intense in the brain that it starts to be resolved through learning rather than through a hallucination.

So then, you know, for those of you who do a little bit of research in psychiatry, you'll know that there is a typical course of schizophrenia that starts off as a more kind of hallucination experience where people are still to some degree cognizant of the fact that they're undergoing an abnormal experience and they're hallucinating.

But late stage schizophrenia has more to do with persistent delusional beliefs.

And now your actual cognitive structure is adapting to the error signals that you're generating and learning the error, essentially, which is not tracking anything in reality because it's just due to a breakdown.

So from that point of view, to address the points that you just raised, Richard, I think a lot of the power of the approach in terms of proof of principle comes from psychiatry.

These predictions and precisions are computed by parts of the brain that you can identify.

So Phil Corlett, I think in particular, has done some really, really cool work on psychiatry.

on schizophrenia and effectively the kind of presentation of schizophrenia and the course of schizophrenia.

Very cool work from that point of view.

It fills it at Yale for those of you who are interested.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Stephen, and then we'll return to the unique predictions question.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I suppose just adding to that, this challenge of things happening over time, like a time series of things happening rather than kind of some snapshot in time, which I think traditionally a lot of research sort of does that.

So even what Maxwell was saying there is what's presenting as a pattern over time,

If you took one moment, it might not show that.

And I think that's where it's kind of hard to analyse that.

That's why these models that they create show how things pan out over time on a low dimensionality.

And then you can get something from that.

And I'm kind of... It does present a problem about real-life scenarios.

And I'm interested in whether maybe approaching it from the direction of affordances and the environment and working backwards...

to how people attune to an environment might be the way to look at the more macro because it becomes so high dimensional if you take someone at the individual level.

But I think this is up for grabs.


SPEAKER_05:
Let's bring that back to the question about crime by Richard.

So let's think about the shared expectations.

So the shared expectations might be people don't walk onto someone else's private property.

So in that case, even somebody who's highly motivated and has the tools and the affordance to do a burglary, there's still uncertainty about what's inside the house.

Now, let's imagine changing the norm so that people are at wide windows and you can see exactly which house has which equipment.

Now, somebody who's motivated and with the affordance is enabled by a cultural norm that allows passing close to the window, as well as an architectural affordance to see inside the house, they're reducing their uncertainty

about what's inside of the house.

And that is going to change not just that agent's behavior in their own field of affordances, but also some macro trends.

And so this is in one sense, this is looking at within the brain, these are different neuronal populations.

And that would be precision could be played by dopamine and by dopaminergic synapses like Maxwell's talking about.

And personally, I find it fascinating that so many stories about reward

Like, oh, well, gambling is about people trying to maximize reward or bank robberies are about people trying to maximize reward.

Really?

Is it, though?

Or is it about people optimizing their precision or perhaps even operating under maladaptive precision regimes?

So it doesn't have just because it's an optimization and a precision oriented framework doesn't mean that aberrant events don't happen.

So within the brain level, we can think about that type of precision.

But then also socially, what is the feedback that somebody receives along the way?

that has other people give them feedback to keep them on the straight and narrow, as it were.

And then how do we as cultures define what that path is?

Are there on ramps from the fringes of society that help onboard people into a healthy and cooperative way of living?

Or do we push people who even deviate in some way

out of the center where they're even more likely to deviate further from the increasingly narrow perspective of the center.

So there's really so many levels that this can come into play at.

So I think just because of the time, let's have a few closing thoughts from anybody who would like to share.

And then also please through text, if you're listening as well as participating, submit us questions or topics or quotes, because we have a bunch of quotes that we've selected

and some other things that we felt like we could have spent more time talking about.

But we'll save that for next week with this first week's podcast being the figures, the definitions, the on-ramps, and the accessibility from a lot of different fields.

And then next week we'll bridge out even further.

So any closing thoughts from our participants?

Shannon?


SPEAKER_02:
I think that's a really good point, that question of how do you study this?

How do you bring this entire story of the free energy principle or predictive processing or active inference and actually study it in a social context, like in a group of people?

So not just the stationary burglar who's alone in a neighborhood at night, but in the context of a group of people who are interacting.

think that would be a really great topic for part of next week or like when we revisit and just you know a plug from music that's a great uh little model system to study these kind of interactions um and starting from western music just because i grew up here and that's kind of music i've interacted with but if you have an ensemble you know who are the leaders of the ensemble who are the followers

And you can kind of manipulate that and really study how you can play with changing the regimes of attention or changing who in the group dictates what the particular field of affordances that this piece of music needs to play.

And there are a lot of really exciting and fun ways to get creative in the lab to study these kinds of social exchanges and maybe put some of these super complex mathematical models to

and give it some empirical testing.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

Richard, anyone else can raise their hand as well.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah.

Building off that, I think it's a great idea to talk about people in groups.

The thing that I've seen coming out with hyperscanning and the ability to have two, three, four, five people all being scanned at the same time while they're socially interacting and then asking, okay, so what is this mathematical model of the free energy principle or active inference or whatever embedded in an individual?

Does it come down to coupled oscillators?

That's the thing I keep coming back to.

Is this just another version of coupled oscillators?

If that's true, then the notion of how do I empirically deal with this is because these coupled models can deal with 10, 15, 20...

a thousand people interacting that our current concepts in sociology we can talk about abstractly but no one can really figure out a way to measure it so i think that'd be really interesting to look at the intersection between the models our current scanning ability to empirical design and the theory and really see where they what are they talking about and what is more unified you know operationalization of these concepts in light of this technology and these models what would that look like in terms of experimental design


SPEAKER_04:
That's really exciting.

I'll try to rejoin because my camera crashed again after this comment, but I wanted to say to both of you, Shannon and Richard, if these are lines of research that you're interested in exploring, this is definitely something that my group is very keen on exploring.

I mean, you're talking about hyperscanning.

I really think this is the direction forward.

We're working with...

a few people now.

So Robin Murphy, Santiago Castiello, Eda Bilek, and Guillaume Dumas in particular are all people who do EEG and fMRI hyperscanning.

And the new kind of thing that we're trying to do is to combine multi-agent modeling with multi-brain neuroimaging.

You know, because the problem that I have with social neuroscience is that

And I'm sure those of you who do social sciences will concur.

What we're essentially doing is looking at the brain with this really deep level of inquiry.

We're looking at hundreds of different sensors on the scalp or whatever.

And so we have all of this brain data that we're looking at, but when we're looking at the kind of social measures that we're using, it's these kind of toy measures like empathy or whatever that are supposed to tell us something broad about culture.

And the problem with that is that we're effectively flattening all of the causal structure and complexity of the social world onto these kind of toy dummy variables that are supposed to tell us something really deep about social interactions.

By combining this multi-scale perspective opened up by the free energy principle with hyperscanning and other social neuroscience techniques, we're hoping to really be able to talk about and understand and model the social world in all its complexity while also looking at

brain dynamics.

So have people, for example, interact in ecologically realistic situations for humans, and then see stuff about, you know, like, so Eda Bilek, for example, if you don't know her, you should absolutely check out her work.

E-D-D-A-B-I-L-E-K, Eda Bilek.

She's currently Karl Fristen's postdoc.

And I think she's also at Mannheim in Germany.

And what she's developed is effectively a measure of brain-to-brain synchrony or real-time brain-to-brain information transfer.

And you can get to this by looking at basically real-time interactions between humans, engaging in some kind of shared participatory task, like aligning gaze direction or whatever.

and simultaneously recording their brains as they interact.

And I really think that this is like the golden way forward.

So if any of you actually are interested in pursuing this, please send me a DM or something and we can get started.


SPEAKER_05:
Perfect.

And I'll just close, I think with one short note on flattening versus deflationary theory, because it really does come back to what are we doing here?

Is this another metaphor and it's just pendulums on a table or is there something actually more here?

And flattening, Maxwell was suggesting, is when we're just projecting.

And that's a psychological as well as a dimensional term.

We project onto simple constructs.

We want to have this simple construct of empathy.

And in a sense, by projecting into that representation at a lower dimension, we've created a world that isn't necessarily reflective of the whole system.

In contrast with a flattening account,

We can have a deflationary account where what's happening is really communicating brains.

It's really just those brains communicating and we're deflating away the extra, the second level.

Where's the empathy?

Where's the regime?

Where's the attention?

The answer is it's the whole system.

And it's not just the whole system, meaning the person.

It's the whole system with the niche and the culture.

And so it's a lot to grasp with.

because it is a multi-level system and we can design an experiment that isolates a certain component, but we never truly have isolated from the evolutionary context or the developmental context.

And so the goal to pursue deflationary rich accounts that provide all of these humanistic things that we want to see like inactive embodied and cultured cognition, rather than flattening it onto something and then saying, well, maybe they're the same between different cultures.

We can actually,

go into that richness and look at what we actually have.

And Stephen, with a closing thought.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, thanks.

I totally agree.

And I like this idea of being able to feel where we look, this idea of feeling texture.

It's sort of analogous with that because you have empathy.

And someone like, I work a lot in the development field and community work and

You get this idea of empathy, but there's no time variation in empathy.

It's just like dumped there.

And it's like, well, how is that changing moment to moment?

There's none of that.

No one really thinks about that, how things change over time.

So I think this is actually really useful.

It's clarified a lot of stuff in my head, actually, just hearing that discussion about... I think it's a different way of thinking about...


SPEAKER_04:
you know normally all that granularity would be seen as a problem but actually it can be seen as data which is really cool beautiful maxwell first author last thought i just wanted it's less of a thought than a feeling i just wanted to re-express my gratitude to everyone in the conversation um this is really exciting and awesome and uh like yeah i i so

If anyone does want to develop these ideas, like I was saying, please get in touch with me.

And our group is very keen on collaborating.

We've established a multi-site international network of research called the Nested Minds Network.

We're going to launch the website pretty soon.

But for those of you who are looking for international collaboration and so on, please get in touch with me.

Like what we're trying to do is build a community around this.

And, you know, this podcast is definitely part of the consolidation process.

And yeah, so thanks.

Thank you all.

You're all really cool.

And this is really fun.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Maxwell.

We build the on-ramps together that are bigger than we can build individually and build the on-ramps we want to see.

We build the culture that we want to see.

And that's a lot of work to be done.

but it's empowering to know that together we'll make it happen.

Okay.

Thank you all for the live stream.

Thanks for listening.

And I will end the live stream.

## SAc1F1AWRAs

SPEAKER_02:
All right, I think we are live.

Hello everyone and welcome to Team Calm Podcast 4.2.

This is an exciting day because we are testing out new technology.

And so thanks to all of our participants.

We hope this works for all of you listening and in attendance.

Let's go to the slides.

Welcome to Team Calm.

Team Calm is an experiment in online team communication and learning related to active inference.

You can find us on Twitter at our Inference Active Handle.

You can email us at activeinference at gmail.com.

Find us at our public Keybase team or watch us on YouTube.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

We welcome all questions that can help people understand active inference.

And as far as basic video etiquette, please mute if it's noisy in your background.

Feel free to use the raise hand feature in Jitsi so that we can make sure to call on you.

We are here in Active Inference Stream 4.2, following up on 4.1.

In 4.1, we discussed cultural affordances, scaffolding local worlds through shared intentionality and regimes of attention, a 2016 paper by Ramsted et al.

Today, we're going to do a check-in and warm-up.


SPEAKER_03:
And last time we had a discussion of the figures- Daniel, sorry, we can't see slides by now.


SPEAKER_02:
yes okay good point i can see the slides on the live stream but uh they're not being shared in the jitsi so what i'm going to do and we're um hashtag doing it live i'm going to post the live stream link and if you'd like you could have the live stream muted in the background and just see what the slides are because it will just be rapidly um following so

I'll continue on this first part and the link will be put into the Jitsi chat.

If you could just give me one second.

How about something on active inference and multitasking?

That's what I want to know about.

Last time we had an awesome discussion of the paper.

We went through the abstract, the claims and the aims of the work, and we also went through all the figures in pretty nice detail.

This time we are going to have further discussion, which has been separated into a few different topics that none of the conversions have been prepared on beforehand, so it will be fun and improvisational.

so let's start with the check-in and warm-up people can introduce themselves and their location if they'd like the first question is what is a local world that you live in any thoughts on local worlds it's a good question um


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I guess this says something about the way that we live.

I mean, I live in Montreal and my local world, I live around the McGill area, so it's very studenty.

I guess I live in a world where people share progressive values.

And I also get the feeling that there's something like a rift, where several of us are sharing the same geographical location.

But don't necessarily live in the same world, per se, in the sense that things don't afford the same kinds of things that they do for other people living in another, as it were, world.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

The first thing I thought of was that local can be geospatial or it can be informational.

One informational link away is just one video chat away, one phone call away.

And what we're experiencing in a big way is that tension between our informational local worlds and our spatial ones.

And that can lead to discordance.

Any other thoughts on this part?


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Maybe...

In this term of local, maybe it's based on communications which happens most often with you.

Even in a global environment, but if you communicate each day with somebody, you are kind of local world.

Cool.


SPEAKER_02:
Second question.

What gives meaning to our local worlds?

So this can be maybe a thought from the paper.

What did they propose gives meaning to local worlds or just experientially, what is it that gives meaning to your local world?

Yes, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I think there's the geographical

like physical embeddedness of that world.

So how you actually, when I think of world, I kind of think very much of it in terms of the physical space, being part of the, of that whole piece.

But then, like you say, how those things show up, then starts to become maybe more abstract or more inferred through other people.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, and from a process perspective, as we'll get to later, it's the feedback loops that happen within ourself and amongst various people that provide semiotic meaning.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, for some reason, I just thought of this phrase, like theory of place, kind of going along with theory of mind, that in this kind of local information environment, but maybe not...

geospatially local, that the people that you're communicating with, you may or may not know where they're communicating from.

And that could be helpful in your communication or not, because simply because we're all here on this live stream, we don't really need to know the exact location of each of the participants.

But if I did know, it might add something to our communication or the narrative that we're building.

to kind of know where we can all connect from.


SPEAKER_02:
And then to follow up with the thinking through other minds idea, it's like thinking through other spaces.

It's about putting yourself in someone else's shoes, understanding where they're coming from.

These are embodied and spatial metaphors that we use, just like, can you grasp it?

Can you sketch out the idea?

These are tactile ways to talk about abstract things like ideas.

And so you're literally putting yourself in someone else's shoes if you ask, what is the accessibility of this room going to be for somebody who's coming from a different place?

And these are the important things to consider.

And we'll return to this, I think, when we talk about the third space that exists in social interactions.


SPEAKER_01:
In terms of the paper cultural affordances, the proposal there is something like, well, what

What's at stake is something like a dialectic between affordances and expectations, right?

What ends up shaping the worlds that we inhabit, which we're conceptualizing in terms of affordances, really are the shared expectations that we have with other people in our community.

And by shared expectations, I mean something very broad to encompass the beliefs that we have about the shared world, but also the norms that are

kind of structuring our appraisal and interaction with the world, as well as practices that might be ongoing.

And crucially, the shared physical environment

that we have in common that in the case of humans comes to encode information about the way that we live.

So, you know, think about the fact that in most cities, streets meet at right angles or, you know, the use of traffic signalization to kind of coordinate our patterns of movement throughout a city.

I think what's at stake is really this dialectic.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

The ant colonies architecture is in feedback with their behavior and they're updated and generated by the very same process, which is niche construction or distributed cognition.

Different contexts are going to have different terms.

A final warmup question is what are you trying to get a grip on?

And this is looking forward to talking about grip later on in this discussion, but what's just something that you're trying to get a grip on?

I just thought it'd be a fun, random question.

One thing we were talking about just right before we started was trying to get a grip on some of these formalisms and understanding which formalisms in the free energy principle and in active inference are downstream of each other, which ones are necessary or sufficient for each other, and also what is the best way to on-ramp and to learn about them from various different perspectives.


SPEAKER_01:
I was going to say exactly that.

I was going to talk about the reading group and the progress that we're making there.


SPEAKER_02:
What have you found interesting or liked about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, I didn't expect this to really turn into the rich discussion and exchange community that it's turned into.

I mean, yeah, we're really coming to grips, I think, as a group with basically all the math and physics that goes into it, like really becoming familiar with all the moving parts and all the ingredients.

It's been a really positive experience.

So that's what we're, I guess I'm also trying to learn guitar a bit more.

That's another thing I'm coming to literally grips with.

Those are the two main things I'd say.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

And Stephen, do you raise your hand?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, like you were talking about this idea of putting yourself or getting in someone else's shoes.

So I'm trying to put myself or trying to understand to put myself in someone else's shoes in terms of understanding what I'm talking about, all this stuff.

And then I think the whole idea of like,

am I trying to understand in this dialectic with someone else where they are in relation to me or am I actually getting into their shoes in a place or in a field of practice or in some sort of stance in relation to some concepts.

So I think there's something kind of about actually

how we try and understand what it means in a meta level like you know because and how we move between them because we i tend to find that a lot of um the stuff like in anthropology and that it tends to have particular metaphors that we end up all having to follow from gold or whoever and that's particularly true in the arts it's all like it's all deluse and

and then everything stay as metaphors.

So like how do you jump in and out of those different sort of shoes that people are in?

I think that's really interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, being specific with generalizations, being tangible with the abstraction.

Those are tensions that we work with.

And also one thought on local worlds and getting a grip.

So once there's a grip on the object, it becomes part of your extended cognition.

You have the grip on the hammer.

You can hit the nail.

But if you don't have a grip on the hammer, it's not part of your affordances to nail that in with a hammer.

Or if you're in someone else's shoes, the local world kind of becomes the foot-shoe container.

And the local world is what gives meaning to that coupling between the foot and the shoe, between the hand and the hammer.

And so in just a spatial way, but perhaps also in an abstract way, the local world is...

tying back to the affordance idea and upon that control idea.

Sasha?

Sasha muted.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, just to add a little meta level comment on that.

The way that we communicate, it has to capture the content of what we're trying to communicate and then also

in a way that makes sense to the receiving party.

But it's just funny, especially on this sort of podcast conversation style that we're trying to communicate with each other, but also in a way that is going to be understandable to a future audience.

And so I think there's a few different levels of modulating our communication style and the kind of affordances that we have.


SPEAKER_02:
Perfect transition to our first bucket of questions, which is feedback and affordances.

So on this one,

This slide has a picture of a termite nest.

It also has a picture of some brain computer images.

And there's a quote from the paper.

It reads, this multilevel embodiment of the generative model, as we shall argue below, extends to the concrete material human design milieus or designer environments in which humans operate.

Some generative models in this wide sense involve semantic content and others do not.

They involve something more minimal than satisfaction conditions, i.e.

reliable co-variation.

So my question, which is pretty broad, was what does active inference tell us about niche construction in the physical sense or in the cultural sense?


SPEAKER_01:
There's a lot to say there.


SPEAKER_02:
And there were many subsequent papers.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, if I can just make a few points to get us started.

So Axel Constant and Jelle Breenenburg, I think, are the two first people to really start working on the niche construction aspect of Active Inference back in 2017 or so.

And so all this work rests on the fact that whenever we're talking about active inference, we're talking about a story that's symmetric in some deep sense.

So active inference is a story about how organisms over the course of development and learning and through perception and processes like evolution become more like

their ecological niche, which technically means that their statistical structure comes to recapitulate, in some sense, the structure of the environment in which the organisms that we're interested in exist.

So for example, you can tell a lot about my environment just by looking at my physical body, right?

So the fact that I'm wearing a parka tells you that summer's over in Canada, for example.

So there are these kind of predictive relations between the state of my phenotype and the expected state of the environment that kind of come together.

So the other side of active inference that's often emphasized is the active bit.

So rather than making my beliefs more like the environment, I can make my environment more like my beliefs or conform to my preferred data distributions.

What was overlooked before 2017 is that from the point of view of the organism and environment, the story is symmetric.

So when we're making the environment more like our preferred data distributions,

as an active inference, we're effectively changing the structure of the environment to make it more like our own structure, to make it like the structure of the preferences that we're encoding.

And so I think a lot of the more interesting work done on culture recently in the active inference tradition draws on this niche construction stuff.

I mean, at some point, the idea is you've only got so many layers of Cortex, and Cortex is metabolically expensive.

So where are you going to keep optimizing after the sixth layer or whatever of increasingly meta...

increasingly centralized representation.

Well, one way to go is really just in the environment.

So there's a sense in which really, like, coordinating amongst conspecifics, you know, like, or with a team member or whatever, is sort of like constructing a niche in another person, in a sense.

You're sort of like, you know,

uploading into another person the sets of priors that will optimally allow you to interface together, which relates to some of the top top effects that we were discussing last week.

So I mean, ultimately, the picture that I kind of draw for multiscale active inference is that you have two stacks, essentially, you've got a kind of vertical stack and a horizontal stack.

Uh, by vertical stack, I mean that all the systems that we're considering are nested systems of systems of systems, right?

So, uh, you know, our bodies are made of organs that are made of cells and so on.

Um, or, you know, uh, the broader, uh, socioeconomic community in North America is made up of like, you know, more regional groups, like the U S Canada, Mexico,

which in turn are made up of, you know, so you've got these kind of nested structures going.

And the active inference story then can be used to, I think, make sense of the ways in which we structure the environment, especially humans.

This is especially the case for humans that we structure the environment in order to foster adaptive patterns of group behavior.


SPEAKER_02:
Any other thoughts on that?

And I can add as well.

Well, and raise your hand if so.

One part that I thought was really interesting, Maxwell, was this notion of like a deep symmetry, especially when the two interacting components of the system have very different affordances.

So I was thinking about winter, just like you brought up.

We don't recapitulate snow or cold weathers.

However, we do come to embody those regularities in the day and in the year with our weather.

first our thermoregulation as an organism and then with our behavior and with our extended phenotype with our buildings and with our air conditioners and so we do in a very deep sense come to embody those regularities and then the air conditioners change the climate

in some sense, maybe a little, maybe a lot, maybe it's in a good direction, maybe it's in a bad direction, but there is a consequence of this coming to embody the regularities, and especially when the systems are very different.

Maybe when you're doing a call and response, it looks symmetrical at the syntactic level, and it has this deep symmetry at the turn-taking level.

And then with other systems where the turn-taking looks very different, it's still something symmetrical, but it's not quite symmetrical at the first pass.


SPEAKER_01:
Right?

Well, so the, the, the idea was, I was trying to elaborate a bit earlier with this vertical and horizontal stack is touches precisely on this is that it's not just that organisms are stacked in this kind of vertical ways that you also have this kind of horizontal relationship between an organism, or an agent and its niche, the turnout to also be stacked in this kind of way.

So it's not just that my cells

make up organs that make up my body, for instance, it's that my body is a niche for my organs, and my organs are a niche for my cells.

And so when we're talking about niche construction, it's very much as Sasha was describing a few moments ago, it's that we're thinking through the environment that is populated by others.

We're thinking through other worlds.

By the way, I noticed that my camera is frozen.


SPEAKER_02:
Ours is not, so you can reload.

One thought I'll give there on the primacy of the organism from a philosophy of biology or natural selection perspective is it was seen that the organism, or more specifically to some, the genes of the organism, are the only thing that make it through the Weissman barrier.

The only thing that make it into the next generation is the information that encodes the organism.

in one sense and so that says okay well the organism is the unit of analysis and things lower are subgroups yes the beta cells in the in the pancreas have a niche that's surrounded by other types of cells and yes the oocyte is supported by other kinds of cells but still the organism is the unit of selection and so that gives um

Some people reason to think that that is the default and that anything bigger than an organism is collective behavior, anything smaller than the organism is molecular physiology or some different field.

But some of the implications of taking this multi-scale proposal seriously

are that we still get the richness of collective behavior, of lateral interactions within a level, as well as the hierarchical layering.

And that combination of hierarchical layering with lateral interactions goes by various names, including a heterarchical system from the social insect literature.

And when we start thinking about things like the whole genome, like the genome encoding a developmental trajectory in relationship with an environment and a microbiome,

Pretty interesting stuff.

And it leads to question what the unit of selection is.

Is it the organism?

Is it the kin group?

Is it the kin group and the extended phenotype?

And one of the ways that we at least delay the question while deepening our understanding is by just observing and by modeling in the most integrative framework that we can imagine.

And then many of these other things fall out.

Many of the relationships between higher and lower levels fall out.

But just because there's a relationship between a higher and a lower level spatially or laterally doesn't mean that one level or the other is the one where things are actually happening.

It's actually happening across all the levels.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Oh, yeah.

I mean, I think that there's a perspective that's being opened up here that really allows us to move beyond, you know, these kind of,

simplistic and empirically inadequate models like homo economicus, like this idea that what human beings are really doing at the end of the day is optimizing their individual expected utility

when they're performing tasks.

I mean, it turns out that humans act in a way that's deeply social.

We evince a fairness psychology, not Nash equilibrium type.

So there's some interesting work in comparative mythology that puts chimpanzees against humans in a variety of

economic tasks, like the ultimatum game.

And yeah, it turns out that humans just don't operate according to the principles of classical economics.

We don't zero in on Nash equilibria.

It turns out that classical economics is actually pretty good at predicting the behavior of chimps, though.

And so it's probably the case that humans in particular are subject to forms of social and cultural selection, like forms of, let's use the word, it's group selection, right?

And this might have been spooky and hard to explain a while back, but with the nested Markov blanket formalism, I think we're finally getting

to a point where we can talk about group selection in a way that's not just slippery and in a way that doesn't reduce everything being selected to, as you're saying, Dan, to the genes.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Two quick points on that.

First, with the homo economicus, it debases us twice.

It says behavior is fundamentally economic.

One strike.

And two, you're not even that good at it.

You make errors or you have these cognitive biases that lead you to make false positive investments or false negative.

Instead, we could just take a step back and observe how we see people interacting in a phylogenetic context, just like you were describing.

And maybe that is how we are.

Which is that we are pro-social and it's not an error correction on an error correction on a debasement.

It's actually we can step into the richness of us as social creatures rather than thinking of sociality as being recovered after we've already paid off everybody.

And then also the question about group and kin selection and all these different levels of selection debate.

First off, in the last several years through the work of Akasha and others, it has been described that some of these mathematical equations are actually formally identical.

So there's an isomorphism and it's like you can model it different ways, but you're going to get to some of the same consequences.

And we can think about the affordances of a single cellular bacteria, let's say.

Now, a single cellular bacteria's niche may also involve metabolites from conspecifics and social interactions like quorum sensing.

That's an example where the replicator is still the single bacteria.

However, there's collective behavior like quorum sensing.

and then the major transitions in evolutionary individuality so like the prokaryote plus another uh something to make a eukaryote eukaryotes coming together to make multicellular organisms and multicellular insects becoming the eusocial organisms it's not based upon you know formica economicus it's not the ants making an economic trade-off it's that when their affordances change in the context of a niche

you end up seeing an evolutionary trajectory that favors obligate cooperation at that scale.


SPEAKER_01:
Precisely.


SPEAKER_02:
It sidesteps a lot of these, how would I feel if I were an ant who didn't get to reproduce type questions, which are really sidetracks relative to what is happening.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And, you know, I think, uh,

it's doing a lot of damage if we're being real about it.

I mean, you know, these economic models are not just flawed theoretically and empirically inadequate.

They're also driving investment.

And, you know, the current state of the economy, I think, which is, you know, despite what you might hear from propaganda, like not so great right now.

I mean, it's...

I think in part it has to do with the flawed way in which we're understanding human economic behavior.

What we really need to be doing is fostering a move towards value or affordance-based economies.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, or instead of how can we give everybody enough US coin so that they can buy food, another way to phrase that is how could we reduce people's uncertainty about their next meal?

And maybe sometimes it looks this way, sometimes it looks that way.

But if we were focused on reducing physiological surprise rather than as a proxy trying to increase some value on a spreadsheet, thinking that people would then just acquire the foods, it's an interesting idea if we

pivoted from these reward-based framings of political or economic issues to uncertainty-based issues because it's often what you hear people needing help with is not knowing where the next place they're going to sleep or get their meal from not i don't have enough to get a meal i don't know where the meal is coming from so it's actually interestingly an uncertainty question even in that case oh yeah absolutely

Here's our next slide.

Another quote from the paper is, we hypothesize that the central mechanisms whereby cultural affordances are acquired, especially conventional context involving affordances, consists in looping our feedback relations between shared intentionality

And share attention in this light, one can view social norms and conventions as devices to reduce mutual uncertainty that is constantly with a free energy framework as entropy minimizing devices.

One must know what is in the minds of others, such as what one would see and how one would interpret another's action generally and context in order to make a successful inference.

both explicit content involving or implicit correlational inferences about other agents in each situation.

So the question here was, how do narratives reduce uncertainty?

How does conversation?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a great question.

I mean, y'all did our paper on narratives a few weeks ago, so I'm sure you have some elements to answer that already.

But I mean, the fundamental idea, I think, is the... Also, I don't want to take up too much room.

If other people have more interesting things to say, please, by all means, jump in.

But I think narratives do this in two main ways, following the two main senses of narrative that we've outlined, right?

By a narrative, you might understand some kind of internal cognitive shama, right?

So like when you tell the story of your life or whatever.

And like from that point of view, what narratives allow is for a kind of

a novel kind of useful re-representation of lived events that you've already undergone.

So it's a way of kind of introducing new structure and meaning into the flow of events that have happened to you.

But by narrative, you might also mean a shared story.

So literally a cultural artifact that is produced through a storytelling practice

And from a niche construction point of view, these are shared elements of a common environment that we interact with and effectively internalize the structure of such that we're then able to redeploy the ideas, concepts, values, and so on that are present in the structure of that narrative to structure our social life.

If I had to, in a nutshell, I think those are the two main functions.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

And please, anyone on Team Calm, raise your hand if you want to bring in the paper.

The idea of that narrative as almost being embodied in our evolutionary priors reminds me of the hero's journey and the narrative structure of the hero's journey.

It's not about the hero tying and untying their shoes.

It's about a story arc, which goes from A to Z.

And that does many things.

It compresses the past into a distilled representation so that you don't need to remember every single detail of the past, but rather you can remember the action relevant sections of the past.

Like the bird told me something relevant.

You don't need to remember how many feathers were on the bird.

It's enough to know that in a certain space and time, you had an interaction where the bird

told you go down this path not that one and then the symbolism as well and so words are symbols these are things we'll return to as well and so the narratives are like paths of symbols whether strings of words um or evocative uh patterns yeah stephen yeah and this also probably changes a bit in terms of how indigenous cultures work with story and legend and


SPEAKER_00:
animalism and unknowns in the environment which they were tuning to and the way that we've kind of codified our narratives these kind of grand narratives which rather than it being about the land which an indigenous culture tends to be about the land and timeless qualities that are unfolding you get this kind of you know you mentioned about the past as an entity that's in a timeline

where we have a sense of self in the timeline, which is actually kind of a more modern way of thinking about things.

So in some ways we've actually designed an understanding of how we fit into the world because our niche has changed in the way that, you know, you were talking about, because we've constructed our own way of understanding what our sort of human world is and attuned to that.

Now we're kind of,

we're even redefining the way we see our history and the way we see narratives because narratives are these broader temporal depths which can stretch and then stories have become kind of commodified.

Whereas in indigenous culture, story and land and us are much more kind of in the present in this kind of enfolded kind of cycle that nature provides rather than say what our calendars

or our watches provide.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, two thoughts on that.

One is the distinction between chronos and kairos.

So the chronometer is the clock.

That's tick, tick, tick, tick, tick.

That's the regularities and the decimal system.

And kairos means timeliness.

And so it relates to dinner time versus 6 p.m.

Those are very different things.

One is an exact time independent of an embodied experience.

And the other one is actually the experience independent of the clock time.

So that's important.

And then also just to highlight the pragmatism of taking an action oriented approach or the active inference approach to thinking about our modern life.

As Team Calm, we often find it helpful when beginning and closing a meeting like bookends to almost have narrative review, just restating syntactically, here's who's here, here's what we intend to get out of this interaction, or here are the goals of the meeting.

In previous frameworks, like getting things done is technically an action-oriented framework, but not in the inactive embodied sense.

It's sort of in a productivity homo economicus framework.

And so you get convergent evolution of sometimes the recommendations like make a to-do list or restate the goals at the beginning of the meeting.

But rather than thinking about these as simply tasks to be achieved,

it actually helps us realign at an increasingly fine scale with the work that needs to be done.

And that is a full stack alignment from the syntactic level, the details and the nitty gritty of the work that does need to get done up through the narrative.

Where are we at this moment?

And what alphas does this project relate to?

That's from the systems engineering framework all the way up to the highest level, which is

What is our group doing?

What is our company doing?

What problems are we trying to solve?

And these ground floor or pet house level questions, depending on how you think about it, are foundational.

And we return again and again to these questions about what our purpose is.

And that's man's search for meaning.

That's the whole task.

And that doesn't really end.

So by framing the problem, not just as a set of popping in tasks to the stack and then finishing them, we can think about this as this ongoing process of realignment of the details of our sensory states to our desired regularities that we want to see in the world.

Any other thoughts on this slide?

Cool.

All right, so we are going to have a few embodied affordance questions.

So here's a quote from the paper.

Sports science provides an illustration of this tendency towards optimal grip.

Studies of the dynamic interplay between a boxer's stance and position and the action possibilities available to them as a function of stance and position have shown that punching bags afford different kinds of strikes to boxers as a function of the distance between boxer and punching bag.

Boxers tend to move their bodies to an optimal distance from the punching bag, specifically one that affords the greatest variety of strikes.

So not the most powerful, not the most rewarding, not the most unexpected to the other person in a theory of mind, but actually the greatest variety from an embodied perspective of the actor.

This is a case of moving towards optimal grip.

So it's beyond the grasping.

Now we're talking about stance.

When observing a painting, we also move our bodies and our gazes in a way that maximizes our grip on the scene or details observed.

We might call such dynamic adaptive engagement with a field of affordances in rolling cycles of action, perception, skilled intentionality.

So the question here is what is being optimized by the body?

What do bodies do?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a good question.


SPEAKER_02:
There's probably a couple of answers and we can maybe go reveal half of the hint, which is how do predictions play into this optimization?

So what is the body optimizing?

Doesn't need to be the end all be all answer, but what is something the body optimizes?

And then how do predictions play into this optimization?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, a lot of my own work has been about since writing this paper has been about figuring out exactly what this means.

But you know if if the free energy principle holds Then it's not just brains that are doing this free energy minimization business.

It's really every level of biological self-organization and there it really just means the same thing across all levels, which means that you know, you have a desired distribution over your data and You know actions

acting on the environment is generated such that this preferred data distribution is brought about.

What changes at each scale is what the relevant data is, what the relevant set points are, and what the mechanisms are that bring about the preferred data distribution, right?

So from a cellular point of view, the Markov blanket of a cell is effectively its membrane,

where the sensory states are all the receptor surfaces of the cell and the active states are like the cytoskeleton and other mechanisms that allow the cell to move about and to effectively generate the patterns of data that it expects to encounter.

But this very same story can be told at basically every level of, like I was saying, a biological self-organization where like from a

from an interoceptive point of view, what the body is doing is trying to keep some of its core homeostatic variables within viable ranges, right?

So, you know, core body temperature might be maintained using such a mechanism where when you register a deviation from 36 and a half degrees, you know, you might have like a kind of low level autonomic kind of reaction, you know, you'll start shivering and you'll get goosebumps and so on.

But, you know, for animals like ourselves that have repertoires of cultural behavior, well, you might put on a parka, you might turn your air conditioning on.

There are a bunch of other solutions to the same issue.

I mean, I think this is really the strength of the free energy principle.

I alluded to this last week.

At the time of writing this, I sort of had an idea how this would work, but it took the following four years of my life to really figure out what that entailed.

you know, along with our collaborators, Carl Friston and everyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
If I can add one point on this and to how the predictions play into the optimization.

So there's the classical control theory thermostat, temperature drops, and then the body can engage in the interoceptive affordances like uncoupling in the mitochondria or shivering or the behavioral and the cultural affordances like wearing a jacket.

But how about if you were planning a trip to somewhere that was cold?

So there's nothing in your local environment that's telling you that your temperature is dropping.

In fact, you could be in Arizona sweating, but you're packing for somewhere that's cold.

And so traditional theories of semiotics might be challenged by that.

They could say, well, you saw the cold city and you looked at the website and so you made some sort of connection and you keep on doing this back propagation of symbols, which is a valid account.

But also we can think about what the body's doing is optimizing its thermal range.

It's minimizing surprise about excursions from its thermal range that's tolerable.

And then it's acting based upon its prediction.

And so similarly, there's substances or states where your body's prediction, it's now cast prediction or its future prediction can be wrong.

And so you can have people who are shivering even though their body temperature is high in the case of the flu or something like that.

So it's really the interaction of the prediction and the affordances, not necessarily the instantaneous.

However, the instantaneous is often the most at hand.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_05:
This is quite funny, but this metaphor reminded me of

just kind of the stereotypical, like when you go out, your mother tells you to bring a jacket and that's because like the older caretaker role thinks farther ahead into future states and the younger child role, they're just thinking about right now or where they're going and they're not thinking to this possible future state.

They're not planning for that.

possibility.

So I just thought that was a nice parallel to this whole jacket thermoregulation, how far ahead we're willing to plan to reduce variability or uncertainty in our environment.


SPEAKER_02:
And differences potentially in risk tolerance to even say, I know it's going to be cold, mom.

I just don't want to risk losing my jacket or I want to be cold or something like that.

I don't want to listen to you because whatever.


SPEAKER_01:
Sasha, I think you're putting your finger on precisely

like the core kind of political economic issue that we're dealing with as a species right now, which is that the problems that we're dealing with

are occurring at a scale that is more or less invisible to the generative models that we've evolved in our heads effectively, right?

So climate change, global warming, these are processes that unfold over decades.

And that require large scale responses, you know, probably to address this, you know, in any way decently, like a kind of multinational coordinated response.

But our brains are meant to deal with phenomena spanning from a few seconds to maybe a year in more traditional societies when you're dealing with the season cycle and everything.

And so there's a huge gap there.

And I think the disconnect between the kind of scientific consensus

And, you know, at least in the U.S., the kind of lay consensus on, say, climate change has to do with the difference in temporal depth of the models that we're looking at.

So as scientists, we deal with these like, you know, models that in the case of like astrophysics allows us to increase by like, you know, orders and orders of magnitude for like the scope of our predictions and so on.

But then there's this gap.

you know, between our intuitive understanding of the world and physics.

And this also connects back to the world that we live in, you know, what kind of world we share ultimately.

Yeah, so all of that stuff, yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, nice.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think I agree with what's being said.

And we've got into this world at the moment where we're very focused on what we want and how we can achieve that.

um but in our bodies might be when we're putting on the coat or something we're meeting our needs as an organism for the heat and in complex adaptive systems for development they're looking at like need want and love to have happen and like the want is what we might you know and we tend to focus on this instrumental want but that can change

within like this construct but our bodies we tune into this kind of deeper feeling of what we need like we can infer that and connect to that and i think that is um that's partly what active influence sort of helps us go back to okay when we're starting to sit into that because indigenous cultures look at that thing of seven generations

And it's not like they plan for seven generations, but they sense what's needed.

So they're kind of working at that kind of, you know, organic level.


SPEAKER_02:
One way also that the temporality becomes embodied in our language, inactive through language, is which words don't have plurals in English?

Now, this isn't like a hard and fast rule, but oil, fish...

Sheep.

There's a lot of words where it's just like it's air.

It's just there's no airs.

How many airs are here?

It just air is around us.

So implicitly, one shouldn't have to worry about depleting it, right?

Well, wrong, because of course you can overfish.

And so it really bridges us to asking about how could we construct our actions today so that it influences

the way that we want the future to be.

Just to complete this slide, the last question is, beyond physical grip, where does this idea of optimal grip apply?

And a really nice visualization was from Jelle Broomberg's and Eric Reitvohl's paper on self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on a field of affordances, which was cited in Ramsted's paper.

And so here we see three representations of fields of affordances.

So these are like blocks that you could pick up.

They're blocks that you could sit on, maybe blocks that you could carve a sculpture out of.

They're things that you could do stuff with.

And depending on the affordance, it's going to...

be a different one and the normal on the top in a we see that there's multiple different kinds of affordances of different types there's a bunch of yellow ones a bunch of red ones and a bunch of blue ones and maybe they have differential salience or they're adequate for different uses like a taller or a shorter person

Then in B and C, we see two sort of hyperbolic and simplified, but still didactic representations of alternate states.

So in B, which is depression, all of the field of affordances look less interesting.

They all look relatively drab and sort of not fun.

and in ocd we see that there's a massive highlighting of one of these affordances at almost the expense of completely blocking the perception of all of these other affordances and so i find this to be a really helpful framework because it helps highlight the commonalities between for example different people who are in a depressed state or different representations of obsession on different topics it could be

rumination in thought it could be a specific motor behavior but when we think about it like this we can actually go from this representation backwards and say okay well could we change our perspective so that yes the red square is still really big but also we can see at least just for now just see these other affordances or could we make one of those gray boxes a little bit more exciting

So I just like this as a representation and it shows that this grip concept and the affordance idea is really transferable to different areas.


SPEAKER_01:
Greenberg, Eric Rubell, Julian K. Verstein don't necessarily get enough credit for this whole skilled intentionality framework that they've developed.

I think it's some of the connective tissue that really allowed us to build the cultural affordances framework.

I really, really like the way that they connect the kind of inactive emphasis on, you know, action orientation and embodied kind of coping with an environment with the ecological psychology literature on affordances and so on.

I mean, we were discussing this last week.

Their use of affordance is also not, I think, consonant with the kind of classical Gibsonian sense of affordance where, you know...

And I mean, the common sense and use of affordance, I think, in academia, at least, also doesn't really resonate with what Gibson meant.

Recall that what Gibson meant really was that all the information that an organism needs to interact with its environment is already available in its sensory array as it moves through its environment, such that an internal reconstruction of the environment

wasn't all that necessary because you could just directly interact with the environment.

So a lot of these commitments are kind of falling out, especially in our use of the construct in the free energy principle framework.

We're explicitly reintroducing notions like inference, reconstructing the set of causes that led to the sensory stimulation.

I think some of the people who make the concept palatable and usable in things like sports sciences and so on are these people pushing the skill intentionality framework.

It's a very useful framework, especially, I don't know, Stephen, I'd be curious to hear what you think about this.

As someone who's coming more at this from the practice end, I think the concepts there are more readily usable than some of the more formal stuff coming from active inference and so on.

And yet it's all kind of part of the same conceptual framework.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I agree.

I mean, this is where it gets complex because you've got quite a radical form of affordances being thought of, and intentionality, and you've got, obviously, the active inference complexity.

But they talk about social practice theory,

in environmental science work now a lot.

So they're trying to look at things through what's the social practices and the social norms that kind of align people.

And I think it's the same kind of thing that you're talking about here.

It gives an actual plausible mechanism so that it doesn't jump from like,

this is what's happening in my body and then suddenly there's some theoretical framework which is somehow completely separate it's like okay it makes sense that i'm i'm enacting putting my coat on i'm enacting looking at this painting and trying to understand it i'm now enacting looking at this painting like i used to work in um in graphic reproduction so when you look

you know, you're not looking at it as the painting anymore, you're looking at it for the colours in it, or is it going to reproduce, or I'm going to zoom in on it with Photoshop, so it's like the practice of engaging with the environment, and then like what's that fitted into if it's going to go into a publication, so what's the intentionality, what's the kind of scales of practices,

and i think that i think what you're saying makes sense i don't know if the two have quite managed to join up yet to make it fully practice ready because to try and explain it but i think what maybe that's where it just has to be used in practical applications in like an activity and maybe the people doing the activity don't need to know all the stuff that's going on behind the

under the hood, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

Nice.

Well, I want to come to some of the other ideas in our other sections.

So this is the section on ontologies and culture.

So here are two nice representations, one of people working together all around the world and the other one of the skeleton that we all know and love, of active inference.

The question is, how do ontologies relate to culture?

And then if a person wanted to address that question with a raised hand or the second question is, what kinds of tools are needed to work with ontologies and narratives?

So I'll start with one of language as an ontology scheme for the regularities and the objects that are around us.

So it's one of the cliches that X culture has Y words for Z concept.

Oh, this culture has 22 ways to describe this.

And of course you can always add adjectives to describe a variety of different kinds of snow or sand or whatever it is, but it becomes deeper

through time and there becomes specialized words that really capture and can finesse as an as a handleable as a grippable concept different types of sand snow whatever happens to be trees and then can then be built into larger systems or sentences maxwell um yeah so i mean i i i think what you just said was very interesting um


SPEAKER_01:
I just want to clarify a bit what we meant by ontologies in this context.

So, I mean, we're drawing on the ontological turn material that's coming out of anthropology in large part.

Apologies to Steven.

Some of this material is Deleuzian.

I mean, you know, I also tend to share your reservations about some of the stuff coming out of Deleuze and stuff, but

So the ontological turn fundamentally is saying something like, well, what we should be doing is talking about the worlds in which people inhabit in the way that they inhabit it, right?

Rather than just saying what we have as scientists, as knowledge, and what other people have as mere belief.

What we should be doing is talking about like really the worlds in which people live and the ontologies or like the categories of types of being, right?

that people are kind of bringing on board.

I think we're at odds with some of the people in the ontological term, because we take a meta-Bayesian approach to this, which is to say, well, we all operate with beliefs.

The scientific worldview is also a set of beliefs that comes with its own ontology and whatever.

So as long as it's an even playing field and that there's no kind of disparity between the respect that we're according to different kinds of knowledges, then

We're sort of all operating with our ontologies.

And in the context here in this paper, what we mean more specifically is things like ontologies of persons.

So for those of us in the American and particularly North American context, racism and colorism are major issues.

And it just is the case that young children even

even children that hail from minority groups internalize the categories of personhood of the dominant political group, right?

So, you know, the well-known, you know, experiments on children suggesting that, you know, children from racialized communities tend to prefer dolls, for example, that look like white people or whatever over dolls that are consonant with their own kind of ethnic

uh you know outward appearance uh and so yeah well what we're talking about then is like the categories of p you know uh different kinds of people uh different kinds of places uh all of these kind of concepts and norms and frameworks that so all this is an ontology

It's a way of cutting up your sensory stream, effectively, of parsing your phenomenology.

And what we're suggesting is that this is acquired mainly through immersive participation and practices.

So you don't have to be explicitly told, for example, the first time you go to a fancy restaurant not to jump up and down on the tables.

humans are exquisitely sensitive to context and we're able to just dynamically extract the norms of the situation or at least most neurotypical humans are able to do this on the fly without instruction and so this is where the ontology stuff at least comes in in this paper yeah Alejandra yeah well actually I was thinking about this um


SPEAKER_04:
idea about the landscape affordances and the shared attention, and how this shared attention is determining which expectations will be encoded in this hierarchical predictive processing.

So I was wondering, and also in terms of these ontologies related to culture,

about social networks.

It's kind of weird, but yeah, it's like constantly in my mind, how these new ways of interacting are changing

It's a kind of a massive joint attention.

I don't know how to say it, but yeah, like a massive joint attention, kind of extended culture that is manipulating us to what to attend.

So in some ways it's changing what we believe that is relevant

and manipulating us, our attention and what to expect, but in a massive way.

And I think we are not conscious about this, the effect that it's having on our beliefs.

And as you were saying, Maxwell, this racism and social,

I think that, I don't know if I'm explaining myself, but this massive joint attention is kind of affecting our grip, the way we grip with society in unexpected ways.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that makes total sense to me.

I really think that this is like a really key issue

I mean, you know, it's unfortunate, but, you know, prejudicial behavior, like hate crimes have been on the rise steadily since, you know, the Trump administration took power.

And, I mean, I think it speaks to the power of, you know, the power of the media effectively and of shared images and shared narratives, you know.

I mean, personally, I think a lot of the issue comes from the fact that, you know, older generations weren't taught to be information skeptic, right?

So, I mean, you know, growing up now as a 30-something, when I was a kid and internet was, like, starting out, you know, what you learned was don't trust everything you read on the internet.

So, I think one of the issues is that communities form around different

types of epistemic standards effectively.

And I mean, if you sort of look at the split, the cultural split, the increasingly deepening kind of cultural split between more conservative and more liberal populations in the US, for example, I think what you see is really a split in modes of adequate justification

So it's stunning to me how the same kind of fact base can lead to completely opposite interpretations in this kind of context.

But unfortunately, the fact that you have these very hateful groups that now spread messages on a medium that then is shared

I mean, it really takes the... Joseph Henrich puts this well in his great book, The Secret of Our Success.

He says, essentially, the same things that make us capable of incredible feats of coordination and that have allowed us to build large-scale cities and develop modern medicine, the same capacity for intense cooperation is also what makes us docile and what makes us crave totalitarian rulers.

We just like to be very nice and agreeable, you know, and if everyone kind of decides that some group is going to be the scapegoat, well, you know, there's a tendency to go along with that.

And, you know, if our hypothesis is correct, and there's also a tendency to just acquire, unthinkingly download the kind of information that's presented to us in immersive contexts,

then it's not surprising that, you know, if these messages are spreading online, you know, in very highly immersive kind of tunnel vision things like YouTube channels that just, like, relink similar content.

I mean, like, yeah, I don't know if this is an entirely coherent message, but I do deeply resonate with what you were saying, Alejandro.

I think this is a huge set of issues that we need to address.

A lot of my own research for the next several years is going to be directed and precisely focused


SPEAKER_04:
this direction uh like countering understanding and countering the spread of these narratives and like just modeling social dynamics using these tools more broadly yeah exactly sorry then just to add something um in terms of like your personal narrative your own story um how how is affected um

I can see it in adolescents or in child.

They are just expecting a like, and that's so meaningful to minimizing prediction error about yourself.

So it's like you have thousands or hundreds of people just paying attention about your picture.

And if you receive 10 likes,

or 100 likes what is like the way that the self is gripping to this.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, that's an interesting point.

There's a weird kind of self-evidencing, I guess.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
It's very sad, but I guess that it's really tragic when you think about it.


SPEAKER_02:
Right, we off-sourced our sovereignty of attention to algorithms, and those are driven by exploit.


SPEAKER_01:
And our sense of self-worth.

right so there's from an active inference point of view likes and retweets and shares and whatever are evidence for your existence right for for for a model of you having worth in a social environment uh that's actually i think worth at least a paper if you want to write that up alejandra like send me a dm and we'll write that up as a paper it sounds it's a great idea um sasha


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I just wanted to add onto that a comment about don't trust the internet.

I really like the phrase that you used, Alejandra, the massive joint attention.

And then it seems like social media is kind of able to bypass that filter of don't trust the internet, but

these are my friends.

This isn't the internet.

These, um, the social network somehow is able to pass through that filter that this is a group of people that we trust or that we feel that we trust more than the internet as this, um, greater entity.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, they don't call it antisocial media.

They don't call it physical distancing.

They say social distance.

These words really matter as far as slipping in the back door semantically with what, um,

is being communicated in the end.

So, yes.


SPEAKER_01:
To pick up on what Sasha was saying, I think the Internet's epistemic status is very much up in the air.

I think I'm always a bit naively optimistic, and so I like to think that people are critical about what they read on the Internet.

But I think it was a joke somewhere, I forget who said it, but it's something like, when I was growing up, my mother told me, don't get into a car with strangers.

And like now I literally summon strangers from my internet having mobile device to pick me up and to bring me places, right?

Like the,

I mean, as some of you are pointing out, it's sort of the connective tissue of a lot of relations, especially post-COVID.

A lot of my friendships, for example, have been pursued over the internet.

So that's actually a very interesting point.

Maybe the fact that this information is being presented through

our friends that are sharing this information does tend to increase its precision for us and make it more salient.


UNKNOWN:
100%.


SPEAKER_02:
It's why the word of mouth recommendation of a product is the highest form.

It's why influencers try to be personable.

There's so much to that angle.

And using the pre-existing and the possible social networks to leverage the spreading of memes that might be just purely corrosive, not even...

for or against one side, just pure disinformation or pure things that are divisive.

Let me just run through a few of our ladder questions so we can get some more neurons firing, connect some more ideas and stabilize these concepts.

So in this quote, which I will not read, it's just about how cultural affordances are acquired through cultural practices.

And I found a really nice image that I thought tied together ontologies with culture.

So this is an image from the ontotext.com on the bottom there.

And it writes, ontologies do not only introduce a shareable and reusable knowledge representation, but can also add new knowledge about the domain.

So I had a few questions here about ontologies, and that could be in that anthropological term, the ontological term, as Maxwell was describing it, or in the more computational sense, like gene ontologies, the structure of words that we use to describe genes.

So ontology in that sense means like a formal knowledge structure.

And about the attention and relationship between attention and ontology, between ontologies and development.

And then especially for this group,

how do ontologies and active inference interact, and how does that actually add knowledge to a situation rather than being a pure descriptor?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, in part, you don't grasp the world in a naked way, right?

Like, we grasp it through our conceptual categories, through the salience structures that are encoded in our conceptual categories in large part, and...

Yeah, I mean, the point of having an ontology is to kind of, you know, fix the frame problem, in a sense, to kind of say, okay, what, out of all of these elements that could be monopolizing my attention at a given moment, you know, who are the relevant interlocutors that are deserving of my attention?

What are the salient aspects of the scene that require my processing?

Yeah, and in general, what

Just in the broad sense, right?

Because otherwise you're just dealing with a sensory stream, which is all fine and good.

So the ontology is what you bring to bear on the sensory stream to kind of parse things out from it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

And I like where you took that.

It was exactly what I was thinking about.

Like how many tennis balls can you fit in your hand?

Maybe three, maybe you have a large hand, four tennis balls or something, but you have a bag and you can cluster the tennis balls and you could pick up a bag with a hundred tennis balls.

So that's the grip physical metaphor is the tools, the affordances that cluster allow you to grip more.

And so similarly, we can use ontologies of ideas and use that to get a grip on really high level concepts.


SPEAKER_01:
And then when we pick up the double edged sword, though, right, because I mean, you know, this is the problem of using priors in general, is that, you know, you're starting from a point that might not be the right one.

And that might actually prevent you from, you know, so ontologies are the reason why we have, you know,

the capacity to interact with each other, for example, as peers, you know, because we have these categories.

You are my peers and my friends and we can interact.

But, you know, ontologies are also responsible for racist behavior, for sexism.

You know, if my ontology says women are inferior to men or the people with dark skin, I don't believe any of that bullshit, just to be clear.

But, like, if that is my ontology, then I'm bound to treat

others in a way that reflects those beliefs.

So this is why they're so important to culture, I think, because it's not unrelated to this formal definition that you were discussing, Dan.

It gives you the kind of general tracks that you'll follow in your treatment of others.

So then it becomes interesting to use anthropological methods, for example,

to see what are the ontologies that people are actually bringing to bear.


SPEAKER_02:
And to use that physical carrying metaphor.

So you go, okay, well, I can hold three eggs in my hand.

I should have a bag with 500 eggs because I can pick it up.

Well, now you have none or you have a mess.

And so oversimplification...

through any number of mechanisms within a value structure simply leads to false positives and false negatives and another way that we can bring in the free energy principle is the phrasing of free energy as model accuracy penalized by complexity and in some ways the extreme uh simple model let's say a one category model like all people are people

or two or three category model and so do the models get more accurate in terms of reducing surprise as we include more and more parameters and then in the extreme case we have everyone is unique which is an interesting bookshelf you know end piece to contrast with this everybody's the same and so somewhere in between is where we're actually going to end up and so how do we help

bring these implicit generative models of the world and our priors into being shaped and designed.

And personally, I think we never escape the value question.

And it's one thing to come together with somebody who has a different perspective.

And it's why it's so important to highlight coming together across differences, because there's just no amount of cultural or genetic or whatever homogeneity that is going to prevent conflict.

And so instead we can have a coming together story about working together across differences rather than wedging tiny differences.

And that story itself is in a trade-off with essentially gaslighting and telling people that suffering is just part of how things are.

So there's so many trade-offs.

that exist, especially when we're talking about issues that matter most.

I mean, we're not talking about species definitions in foxes.

We're talking about our own lives and our world and our ecosystem.

And so, yes, they're touchy topics.

And it's so important to be clear about what is and also what we want to see.

And so I think there's so much that can be explored and expanded on here.


SPEAKER_01:
I like that you brought in complexity minus accuracy, because in a sense, the

you know, this is a little bit, a slightly looser way of thinking about it, but in general, you want as little boxes as possible, right?

Boxes, I mean, if you listen to Buddhist wisdom, for example, boxes are the source of suffering, right?

We cling to our boxes, we put things in boxes, and it makes us feel comfortable, but really this is the source of suffering, you know, to

this tendency to only be comfortable with things when they're nicely packaged in these kind of nice binary categories.

I think this is why people get so uncomfortable when these binaries get challenged by gender fluidity and transness.

and these kinds of things.

On the flip side, if we didn't have boxes at all, we would die, right?

You know, you need to be able to parse that sensation as hunger, in order to generate like, you know, appropriate survival generating behavior.

So I think that's the fundamental paradox of human existence is both that we need boxes to survive, but that they also are the source of much suffering, both that we're inflicting to ourselves by forcing these kind of conceptual straitjackets onto ourselves, but also because of the social wrongs that can be the result of using the wrong ontology.


SPEAKER_02:
yep and cognitive diversity means differences in risk tolerance it means of course different perspectives unique perspectives and also um maybe on that explore exploit or on that model accuracy versus complexity some people will accept um a more accurate model from their perspective that is also a lot more complex whereas somebody else's the coefficient of how much they're penalizing a complex model is different so they're going to come to a different conclusion

And it's not as simple as right versus wrong in that situation.

It's model preference.

And could we take a step back?

Could we reframe and understand how we're all part of the ensemble that's learning?

It would be nice.

Let's go through a few of these last topics on communication and semiosis or meaning generation.

So here is from figure one of the paper, which we discussed last time as far as what it was describing.

But here I want to connect it to one of the quotes.

They write,

Conventions need not be explicitly formulated as rules and may instead originate in the actor's engagement with local backgrounds over time.

That is, from non-contentful developmental experiences, learning or participation in social and cultural practices.

To operate with conventional affordances, agents must have shared sets of expectations.

We must know what others expect us to expect.

So, yes, we're hitting the same idea from figure one, but there's a lot we're kind of spiraling another layer and coming back to this idea where we're in a remote group right now.

And so we are getting our expectations about what to expect and all these things.

Not only are they going to be very different person to person because our local worlds are quite different, but there's this algorithmic level.

that influences what we expect and it changes on the inputs that we receive and reducing our surprise about the sensory inputs is one of the drivers of behavior and so how does what we see in the news feed end up recapitulating the things that we will draw our attention to and that's sort of this self-radicalization process that can happen is attention is brought to something and then it continues to basically percolate upwards as people pay more and more attention

and are more and more cautious or more and more aware of something that... It's hard to take a step back from any scientific worldview and say that one is better or the other because although I'd love to hear a workaround, it's hard to get a purely secular perspective because someone could say, I'm just pursuing my accuracy by doing something that's aberrant to you.

And it's difficult to see...

purely within the framework, nor does there have to be.

I think what free energy and active inference and focusing on the communication dynamics allows us to do is let our values be values, let our communication be communication, let our behavior be behavior and talk about what we expect using ways that we want to communicate.

And if people don't want to use nonviolent communication,

Other people may or may not choose to communicate with them, but it's how we communicate what we expect when there's not only that computational intervention, but also a lot of coming together of different perspectives.

It's one of the challenges of our day.

And then also just,

This cultural iceberg was a nice image.

Some of the words are small in there, but the quote on here is, joint attention is usually understood as occurring in a diet of two people or between agents in direct interactional spheres of communication, gaze following, finger pointing, or other verbal or nonverbal cues.

To address more complex social situations, it is useful to revise current socio-cognitive models of joint attention to encompass fundamentally triadic situations in which the third is the socially constituted niche of affordances supported by local ontologies and abilities.

So before you get to the questions, just some of these in the iceberg.

Above the iceberg, we have dress, folklore, language, fine arts, holidays, food.

And below, we have family values.

We have gender roles.

pride, concept of justice.

So this, and there's different versions of the iceberg.

I just thought this one had a lot of nice ideas.

My questions here were, what is the third member of a social interaction and how can active inference help us design culture?


SPEAKER_01:
If I can jump in quickly, it's sort of, it's sort of the, so a human once in culture, it is never alone.

in a sense.

We're always constantly seeing things through the eyes of others.

It starts off as, what would mommy want me to do in this situation?

It's remarkable.

Canadians are really good at this.

I'd have to pull up the studies, but there are studies that show that Canadians, even at night when there are no policemen, will stop at a red light and just wait it out.

you know, and go even if there are no agents that could penalize them.

I mean, it's really remarkable the extent to which we internalize these kinds of norms, and they end up then directing the way that we interact with others.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Any other thoughts on this?

Or we can just... It's something for pondering because we have the explicative portion of our experience, which is that which comes to our conscious awareness, that which is stated verbally.

But on the input side, subconscious input, and on the generative models that can't be expressed in words, sometimes they can be expressed through art or through action.

But

the whole iceberg is there and so it's just i really like that once you're in culture you're never alone and indeed we we are never alone because to be aware is to be communicating it's almost like the uh cog ergo sum it's like i communicate therefore we exist something like that

In this last page on semiosis, which I think is an interesting topic, the authors wrote, however, cultural symbols and signs are usually polysemous.

That means having many or multiple meetings and their interpretation depends on context.

It's contextual.

Our hypothesis is that feedback loops mediating shared attention and shared intentionality are the principal mechanism whereby cultural, especially conventional affordances are acquired.

So conventional is fun.

I think in this setting, because it alludes to conventional, like normal, like it's just the conventional approach.

It's the normal approach, but also based upon convention and convention in that sense means both the coming together, like it's a convention of the knife sharpeners or something, but also it's a, it's a joint it's agreed upon.

So it has many senses.

and it shows how normal and agreed upon often are related that's one symbol and so here was a few graphics that i found on a nice the dsproject.com so on the left is what is known as the piercean triad by cs pierce and that's the sign the interpretant and the object and on the right is um sarsour who is another semiotician

that may have used different words.

And here we see that there's the signifier and the signified and then the referent.

And so I like this because it shows that there's multiple ontologies, even when we're talking about sensemaking, about meaning generation, there's multiple ways we can parse that.

And do we choose to see it as a triad

Or do we choose to see it as a binary with another binary, like the SR and the SD are one whole and then the RF is another, you know, is it a pair of binaries or is it just an integral triad?

So that's one way where there's multiple frameworks we can use just to talk about meaning generation.

And then this image,

is a representation by those authors about unlimited semiosis and this is sort of looking through time how that triad evolves and so i just thought how does this relate to active inference to that unfolding idea to this notion that our meaning generation our sense making process is ongoing with respect to the symbols but we can modify those symbols as well so how can we maybe use active inference at least to grasp what are the outlines of this problem

Some of it, I think, was addressed in later papers.

For example, I forget which Act-Inf stream, but when we talked about is the free energy principle a formal theory of semantics?

And it relates to that.

I think it would probably be cool at almost the end of our time just to switch into panel mode

and just see if anyone had any last thoughts that they wanted to talk about, any last questions or where are you going with what we've discussed today?

What do you think would be a good question to leave people on or a good next step for us to take?


SPEAKER_01:
I thought this was a really interesting and useful exercise.

I'm super grateful.

to all of you for this continued attention to the work that we've done.

Yeah, I told the team earlier, but I've blocked off these mornings to participate regularly.

So I mean, I'm very satisfied with this.

I think it's very cool.

And I think we've raised a lot of issues that could be pursued as papers.

Yeah, particularly this issue that you were raising, Alejandro, about social networks and the way that they tie into attentional dynamics, I think should be the target of much more discussion.

Yeah, I mean, I thought everyone had very, very interesting things to say.

So thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Here's one angle on that is an evolutionary prior is that your social networks are constituted of people who are not adversarial with you.

Most of the people who you're engaged with, whether or not they believe the exact same thing, you have to be relaxed enough around them to sleep, for example.

And so the deepest prior is if we're relating, then we're

we're going to be to some broad extent in agreement.

Okay, now we know from active inference and niche construction that the two ways that you can deal with uncertainty or with unexpected sensory inputs is by changing the environment, that's niche construction, or by changing your internal model, that's inference.

So what happens when you're in a social contrived situation?

It says, oh, but your friend posted this.

Okay, so it's coming in through the friend door.

And it's a...

something that for my current value system at time t i think of is not chill there's all kinds of things not being chill but it just isn't and the two ways that i can deal with that are change my model to be more like that so i make that less surprising some type of hateful speech i get numb to it or i come to embody it actually to reduce my surprise on the inference side or

I can get doubled down in my beliefs and try to reduce my uncertainty or the surprise from those sensory cues by getting into a debate.

I mean, think about how much mental energy gets burnt on these sort of debates and people trying to change each other's mind online.

And there's something beautiful about people sharing their differences in idea.

But when that whole discussion is being basically discussed,

overviewed by an algorithm that doesn't exactly have those people's mental health or the alignment of different cultures in mind.

Not exactly.

Not exactly.

You know, it's correlated.

No, it can get off the rails.

And so that deep evolutionary prior isn't something that can just be unlearned like you were speaking about earlier, Maxwell.

And so when our deepest prior and our intergenerational ones

get taken advantage of it's like these slow waves and they can't quite cope with these very fast frequencies and so the options are to slow it down that's like the archaeo futurist you know oh well in the future we'll return to a more heterogeneous uh

organization of people.

So slow down these high frequency waves or come to a better way that we can predict and communicate about them.

I mean, there's a lot more that we could think about there, but it just it's yeah, there's yeah.

Stephen and then Alejandra.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I think, like you were saying, these ways that we think about what is happening

is really important in terms of how we construct our conversations.

But I think there's also the where and the where we've taken our attention to be able to have our conversations.

So when you're locked in, they call it context collapse when you're on like Facebook, because you have no context, you have

no story, you have no... So one of the things with complex adaptive systems, the work of Cynthia Kurtz and David Snowden, they work with stories, small micro-stories, say 100, 1,000, and start to make sense of them, like attribute them with titles and metadata and actually work with story.

Because when you're working with story, each story, if it's kept raw, so it's not an opinion,

they call it it's like it's kind of maintains the internal complexity of it so you can still reinterpret it but once you've got an opinion an opinion is collapsed down you can't really reinterpret an opinion so we're kind of trapped in these kind of interpretive kind of inductive deductive spaces which is great if it's a case of like i have the right answer or you have the right answer so then we can like debate it but the trouble is what if we don't know and no one wants to admit they don't know

Can we work with something more complex?

And maybe that's a where question and a how question, not a what question.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

Alejandra?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, and I totally agree.

And also taking what Sasha said, that the idea that we are talking with our friends and, yeah, that's like the...

like our conscious, um, um, internal belief.

They are our friends, but we actually not have any idea, um, how these platforms work, um, how these platforms are manipulating our attention.

So we are communicating with others, but, um, we have something between this communication that we don't know actually how it's working.

And I don't know, I was thinking that we are kind of playing in terms of active inference to constantly increase our prediction error.

And you have to engage with this platform in order to reduce or minimize prediction error in terms of emotions or the way I react to other giving a like or sharing a post.

I don't know.

This idea that we're interacting with friends or we're close people, but we don't know what's happening in between.


SPEAKER_02:
Sasha?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think that that's a great point to touch on that we don't really understand what's happening, this hidden state between us and the person that we're trying to communicate with and how that's being manipulated.

And while that's a totally valid critique of social media platforms, we could say the same thing for like telephone communication or even telegram.

The people who were sending the message didn't necessarily understand what was happening in that process.

And yet they felt or they would trust that it was...

the integrity of the message was maintained or that it wasn't, nothing was lost in that process or manipulated.

But so it's been kind of like a steady, a steady march of technological advances that are more and more removed from what we think we're doing in this process of communication.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

The neutral claim is that context directs attention.

So if there's a bunch of arrows pointing to something, even though it's not in the exact object, it will draw your attention to it.

Or something that's placed on top of a pyramid is what your attention is supposed to be drawn towards.

Well, in the Telegram case, not the app, the Morse code version, the context is that you trust that Western Union or whomever isn't going to be garbling your message.

And the context is who it's from.

And so you can actually unpack it as if that person were just telling you.

But when it's a stranger and it's like engaging the gas and the brake on is this an adversary or not?

And the context is constrained.

So you can only see their name or a fake Internet name and a picture.

And then is it a surprise that given a picture and what somebody says, somebody is going to unpack it in seconds?

potentially the least charitable way based upon identity or based upon a typo or based upon some sort.

Whereas in person, we just look at each other and we can have more of this human sense.

We can have the context and that helps us understand.

And then beyond the context cues, when we can actually feel like we're part of a shared society, then we want to help people who are in need in our local worlds.

And there's only one world.

So it is our local world, Spaceship Earth.

so there's there's so many angles and the question would just be what are those on ramps and then how is it all going to actually play out any final thoughts though because this was an awesome discussion great follow-up and there's we could have talked for longer on just 4.2 345 but next week we'll move to five and so

If there's no further thoughts, I really appreciate everybody coming together.

Thanks for the attention to those participants and also to our listeners.

We'll always be, even weeks later, accepting input on what papers, what topics, what questions would be cool to discuss.

And so, yes, thank you.

It's been a great stream.