SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone, and welcome back to Active Inference Insights.

I'm your host, Darius Parvizi-Wayne, and today I am truly honored to be speaking to one of this century's most important philosophers, Professor Thomas Metzinger.

Thomas is Professor Emeritus of Theoretical Philosophy at Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, co-founder of the German Effective Altruism Foundation and president of the Barbara Wenger Foundation.

In 2019, he founded the Minimal Phenomenal Experience or MPE project, and just this year released the book, The Elephant and the Blind, which details the results of that project, bringing together more than 500 experiential reports to offer the world's first comprehensive account of states of pure consciousness.

His work focuses on consciousness and he is best known for establishing the self model theory of subjectivity.

Thomas, Professor Metzinger.

we've we've spoken on email, we've had all sorts of, you know, we've had our email friends, but it's actually so lovely to kind of see you, albeit virtually.

So thank you so much.

Honestly, it's an absolute honor.

And anyone who knows me knows that I'm a massive fan of yours.

I mean, in the latest version of the flow states paper, it has met singer 2003 2004 2005 2000 and so on.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, something wrong with you.

Thanks for having me anyway.


SPEAKER_00:
No.

Well, it's one of those things.

I mean, with respect to your work, I feel like the past year has been sort of half active inference, half Metzinger.

It's been fun.

I think a good place to start for the audience is to kind of out before we get into the new book, because I do want to touch on that is the first outline, the self model theory of subjectivity, SMT, because

it might strike people as initially rather counterintuitive.

So perhaps you could just give a brief account of the fundamental claims or axioms of the SMT with respect to its kind of key constraints, whether that's transparency, globality, and so on.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So in the Anglo-Saxon world, there is this absolutely unreadable 2003 book, Being No One.

This actually has a precursor.

Most of you will not know.

In the German system, we have two major theses.

We have a PhD thesis.

And five years later, we have a habilitation thesis, which is a much bigger thing.

My committee was 17 people.

And in 1993, I published a book called Subjekt und Selbstmodell, the subject and self model.

And the subtitle was the perspectivalness of phenomenal states from the perspective of a naturalist theory of mental representation.

So this already tells you what this is actually about.

So being in the consciousness community, I'm one of the guys that founded the SSC in 1994.

I was always of the opinion that consciousness is not one problem, but a whole bundle of problems, some more empirical, some more conceptual.

And that the center, the most difficult thing is what is a first person perspective?

what makes a state a subjective state in any given information processing system.

So I set out to tackle this.

And then 10 years later, I had a wonderful year, one of the two best years in my academic career at UC San Diego, where Paul and Patricia Church had hosted me, was absolutely great in the philosophy and the cognitive science department.

And I wrote the whole thing in English and updated it in that year in the eighth floor of the HSS building humanities and social sciences.

And I thought you can't do that title.

Americans need something more crude.

I said, call the book being no one.

And that is what you have now.

And the idea, this is,

Indirectly, it's also trying to make a contribution to the problem of consciousness.

But the idea is to say, what is a first person perspective, really?

Because everybody in neuroscience or in philosophy talks about, for instance, like Dave Chalmers would be 1pp facts and 3pp facts.

But the notion of a first person perspective is taken as a conceptual primitive, as if we all knew what that is.

But it's actually a hybrid metaphor.

So you have the first person pronoun.

And there's a lot of good work in analytical philosophy of mind on, you know, if there's some irreducibility in indexical expressions like I myself.

That's so to speak the linguistic, the surface level and perspective is a term from another discipline, geometry.

People who work in geometry can tell you something about what a perspective is, parallel lines meet in infinity and so on and so forth, but together,

You know, one could say it is the epistemic perspective that a system gains if it can refer to itself in the first person singular.

If it can use, say, an expression like I by saying I'm particularly happy and relaxed right now, ascribe a phenomenal state to itself.

this would exclude all systems that can't use language, all higher vertebrates and animals.

And what I developed, we can go what I really think a first person perspective is, I think it's a model of the intentionality relationship.

Maybe we can come back to this later.

And in my own

to make the connection to active inference.

So I'm much older than you are.

I'm 66 years now.

For me, the first, really first big intellectual revolution was to discover Anglo-Saxon analytical philosophy of mind.

and get out of this continental swamp I grew up in, you know, in the Frankfurt philosophy department.

And I'm very grateful to the older philosophers, people like Peter Beery and so forth, who is already already died and who poisoned

young German philosophers by importing Anglo-Saxon analytical philosophy of mind, where we discovered, wow, you know, we've had this military catastrophe and everything in the century.

But in other places on the planet, philosophy has gone on.

We just had total destruction in our country for decades and lost our intellectual traditions, teacher-disciple relationships.

So I really went into analytical philosophy of mind.

That's one thing.

Another thing is taking conscious experience really seriously because it was kind of ignored by mainstream neuroscience.

A third element is opening

analytical philosophy of mine to neuroscience and cognitive science to organize interdisciplinary cooperation.

And then maybe the second or third, um, really intellectual revolution in my life was, um, connectionism and neural networks.

And, uh, you know, you have Andy Clark, um,

Microcognition 1989 in your country was super seminal and important for us and early work of Paul Churchland also and sub-symbolic representation, you know, this whole debate, photo compositionality and all this was very interesting.

And when Carl came out in 2010,

Um, I've made a decision for myself that I'm too old, that I'm not, I'm just not gonna get go into this on a formal level.

So when I, in, for instance, the 2003 book use the term model, mental model, uh, it is not a model.

in that terminological framework.

As I say in the preface, this is all just introduction to the self-model theory of subjectivity.

The first inspiration, I mean, of course, roots run deeper, but there is a book by Philip Johnson Laird that was called Mental Models about relational data structures.

And there's a tradition in theories of mental representation into which we looked very deeply in German philosophy, maybe 20 years ago.

we discussed very deeply different models of mental representation and their history and there was a guy in 1943 kenneth craig who wrote a book the nature of explanation and there you have for the first time that's the classical locus for the notion of a model a mental model

relational data structure that have a partial homomorphic to the relation structure of what they represent.

So that's where the term self model came from me.

There's a lot of technical stuff there.

Diagrammatic reasoning.

How can systems think with image like structures and not with symbol calculus?

that's where it comes from and step one i think there are three major steps maybe step one was to apply this to conscious self-representation and say okay there must be something like a phenomenal self-model beyond you know linguistic representation by mental models the whole technical universe there um

The second thing is the notion of transparency, which actually originated in your very own country with GE Moore.

To apply this to the idea of a phenomenal self-model and ask what would happen to a system if not the external model of the world were transparent.

meaning could not be experienced as a representation if it could, if it operated under a model of itself, a global integrated model of itself that was transparent, which the system itself could not experience as a representation, as an internal representation.

And then the third step is what does it need

in addition to do these two things, to generate a consciously experienced first person perspective.

Because you can imagine some systems, human beings, who are, say, completely conscious, wide awake, who have a self model, say a robust body model,

say some state of stupor or total absent-mindedness or something like this, but who do not have a subjective perspective on the world in any interesting sense.

At least they don't experience.

They may have one in epistemological reading, but phenomenologically they are not directed to the world as knowing selves.

And what is the difference there?

And well, I think it's that systems like us even model the intentionality relationship.

We can postpone that.

So I try to construct a theory, a naturalist theory, how something like consciously experienced first person perspective could have naturally evolved.

What else do you think?

listeners should know about the self model.

So the main point is everybody thinks this is a theory of consciousness.

No, the aim was to have a conscious, uh, an experience of subjectivity.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah.

Okay.

So, so, okay.

This thing is there's plenty, there's plenty.

And I think, um, in my experience is that the notions have been developed.

chronologically in some ways.

I sense there's a focus in your work towards the epistemic agent model, the epistemic self model in the sort of 2013, 2014 Metz and Gary and stuff.

But I want to go all the way back.

I think a really good place to start for people, in my experience, was the Precy to Being No One, which is this 2005 paper.

So there you talk about simulation and emulation.

And I think that's a nice place to start, which is that

in self models, we have a emulating or an emulating and simulating system, and a target system.

And it just so happens in the self model, those things are the same.

So I've always thought about with your work, the kind of notion of a strange loop, or a cursivity, such that there's a part of our information processing system that is targeted at itself, such that it simulates.

And by simulates, you mean,

reflects or the output of the information processing system and emulates the properties and states of that information processing system.

Now, I don't think people will necessarily have an issue with that, right?

This goes all the way back to cybernetics, good regulator theorem.

I guess what people might say is, okay, I have a model of myself and I, in the sense that model is embedded in a world model.

So I'm also doing the same thing with respect to the world.

why is it that that process of simulation and emulation is giving rise to phenomenality why is it giving rise to subjective uh experience and if we can pass these two things out the what it is like to be a conscious being so why again it's a hard problem question but i guess um


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I know.


SPEAKER_00:
It's worth asking just to get really to the nuts and bolts.

What is it about that simulation and emulation?


SPEAKER_01:
So I think a simulation, if I first generate a simulation of you, I will simulate

observable properties that my receptor systems, what I can see and hear of you, my visual representation of you, my auditory representation, I can simulate that.

Then I can discover that you have unperceivable invisible features too, namely that you are also a simulator.

And I might simulate those properties of you, psychological properties, mental properties, if you want to put like a, which are not observable by this kind of sensorium, this kind of animal, which I am has.

So I can in mind reading, for instance, human beings can simulate each other and they can emulate each other.

Now, the interesting thing is the reflexive case

I can have a body model.

That's trivial.

And I can also somehow simulate abstract properties of mine.

That's where it already gets interesting.

Like, are there actually, I mean, there's the interoceptive self model, but that's receptor based.

What are these mental properties of myself?

For instance, I may take myself to be a person.

I live in a culture and a society where we know the status of a person, and I know this, and then somehow I represent myself as a person, as a rational individual.

That would be a very high-level emulation.

Now, does any of this need to be conscious?

I don't think so.

That's the million dollar question, of course.

I think that the largest part of the human self model is unconscious.

And the question is, what is, if we take the global workspace metaphor as a proxy for a theory of consciousness, what part of the self model this organism has is currently globally available?

What part of the self model, for instance, can voluntary attention be directed to and what

can you not direct your attention to?

What part is available for selective motor control?

To which parts of myself itself can this animal point?

And I think most of the knowledge, the really robust knowledge is of course unconscious.

So what your colleague George Dean would call the homeostatic control model,

which I think George has this very nice differentiation between an allostatic control model and a homeostatic control model.

I think that's very useful in making those different levels in a human self model more precise.

And of course, most of homeostatic control is totally unconscious.

Um, you know, breath, heartbeat, blood, body temperature.

And in a sense,

That's a self-model, but it's not a phenomenal self-model.

And what is that part that needs to be elevated to global availability?

What are the, so to speak, the functional, the neurocomputational properties that any given moment mark out the phenomenal partition?

I have no answer to this, but I think that's the research question.

So I don't think that you magically like pull yourself out of the swamp by having a strange loop trick of self-referentiality and then the lights go on, you become conscious.

As I've tried to demonstrate for people who didn't know it in that new book, non-egoic

Self-awareness without a first-person perspective is a widespread phenomenon that we know.

Consciousness can experience without a phenomenal self, and consciousness can exist with a subject-object distinction, without any experience of being directed as a knowing self as the world.

These are not necessary conditions.

It might be something entirely itself.

I have wild speculative ideas, but nothing I could really argue for.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I will.

I will.

I definitely want to get into that.

Um, I guess a point of clarity for people is, um, would, should the, so when you say that when, when it's written that the emulating simulating system and the target system are identical is to me that they are

strictly identical in the sense that if we took the neurocognitive mechanisms, right, if we just went to the physical level, they would be the same?

Or do we think that there's a higher order network in organisms that possess a self model that is solely reserved for the act of simulating and emulating?


SPEAKER_01:
That's an interesting question.

And that that's where it gets very tricky.

So

I think of course, I think the phenomenal self model that is currently active in your brain right now is strictly identical with some physical subset of your brain properties.

Probably it's best be described on a functionalist level as a computational, a time slice in a computational process.

So it's not,

identical with you as a whole, with Darius as a whole.

The idea is rather from an epistemological perspective, the subject is the organism as a whole.

To achieve knowledge, conscious knowledge about itself,

that organism has developed a neurocomputational tool.

That tool is the phenomenal self model, but that's physically, of course, that's just a part of its nervous system physically.

So it's like the whole organism kind of refers or represents the whole organism consciously through a special part.

It has a physical part.

So in, if that picture is roughly right,

then saying they are identical is not true.

It's like the epistemic subject, what has that conscious self-knowledge, and the intentional object, what it is directed at, that's identical in both cases.

It's the organism as a whole.

But the tool that's being used is something in its brain.

It's only a physical part.

I don't, I guess it makes things clear or is that confusing?


SPEAKER_00:
Um, no, I think it makes it clear for me.

Um, God knows who it makes it clear for.

Um, I guess people might also be thinking, especially if they're

neuroscientists, let's say, that all that exists in the nervous system is all these electrical signals, in which there is no inherent distinction between the self and the world.

There's just sort of zeros and ones, let's say, how, I mean, does this require another computational mechanism to do the distinguishing?

I mean, as you know, this is a classic problem in cognitive neuroscience and philosophy of mind, right?

Like the so called self

specifying process is there something about self-modeling because maybe this is worth explaining as well that the self model is always embedded in a world model is there a way in which the system that's emulating and simulating itself does not take itself to be the whole world because if it you know the whole world is almost encapsulated embodied within the nervous system

So it can be phenomenally represented.

How does the system manage to make its distinction between itself and its lived world?


SPEAKER_01:
That's very important.

And a lot of things need to be said there.

Maybe as kind of a preface, we have to distinguish levels of description.

For instance, a self-model as described on the representational level of description with something which has a content, and the content is the system as a whole.

Or a self-model that is described on some functional level of description, say more fine-grained computational level of description by the causal structure.

And that will be some computational process in the nervous system.

And then, of course, at any given moment, there will be a neurobiological implementation.

And there's a whole story which I exclude for now about intersubjectivity and social environments and all of this.

And in making this distinction over the years, these distinctions, I found a very important one that gets many people confused is

the distinction between a computational self-model and a phenomenal self-model.

So there's this intuitive notion, ah, this guy's talking about the ego and what I experience as myself, the egoic phenomenal self-model.

There are special cases where it's not entirely like that, but in general, oh yeah, I'm this thinking, walking, body controlling, feeling self.

That's the phenomenal self model we have quite often during waking states.

Now, if we look at the computational self model, then technically, and we just look at conscious representation, exactly what you said now is right.

All of the world, which I now experience as being external to me, is technically an internal state.

It's a virtual model.

It's a prediction about what might happen next on many different levels.

So what it actually is, as I said in my popular book, The Ego Tunnel, it's like the walls of the ego tunnel.

It's like a surface, but not a two-dimensional surface, a very high dimensional membrane or surface in that model with colors, objects, sounds, and stuff like this.

In that respect, it's a wholly internal affair and the puzzle consists in, so if this is all an internal process, why is it so robustly experienced as the environment, as the external reality of the system?

How does it make that distinction?

And one aspect is what am I the obvious cause of?

as you have written yourself.

What is the domain which is highly predictable and which I can control?

That's a candidate for what becomes the self model.

But computationally, if we just talk about consciousness, the whole thing, this whole room, the screen with your face, my face,

that's a self-model because it's a prediction of likely own states that may it's an anticipation you know so in that sense it is neither that's also interesting it's a probability distribution in that sense it's neither real nor unreal it is that's what i mean by virtuality you know it's strictly speaking it's not real

It's all a massive, very complex hypothesis at every single moment.

So how is this so fundamentally split?

First thing to say, I think, is we have, especially in the light of, say, the last 10, 15 years of theorizing, get away from this simplistic self world dichotomy.

If this whole story about Markov blankets and so forth is true, there are many nested Markov blankets.

And there are many statistical boundaries a living system creates.

For instance, in its unconscious self-organization and elementary bioregulation internally to the organism, but

I can well imagine that in this active inference framework, when I actually do change something in the body external world and try to make the world conform to some internal target state or something, there must be one

really well-defined, no-nonsense, no woo-woo phenomenology, feel-good stuff, in saying that the human self model pulsates across the boundaries of the organism.

It sometimes dynamically runs loops through the environment.

And I think it would be a major achievement if we could say all this in a formally precise way.

Yet all the time, I'm a very old fashioned guy.

I think it remains true that phenomenal properties locally superween on neuro-functional properties in the brain.

That what is consciously experienced, even in skillful embodied interaction with the world.

is fully determined by local neural activity in the brain.

Even if the system develops a complex causal loop through the environment, conscious experience, the phenomenality as such, is locally constituted, locally generated, identical to a local process, I would say.

And if that is true, we might in the end

arrive at a situation where people say, ah, consciousness is so uninteresting, you know, it's just, you know, no, but then these larger bubbles, social bubbles, they might be theoretically much more interesting maybe than that local model in the brain.

So let me just last, I have Austin asked myself the question,

you just put to me, what is the origin of self models?

Ask people, I mean, and I think a really good candidate is the immune system.

It's a low level, very low level process.

And it's super efficient, you know, we develop more than 1000 malignant cells every day.

And your immune system shoots every single one down every day, else you wouldn't be here.

It's a very old process.

It's very complex.

It's not localized in a nervous system.

But this process is one of the first processes, I think, that draws a boundary between this is me and this is not me.

There are even people who speak about an immune self.

And, uh, I think out of these entirely unconscious processes of trying to maintain the boundaries of a living organism, this is where it slowly grew up, grew out of, you know, from a molecular level.

And, um, then of course, did you come to the, in the new book to, um,

Did you come to that notion of the single embodiment constraint?


SPEAKER_00:
No, I haven't.

Okay, there's a and then I'm working my way slowly for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, a lot of people presently do.

So this is something I want to point out, because it's a constraint, which is so simple that most people overlook us overlook it, we

Human beings, most animals are beings where all effectors and sensors are located in a narrowly circumscribed space of physical space location in physical space.

We have a single embodiment.

We have a single skin surface of pretty well defined.

We are highly local beings.

We could imagine, um,

an artificial intelligence which has become conscious, which administers, administrates a few thousand robots with sensors and effectors of their own all over the planet on the surface of other planets.

That AI could look through the windows of many single embodiments, local embodiments of robots.

without actually itself having a single embodiment.

It could develop a very different kind of self model or mental properties than we have, but we are just these local entities.

So for us, it's very obvious, physically localized in a single embodiment, almost sensors and effectors all concentrated in one location in physical space,

So the body model, the physical organism model, what can it do?

Where can it climb?

How fast can it run?

This would also naturally have been something with a pretty simple boundary in space and so on and so forth.

I'm just trying to point out logically this wasn't necessary.

There could have been completely different intelligent creatures somewhere else in the universe, widely distributed or something.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, it's a thought experiment that I guess is in some sense impossible to conceive because of the boundedness of our perspective.

Well, maybe it isn't.

I mean, maybe I can.

I mean, I've been reading a little bit of Peter Godfrey Smith, but only the pop science on octopuses, octopodes.

And he speaks a little bit about these kind of, you know, the fact that octopuses seem to have a far more distributed cognitive system.

which could imply multiple self models, you know, one for each arm.

I think what's interesting here is that thus far, everything you said would be highly convergent with the with the fluffy continentalists.

So as I as you know, I'm very interested in

these kind of self-specifying processes.

So this is the work that really blossoms out of Dorothy Legrand's really wonderful sort of five years where she's just writing these incredible articles about self-specifying processes.

And thus far, I think what you're saying makes perfect sense, which is that her and Evan and others have said one of these self-specifying processes will be these efferent reafferent loops.

And that is self-specifying because the cognitive system in some ways recognizes a signal that's caused by its action and a signal that's caused by the world.

And then the other thing, interestingly, is actually in that 2011 TICS paper, Specifying the Self for Cognitive Neuroscience, they also talk about something akin to what you were mentioning with respect to the immune system, which is that homeostasis might itself be a self, non-self specifying function.


SPEAKER_01:
Absolutely.


SPEAKER_00:
Because it's a self that's maintaining its integrity over a precarious world.

Now, the tension I think lies in this self as subject self as object distinction.

Okay.

And this is where I you know, this is where I've really been digging in and trying to really get to the bottom.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's go there if you want to.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I only briefly want to touch upon it because I think that Le Grand would have an issue with this notion that at its very bare minimum, what you would call the minimal phenomenal selfhood, what she would call the self as subject or pre-reflective self-awareness can be representational.

Yeah.

Rather she would propose that, and I think people like Dan Sahavi,

and Sean Gallagher and going all the way back to Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, that this is just the subjectivity that's imminent in all experience.

Yeah.

And it structures the world which it intends, if that makes any sense.

So how can you get pre reflective self awareness, self a subject,

and keep your representationality, how do you make those two marry?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm going to share an anecdote with you.

Many years ago, Francisco Varela and all these guys, they have this dogmatic thing

They don't know what they mean when they talk about representationalism, but they know representations are bad.

And it is something rigid, a representandum and a representatum.

And it's a rigid relationship and it could never be alive and all that.

So Francisco Varela invited me and David Chalmers to

Paris to give talks and then you listen to myself model talk.

And it came to me afterwards and he said, Thomas, everything you say is absolute.

Are you right?

I can subscribe to everything, but you're totally lost as long as you don't give up your representationalism.

You know, you're doomed.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
And of course, this is nothing new.

They all say that.

But what they haven't properly followed this intellectual tradition

is, I mean, the concept of representation has developed over some 350 years and people, you know, Descartes, Malebranche, and people have thought about it.

And I think only a very small part of the continental phenomenology tradition have even

grasp neural networks and the fluidity and context sensitivity of neural networks and dynamical systems and all this stuff cognitive science has been through.

Representations can be something very much alive.

and super context sensitive, you know, and it's, I think it's very obvious that our concept of representation is evolving.

If you think, you know, of the whole predictive processing framework, how it is evolving, but personally,

I'll just tell you what my personal stance on this is.

I'm an instrumentalist, but not a realist about representations.

I make no statement if anything like that exists in the world metaphysically.

All I'm saying is at this stage of scientific progress, we're in the last 40 years, maybe, modern cognitive science.

the concept of representation, which is being continuously enriched and calibrated and refined.

You may remember that in being no one, you know, I talked about presentation, representation, simulation, all that is still useful.

It is still heuristically fecund to use that level of description.

But there will be some stage in scientific progress where we probably discard this and say, okay, now let's say a current model goes through, somebody will say, okay, it's now all a part of statistical physics or something like this.

Notions of content of notions of a belief

on notions of a model, however, technically refined is not something we need anymore.

We can do it all on a lower level of description.

And I mean, the super frightening question is of course, if this could happen to phenomenology itself, you know, to consciousness, people would eliminate that concept because they have more fine grained, lower level, uh, concept.

So I'm not wedded to the representationist level of description, but I still things.

And that brings us back to our conversation also.

I still think, mm,

It is very useful, for instance, speaking in terms of models and self models still and say, well, now we mean something more predictive processing-ish by it and not something Johnson-Laird-ish by it.

Although one can see if one looks, there's an intellectual tradition there.

This is not disjunct, right?

MPS.

I shouldn't say much because I haven't properly read that literature, but there's this

It has the MPS paper in 2009 was very influential.

And then people have made their own naively realistic branches of it.

And he kept talking of the minimal self and a minimal self as is, there was a thing.

And maybe, I don't know if that's relevant, but one also has to be aware that this whole issue of self is of course, ideologically charged.

There will be a group, whenever you say something about your ideas, Darius, there will be a group in your audience who are Buddhists and say, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, no self, I've always wanted to be, you know, and there will be another group who has

a strong desire for mortality denial.

And there's something that is irreducible or some ideological thing.

So, um, and it cannot be true that there is not something that is untouchable by science or philosophical analysis for many people that's emotionally very important.

And that puts a lot of noise on the signal.

For instance,

I think most of the criticism and resentment I've got in my own country, in Germany, was not by Catholics or people who want a metaphysical notion of self, but by very good leftists who thought this is dangerous because it erodes the revolutionary subject.

And they didn't read, you know, but you know, the idea, they didn't read it properly.

They didn't understand these things, but I said, this is kind of dangerous.

We need the rational, critical subject, the subversive subject.


SPEAKER_00:
And yeah.

Good luck.

Well, I just know.

Well, I mean, that sounds almost quite Catholic, in some sense that you're invoking some kind of Cartesian thing onto itself that that can make itself revolutionary and subversive.

I'm, I'm in some sense interested in a far more stripped down form of selfhood such that I don't even like using the word I'm more interested in subjectivity.

Okay, I guess it's totally fine.

I mean, I mean, I

There's a, I just think for people, there's a nice, very nice Stanford encyclopedic article by Zahavi and Gallagher about self-consciousness.

And there they kind of talk about how deflationary we should take this notion of pre-reflective self-awareness to be.

And I'm quite interested in this very sort of, to the point where the notion of self itself kind of disintegrates such that you're left with, as I said, the subjectivity imminent in experience.

I'm just curious, when you write that...


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry, footnote before you go on.

I, of course, know this article.

I was always much too lazy to submit one of my own.

But this article in the SCP is a political move.

It's very clear that it is a political move to establish a certain view on self-consciousness and exclude others.

It's not very balanced.

And of course there is, would you agree?

And I understand this, of course, I emotionally understand.

Do you agree that there is an anti-reductionist resentment in this?

There must be something that's unknowable, untouchable.


SPEAKER_00:
Um, I'd have to go and read it more with respect to that question.

I have to go read it a little bit more acutely.

I mean, I'm personally, I mean, maybe this is the product of being an early career.

I mean, I'm not even in a career, but let's say like an early level researcher that I'm quite keen to remain agnostic about the big questions.

Uh, interesting.

I will also because I don't want to piss people off.

And who am I to piss off you or Danza Harvey?

We can all be friends.

I think that said, I mean, in terms of the sociology of consciousness, I think there is being a slight pushback against I think you're right, there's been a slight pushback, maybe for ideological reasons.

And I think some of it probably is something like terror management against the irreducible against the reducibility of consciousness.

I think that's certainly true.

I'm recognizing, even in the conversations I am having, a far greater willingness to invoke, at least for hypothetical reasons, something like dualism.

And that's interesting.

Again, I'm quite agnostic.

I think that I won't say that consciousness is reducible, and I won't say consciousness is irreducible.

I don't know about the ontology, and I also...

And my limitations with the ontology in many ways, the limitations of my epistemology, right?

It could be.

It really could be that it's all neural networks and neural firings.

I just don't know.

And so I'm quite happy to remain silent where I don't know.

I guess the question that I was going to ask is, you say that the content of experience is representational content.

And I'm just curious about whether you would say that pre-reflective self-awareness.

So the sense that is not intended, but is there that experiences for you is a content of experience.


SPEAKER_01:
Uh, it's, um, it's well,

It's never really clear what pre-reflective means.

You know, there's a lot in German idealism, in Fichte, we have our own local discussions of this with people like Dieter Henrich and so on, what this pre-reflexive element really is in which everything is grounded.

And it's, in what sense is it pre?

is it that what comes first when you come to after birth, is it in a temporal sense, pre reflecting about yourself as a subject or is it something deeper?

Is it some transcendental, a condition of possibility for everything else?

If that's,

or is it because the condition of person possibility itself will not be something phenomenal this will not be something you experience but i think there may be an interesting way out there that some

creatures can internally represent the conditions of possibility, say for having a first person perspective, but of course not in words concept or propositionally, but in an entirely, you know, sub symbolic format, this is the enabling condition for things, more complex states I will have later.

And, um,

The question is, I think your question is, what can or do we want to describe this as a representation?

I mean, if it is something that is, if the claim is, this is something everybody can consciously experience.

I mean, this is somehow the claim, you all know, this pre reflexive element.

This can, of course, be doubted.

Like, you mean the same thing when you refer to it, and Dorothea means the same thing, and I mean the same thing.

My attempt has always been to go deeper than that or make that more precise.

I pretty much know what they mean, and it's a long, broad tradition from Sartre and so forth and German idealism, Fichte and all that.

But what is it actually to take it seriously and not just keep saying as a placeholder, pre-reflexive.

So the real German term is prereflexive selbstvertrautheit.

And that in English means something like pre-reflexive self intimacy.

There's a way of being intimate with yourself way before any thoughts or concepts appear.

That's what I'm also interested in.

Uh, and I don't know if you would agree, but being self intimacy is an epistemic notion.

Somehow, you know yourself somehow you are always already in touch with yourself.

I don't know.

And I've been, um, you know, very,

interested in what the sources of this are.

And I think if you look at it, there's more than one source, actually.

So for instance, I don't know the French.

So in Merleau-Ponty has this point, they take this distinction of body

Körper.

Körper, by the way, relates to the English word corpse.

That's the inanimate body and the lived body.

And Merleau-Ponty made a very interesting point about what in German is called die Ständigkeit des Eigenleibes.

That means, Ständigkeit means there is one signal source in the self model which is permanent.

Something like the proprioceptive self model and the interoceptive self model, which is like the background hum of your refrigerator, which is so invariant that you don't hear it anymore until the refrigerator goes off.

And there is something in the phenomenology, the interior perception of one's own body that has this permanence.

And I think that permanence

is responsible for some of the Cartesian intuitions that not only you have, but that I have too.

because I think in English you say a substance is ontologically self-subsistent.

I think that's the right term you would use.

Sounds about right.

Yeah.

So in substance, if the self was a substance, it would be something that could hold itself in the state of existing.

Even if everything else in the universe would, that's a metaphysical substance.

Now we find that in our phenomenology,

I think, uh, this experience Malo pointy pointed to is it's an experience of not only being very deeply intimate and in touch with myself, but continuously holding myself in existence.

And what I find so fascinating, this is exactly what Carl talks about when he speaks about predicting yourself into existence.

Mm.

We are actually, yeah.

Maybe you,

guide me?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
It's just no, no, no, that face was only because I've been reading so much lagoon.

And she's obviously influenced me.

No, I haven't.

I mean, I sort of I would love to I haven't even reached out to her.

This is this has just been like, it's been a bit of a whirlwind of me just reading her papers and being like, Jesus Christ.

I think I think in part because in the British educational philosophical

curriculum you're taught that consciousness involves necessarily qualia intentionality and subjectivity

And so for someone to reinforce the subjectivity aspect, I don't you know, it's like I'm flirting with objective consciousness and subjective consciousness.

And maybe it's just it was a nice reminder, you know, it's all spurred up some childhood memories for me of learning about consciousness.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, I'll, I'll throw two things at you about Cartesian intuitions.

I have them to an intuition.

is something that gets in your way when you do philosophy, because it is something that structures your model of reality.

Now the human self model has a spatially extended part, the body model, and it has layers which have no spatial properties.

Namely, if you calculate in your head or something like that, if you do abstract reasoning,

The phenomenology is you're doing it, it's mental action, but it is not in space.

It is in time.

Some parts of the self-model are spatially coded on the level of phenomenal experience, and some only have temporal properties.

That makes Descartes' argument about res extensa and res cogitans extremely intuitive for beings like us, for beings with self-models like us.

Do you say chimes?

It resonates with our self experience, because we are indeed sometimes thinking things, and you've written about it in your forthcoming paper, that when we mentally act, we automatically imply

that there is an entity that can control in this way.

There is a controller.

And of course, the same for bodily movements.

So that's why Cartesian intuitions are so plausible.

They get in our way.

There is something inconceivable

uh, in the truth of say physicalism or subjectivity only being a very high level irrelevant, um, property.

And, uh, in, in this Oxford handbook of the self, I've, I've written a chapter called, um, uh, the no self alternative that try to explain,

why everybody necessarily has the feeling there is something wrong with no self scenarios.

Because the very act of trying to actively mentally simulate a possible world in which there was no self always generates a sense of effort.

And that sense of effort is the selfiness.


SPEAKER_00:
You get my point?

Sure.

I mean, for me, I don't know how much metaphysical import I would draw from that intuition.


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry for interrupting, but it cannot be true for beings like us.

It cannot be true.

It could never be really intuitive.


SPEAKER_00:
I think that's absolutely right.

Well, I guess my question here, therefore, is at the phenomenal level, not the metaphysical level.

Okay.

So I want to talk about your new book.

But before I get into that, so in your new book, you show there's a kind of non egoic zero person perspective.

which implies that in some ways there's a well, again, I haven't read too much of it, but it sounds like to me that one could interpret that at least as the maintenance of a world model without a self model.

Yeah.

I'm curious about whether before we get into that, what about the inverse of that?

Could you imagine that there could be a self model without a world model?


SPEAKER_01:
I bring this up.

First, this new book, which is open access available for everybody, the English version, is not a scholarly monograph.

This is not like being no one.

it's more like a multi-level experiment in popular science so i'm trying to do the it's really an experiment trying to inspire a lot of very different people at the same time which includes practitioners of meditation who may not have no interest in research or

or philosophers or even theologians to offer something to take it out of my hands.

So my ideal reaction to that book would be if many people say that nice try, I can do this much better.

That would be my ideal result.

If people take these bits and teasers and do some proper research somewhere.

Now the question that occurs, of course, in the phenomenology of mystical experiences, non-dual awareness, there's a cluster of phenomenologies I'm trying to document there.

For some people, the self expands.

For instance,

The phenomenology of identification can attach not to this body and not to the thinker of these thoughts, but to the all-pervading quality of awareness as such.

That's a well-documented phenomenon in advanced practitioners of meditation.

So you can become the awareness.

But the question is, there are long traditions in Asia who say that is the true self, like Advaita Vedanta.

And there are long traditions, like all the centuries of Buddhist philosophy, who say, no, no, no, there is no such thing as a self.

Let's just speak phenomenologically about the phenomenology of identification.

The kind of phenomenal content of which you could, after the experience, say, I was this.

Because during the experience, you typically cannot say, I am this.

You cannot really say it.

So that phenomenology, is there a phenomenology of identification with the whole, with the world?

Or should we rather say these states are...

neither self states no world states you know because the distinction doesn't make sense anymore and you know there's this notion of non-dual awareness in the contemplative traditions that there are states of experience global states modes of experience in which the distinction between subject and object makes no sense anymore

I quote one advanced meditator from Israel at some place in the book who says, it is not me looking, it is the world looking so that the whole world becomes the epistemic subject, the knowing entity or something.

And as you very rightly point out, we have this becomes a terminological issue.

some mystics over the centuries will say i became one with the world i still wasn't there i still was there i expanded all embracing others will say um a description i very much liked by one person was nobody sitting on the cushion everything sitting on the cushion

He described this, you know, that like the whole world sits on the cushion, but he's not there.


SPEAKER_00:
Draw the heavy.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So that's a terminological question.

The way I would like to frame it is that what was previously the egoic phenomenal self model.

can in some rare cases become identical to the computational self-model we talked about earlier.


SPEAKER_00:
So the whole thing becomes recapitulated into a sort of phenomenal space.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, but it's also as if these states were much closer to the scientific image of the world.

the old biological model of reality with a self going through.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, no, I mean, of course.

Yeah, so absolutely.

In terms of how neuroscientists take it, it absolutely is consonant with that.

I guess my question here is, again, it comes back to this pre reflective versus reflective dichotomy.

When we talk about the possession that these people experiencing expansive states of consciousness, oceanic feelings of consciousness at one month, and so on.

Are we talking so

it sounds like to me that actually the possession in many ways is a pre reflexive property of their experience such that the whole world is seeing is not I am seeing the whole world as mine.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah, yeah, of course not.


SPEAKER_00:
Is that I want to recognise that there is a difference there.

Because I think I've done a bit of meditation, not as seasoned as you or someone like laws.

But in some ways, I found that, you know, at those very glimpses of non dual awareness,

there is a very subtle recognition, the sense that I am not distinct from that which I am observing.

But in some ways, that can be paradoxically flipped to mean that I own that as much as I own myself.

there's just two meanings really have the word owning.


SPEAKER_01:
Absolutely right.

Yes, correct.


SPEAKER_00:
And so I'm just curious about, is it really the case that all of these so called zero perspective, the owning is all you know, emerges pre reflectively?

Or is there also a split where the possession is a reflective I own this thing, like I own my car or my laptop?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, afterwards,

This is also true for psychedelic experiences.

Afterwards, people will, some people will just stay quiet, and not report this and keep it as a treasure.

And

Most other people will run off and talk about it, and they will talk about it in their belief system, given the conceptual instruments, their culture, their cult, their spiritual lineage, their master, whatever their church has given them.

And that is actually what I'm calling attention to.

this phenomenology is almost ineffable.

And if we could make a little progress, uh, bring a little clarity in there because it's so obvious,

that there is an elephant and different people describe that elephant in different ways.

And can we make, I don't have the final solutions.

Can we make some conceptual progress in understanding this?

And one thing that will fall out naturally, I think is that what these German,

idealists, Fichte, and say people like Manfred Frank and Dieter Henrich in Germany would call this pre-reflexive self-intimacy and what you have in this Sartre, this whole story, Merleau-Ponty tradition as pre-reflective self-awareness, there's actually something slightly below this.

or it can be said more precisely.

And I call it non egoic reflexivity because I think the really, really interesting discovery the Tibetan Buddhists have made, I don't know, maybe in the 12th century or so is that this experience of pure awareness has a quality of reflexivity in it sometimes, but not always.

There's even a term called , self-knowing, non-egoic awareness.

And I think that is probably the common phenomenological anchor for what all these philosophers try to hone in on as pre-reflexive self-awareness, but they do make the mistake

of still putting, projecting some egoic character into it.

Some intuition, you know, and there is no egoic character in it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Is there, is there perspective on this?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not the person to know, but personally I take very seriously is the world can be seen out of this.

So there is okay.

This is maybe, I don't know, getting too much, but there is something that is called dual mindfulness and meditation researchers research where you would say, sit on your cushion and have an experience of pure awareness and it's all nice and clear and silent, but you're still having it.

There's a meditator who has pure awareness.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
And then there is non dual mindfulness, which is absolutely effortless.

no control.

Therefore, if my theory is right,

that the phenomenology of ownership is caused by control, controllability, then it would not be going along with ownership, as you said.

And I found it interesting, Sahavi has at one point used that concept of anonymity also, I think.

Something that is really, in that sense, nameless.

and self and not owned by anyone.

And my suspicion is every human being actually, if they're a little quiet and silent and they feel into it, they can experience this non-egoic reflexivity in pure awareness.

They know what this is.


SPEAKER_00:
But then later to describe it leads to an explosion of philosophical systems.

Yes, and poetry.

No, not in a derogatory way.

I mean poetry in the most complimentary way.

I thought that some of the testimonies of these people were very beautiful.

So I mean that not at all in a demeaning way to their experience.


SPEAKER_01:
You see, most of them are not academics and they don't read things like you and I read.

It's amazing how they do their best in natural language.

But the sexy question is, of course, if given mathematics and computational phenomenology, we could go further.

We could have more precise descriptions.

Maybe a perception in which, in the end, Dorothee Legrand and Sean Gallagher

And everybody can say, yeah, that was what we meant.


SPEAKER_00:
Thomas was right.


SPEAKER_01:
No, not Thomas was right.

No, I know.

I know.

But there's the questions of course, what are the criteria?

Can we have any criteria?

I mean, what would convince you in the end?

It's just people talking about their own phenomenology, right?


SPEAKER_00:
It is, and I wanted to ask about this autobiographical retrieval aspect.

But actually, before I do, I want to just ask about this reflexivity, because I thought that was a very interesting point, that some of this egoic awareness, non-egoic awareness rather, is reflexive and some isn't.

Now, it seems to me that, again, there are multiple ways of disambiguating the term reflexivity.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, there are.


SPEAKER_00:
So one is a kind of reifying reflexivity such that it becomes a thing that you own.

Right.

So this is my leg is clearly self-referential, but it's also reifying.

Right.

I can sort of dissect my leg as an object that belongs to me.

And actually, I think Dorothy, again, is quite helpful here in her kind of analysis of dancers talking about their experience of their own bodies as performative and transparent rather than opaque.

such that they can take their body as an intentional object without reifying it through what she calls scrutiny.

So I'm curious to think about what it means for non-egoic awareness to reflect on itself.

How can this be done in a manner which doesn't in turn reify the awareness?

awareness itself, pure awareness, such that it sort of becomes an encapsulated notion that something is beyond.

So that has alterity with respect to something else.


SPEAKER_01:
That's a super interesting question.

And I think you're just homing in on the target.

And I think there's nothing you can do.

Doing anything will always ruin it.

And as all meditators know, if there's

even the faintest glimpse, the noticing of this glimpse very often ruins it, um, because it leads to the reification or some stray thought that says, uh, and as I quote one of our subjects somewhere in the book who says very interestingly to me,

but is this pure awareness asks the thinking mind and something else just knows.

Oh, you know, that's how she describes it.

Right.

Something else just knows because it knows itself.

And of course it's non propositional.

And I mean, there's a long tradition.

I have a small chapter on meditation and non meditation,

who have always said over the centuries, there is nothing you can do.

Do not meditate.

Uh, one of the nicest present day installments on this is American meditation teacher, Loch Kelly.

There's a three minute, uh, YouTube video, which goes, don't meditate, marinate.

The, the, the whole idea is this is here.

It's established.

Don't try to grasp it or experience it because it's already here.

And if you can marinate in that quality, which in more sober words,

I've called a phenomenal character of tonic alertness.

I think it may be something very basal and very simple in the end.

Let me just the quality of pure wakefulness as such.

And if you don't attempt to look at it subjectively, but like rather dissolve in it, uh, marinate in it, then maybe it can know itself through you or something like that.

Uh,

but it needs a lot of future research and the big question is of course also i mean what value do we assign to these experiential reports yeah many of these people are deep into bizarre belief systems they are way out of the scientific world view some of them were not

many, but some of them would not be accessible to rational argument.


SPEAKER_00:
Um, and is that, well, there are two things there.


SPEAKER_01:
One is I'm going to ask you something.

So if Doro says in there's a perfect flow moment in dancing where my body come becomes transparent.


SPEAKER_00:
So the body would always be transparent to choose her word.

I heard you well, apart from something like a deafferented patient.

By bodily transparency, she doesn't really mean what you mean by transparency, as you actually pointed out.


SPEAKER_01:
No, that's different.

But the way she uses the concept of the transparent body, it's intuitive to you.

You have the feeling.


SPEAKER_00:
I understand this notion of the world being presented in a bodily fashion.

That's really what she means.

so she she there's there's multiple so this for people who are curious is it's it's actually it's her and who is the other it's 2009 um there it is perceiving subjectivity and bodily movement legrand and raven r-a-v-n uh i think raven also wrote a fair bit about dancing um

Yes, I think Dorothy was very much on to what we're talking about here in terms of flow states.

But she says, let's have a look.

I just want to make sure I don't take her words out of context or speak on.

Well, I shouldn't be speaking to paraphrase Wittgenstein, but I will come to it in any case.

Footnote.


SPEAKER_01:
If you're interested in all of this, I would very much recommend the work of Adrian L. Smith at King's College.

Are you aware of him?

I'm not.

He wrote an excellent thesis with me called the structuring body.

And this is all about how the body structures the perceptual field or the phenomenal field.

Yep.

And there's a lot you might be interested in there.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, well, I'll certainly Well, thank you.

I'll certainly send him I've just looked.

Yes.

Yes.

This notion of structuring is, is an interesting one.

I think I do understand it.

But I'm also I'm also to some degree concerned about how much I'm getting indoctrinated by the by the poetics of some of these papers such that I press if I just needed the title, perceiving subjectivity.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, perception is object representation.

Subjectivity is an abstract concept.

It invites trying to build a mental model of that sentence while trying to understand it.

Can I perceive my own subjectivity?

yeah i can and no scientist is ever going to take this away from me you know what's funny is that you two you two thank each other so much in your like footnotes i i i like her and she always came as a visitor to the mine group i think it's it's all very nice but if you want to take it seriously

I mean, what does perceiving subjectivity mean?

Does this, does this make any sense conceptually?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I think, I think to be fair, I would take the notion that that title is somewhat tongue in, not tongue in cheek, but it, and it's, it's certainly not lazy is certainly the wrong word, but it's somewhat, um, it's somewhat deflationary.

I think, I think I like this notion more of, I mean,

again, I'm doing a rubbish job.

But it's very important, I think, to contrast it with this with what she calls opacity and what she calls performativity.

I think I may, it may Oh, it may actually be the the Le Grand 2007 pre reflective self consciousness on being bodily in the world, which was in Jane's head.

It's funny, I've been recommending these papers to everyone.

So sorry, guys, if you do

put down the garden pot, you know, and I recommend yours as well, Thomas, obviously.

Yes, okay, excellent.

A transparent body pre effectively experiences the bodily mode of givenness of objects in the external world.

Okay.

This is Yeah, 2000.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, but I even say this in the elephant book very briefly, given this given height.

There's the myth of givenness, Wilfried Sellars.

The concept of givenness, if we want to take it really, really, really seriously, has strong theological connotations.

There are philosophers of religion

who speak about the quality of givenness as the world is given to me, my life is given to me by God and all that.

If we take this out, Dara, the Latin, Darius,

Latin means to give.

That's a social relationship between person A and B. So if you say there is a quality of givenness there, there is an entity that has a personal level characteristic, if I want to take that literally, that gives something to me.

So the world is another.

Somehow it is another self that gives.

reveals itself to me or gives it myself to me as a present.

That's, I mean, that's poetry.

Uh, that's beautiful.

I, I think I can experience what is meant by this.

There are phenomenologies, but conceptually it doesn't really make sense.

There is not person a giving something to person B.

maybe it is much something much more like what Buddhists would call the quality of suchness that there is a self revealing quality in, in, in inanimate objects, which you can't perceive if you look property or something like that, that's speculative.

So I know no other way of taking what say Doty says seriously,

as trying to take it literally.

And then it explodes in my head.

I guess the idea might be perceptual object.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm just very sorry, you know, the idea might be the idea might be that, well, okay, so I will come to this notion of perceiving subjectivity, because I have the paper now in front of me, I think in terms of the givenness, I mean, I think, again, I'm not a historian of phenomenology.

This is all

you know, somewhat new given my age and whatnot.

But I think some of it seems to be a lineage from who sell and this notion of givenness.

And then I think the other thing that feeds into it is, and I think it probably is proto religious in some sense that it's intentionality or consciousness giving its own contents to itself.

Yeah.

And in some ways, it speaks to, you know, God as the divine spark, God as consciousness, and so on, which is obviously a deeply Judeo Christian idea.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Do you have any of those?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, just also met on on some predictive processing generative model of reality in the brain, right?

Because this is also self giving all the time.


SPEAKER_00:
Of course, it's a confirmation bias in many ways.

It's confirmation bias.

Well, we seek evidence for the priors that are encoded in our generative hierarchy.

If we remain the things that we are, of course.

I wondered whether you know, that's that kind of claim that intentionality, I use it, you know, I think what we've kind of come to here is the importance, and in many ways, the opacity that language gives, right?

When I say into consciousness gives its own contents to itself, I am constructing a kind of subject verb, an SVO sentence, which I could say for I eat a pizza, right?

But I mean, something clearly quite different here.

And

I think in many ways, of course, it reifies the subjects and the objects because that's what language does.

And so, as you say, many of these conversations end up being literally ridiculous because it's very difficult to understand exactly what's being spoken about here.

But I think, again, there is a latent ontological commitment in something like that, which is that consciousness is in some ways an agent, has some agentic force to it.

That is not just a...

part of its phenomenology, but perhaps also part of its ontology.

Again, I'm very much, this is not what Dorothee or Merleau-Ponty, anyone says, I'm just abstracting here somewhat.

You're, I guess, quite keen to bracket out those ontological commitments, right?

This is not a theory of consciousness per se.

How the simulation and emulation manifests into phenomenal space is somewhat the big question, right?

It's Chalmers' hard problem.

Is there anything in you that when you say there were no such things as selves, is there any part of you which goes, but I don't know, because I don't know the true origin of phenomenal experience.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, of course I don't.

Uh, I might.

you know, die in five minutes and, and there may be a roaring crowd of angels laughing at me, you know, and, and there may be all these non-physical entities

slapping their knees, laughing, saying, no, look at yourself without a body.

It was all wrong.

Many things could happen the next instant.

I don't know.

Idealism might turn out to be right in the end.

There are these also probably

There are metaphysical options, I think, which in principle may always remain viable.

And of course, if you take the whole self model theory, which has many layers, something we haven't spoken about, for instance, completely is

social self models, self models in societies, the resonating process between different subjects, you could turn it around and say, if it allows you to sleep easier, this is a theory about what selves are.

So our intermittent processes that are absent in, uh, in dreamless, deep sleep, I mean, phenomenal self dreamless, deep sleep, which are very different and very volatile during the dream state, the non lucid dream state, and which are sometimes on some layers are quite robust during waking.

And we know this, and that's probably like a self, something like a self model.

And then if you look closer,

you find that a lot of things you've always thought aren't true.

So a famous point, some meditators make, if you actually attend to what is going on in your head and when you go about your normal business during the day, you don't have to meditate.

There's very often, there's no self there.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Well, no, absolutely.

Well, there's no,

It just so depends on what you mean by the self.

I mean, there's no self as there's no self as what I call well, you know, the self as what did we call it reflect, you know, conceptual, the self as a conceptual object.

I mean, again, I get into the super granularity of this, as you know, in the footnotes.

You know, and people can read the footnotes of that flow paper.

And I think it's an attempt to really unpick.

If we hold this dichotomy of self as subject to self as object, where does it

lingo and where does it diminish?

And here your work on mind wandering, dreaming is super informative.

I guess the response would always be well, underneath all of that still, the loss of cognitive agency, the loss of autonomous agency, there is nonetheless the subjectivity imminent in experience.

And

Well, the reason why I asked this ontological question is because I think... I want a clarifying question.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you mean underlying is a phenomenal experience of a really primordial, let's say primordial subjectivity?

Or are you saying the enabling conditions are always still there?

I can always come back.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm talking about the former.

I think if there is experience...

And again, I'm reticent to say it, but I think at least I take seriously the claim that if there is experience, there is pre-reflective self-awareness.

Not just the enabling conditions for pre-reflective self-awareness.

There is a subjective thickness, a for-whomeness to all experience.


SPEAKER_01:
Uh-huh.


SPEAKER_00:
That's the claim I'm making.

And I think the notion of this pre-reflective is the fact that it's not a pre-enabler of itself.

It's a pre-enabler of higher order forms of self-reflexivity.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
So actually, it presupposes the very capacity for that.

But in some deflationary sense, it's always there.

So when you get yourself with flexibility, you've always got this sense that there is.

But again, when I say there is a sense, I don't mean the sense that you're intending that it's just there, that that object is being intended for some one or something.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so let's just go through some examples.


UNKNOWN:
So


SPEAKER_01:
Darius has meditated and it has been more or less.

Okay.

And then he gets up and he tries to do some walking meditation, uh, on the lawn.

And then something like a flow state happens and you can tell your listeners what exactly that implies.

Suddenly the walking becomes completely effortless and in a,

If only attention is only in the present moment, um, there are no noticeable thoughts.

Um, is that for whom this you're trying to get up in that case, is it something like the, for this bodiness?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, in the sense of the walking meditation, I would say that the subjectivity there is punctuated ultimate or defined ultimately by a certain bodily NOS, not so much an embodiment, but bodily NOS, there's a sort of bodily thickness to the experience.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, you know, so, and yeah, so that you feel your guts and your heart beat?


SPEAKER_00:
No, it's no, no, no, no, I wouldn't say it's as specific as that.

There might be some people, you know, an Anil Seth type figure might say, well, you always have this buzzing of, you know, viscera, you know, and the guts and the interoceptive processes.

For me, so I think there's an open question that I was going to ask you, actually.


SPEAKER_01:
And I guess I have more questions, more questions for you.

And I want to understand this.

So in being no one, I have...

also described the special I've made these neuro phenomenological case studies.

There are these Cotard syndrome patients who will merrily sit in a chair and claim that they are dead.

So they have no life, no live body, but a corpse.

And they will even ask the doctors to throw that corpse away.

In saying that there is a for whom this still you think?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, Kotar syndrome, Kotar's delusion, I would tentatively suggest that it's still a delusion for whom.

In the same way as derealization, which to be candid with everyone, I have experienced a fair bit of as a result of anxiety attacks.

And there is nonetheless a for whom-ness.

in a derealized or depersonalized state.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, more questions.

Darius has been stoned out of his mind again, but he realizes he has to get home what begins walking home.

A body walks home while in a completely absent minded state.

Is there where's the for whomness hiding there?


SPEAKER_00:
so okay so i i think uh there is a point here that i think i i can't answer currently which is whether pre-reflective self-awareness is always pre-reflective bodily self-awareness so i think that's a that's a that's an interesting question darius is in dreamless deep sleep yeah is there for wholeness and dreamless deep sleep no right no i would say you're just darius is non-lucidly dreaming is that for wholeness for the subject

For the phenomenal subject of my dreaming experience, I would hold that there is a for wholeness within their experience.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Now Darius reads a Buddhist treatise and comes to the conclusion for wholeness is the root of all suffering.

I must think about the most efficient way to eliminate this.

What would he do?


SPEAKER_00:
Uh, presumably I would probably start doing some Vipassana.

Um, and, or maybe take some, maybe take some DMT or something.

I don't know.

Uh, blow my, blow my neurons apart.


SPEAKER_01:
So you would aim at what researchers call ego dissolution.


SPEAKER_00:
And then I would, which I'm skeptical of.

I'm not saying I don't, I'm not, again, I haven't read your entire book.

I can't say, yeah, I'm, I'm, I'm purely skeptical of, um,

this notion of, I think there's a little section of the flow paper where we say, okay, there might be a range of flow states, which includes psychedelic and meditative states such that you get something like the downregulation of the default mode network and the loss of reflective self-awareness, right?

Like planning is prohibited, meta self-conceptualization is prohibited.

And I sense that in some of my own meditative experiences and psychedelic experiences.

flow state experiences for that matter nonetheless um i think what people i think there's a risk or a suspicion that when people are talking about ego dissolution there is nevertheless a maintenance of subjectivity in their experience maybe it brings us back to the question you still wanted to ask i mean


SPEAKER_01:
A big epistemological issue I have, there's one very good paper about it by Raphael Millier, I flagged it.

Why should we believe any autofine phenomenological report about ego dissolution?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I was going to ask that.

So I was curious about how can you coherently report a selfless state of consciousness from your own autobiographical memory?


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

So I see the issue there, and there are some

attempts to get around it by saying autobiographical memory is constituted through a second order architecture.

But I think somehow the claims somebody, that's the question, the claims is making that they themselves were having

a selfless experience during that period of time.

And that cannot be right somehow.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Well, yeah, something's going to miss that.


SPEAKER_01:
So the linguistic exposition is somehow faulty.

If it was true, this point I'm flagging and on which I have no, how to say no official final opinion.

this is of course an epistemological epistemological barrier for doing research on this, because all people reporting things like that, we should doubt them.

We should think, yeah, they had a, a near selfless state and they're confabulating because they want to have something so much, you know, they are Buddhist, pious, Buddhist believers.

And I wanna report something.

They want to report an experience, but,

The question could be, is there an unconscious autobiographical memory which was running and registering while there was a conscious selfless experience and which afterwards surfaced again?

There was, by some unconscious mechanism, there was a selfless episode was registered, then is made globally available again.

And then misdescribed by somebody who just doesn't know what to say about it and misdescribes it as their own experience.


SPEAKER_00:
Um, what would you do?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I just, I wonder whether even an unconscious memory doesn't in some way involve the self specifying process point.


SPEAKER_01:
That's a very good point.


SPEAKER_00:
So it might not only be an issue of the intentions of the subject, such that I want to confabulate, I really want this to be true.

It may just be the very act of lived experience passing into memory transforms it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's might be exactly right.

That in beings like us were, as you said before, self-specifying mechanisms were so important from an evolutionary perspective.

Also the retrieval process automatically structures the whole thing in some egocentric self-specified form.

It brings back.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

So I've only got a couple other questions.

I'm aware of time constraints.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, keep going.

I hear lunch isn't ready yet.


SPEAKER_00:
So you live a lovely life.

Tomorrow.

There's a slight mention again, very early on in the book about intrinsic phenomenological essence of pure awareness.

So is there a unifying characteristic?

Because in the book, the structure in many ways is the different features of pure awareness.

So you have the relaxation, for example, I believe is the first chapter, and there are others.

What's the conclusion to that question about whether there's an intrinsic phenomenological essence to pure awareness?


SPEAKER_01:
This is really just preliminary work.

It's more like creating a platform for other people to start from.

But there is a summary chapter in which I have

try to extract five different readings of what purity could mean, you know, because also different people mean different things by it.

And I'm also this right at the beginning, most meditators or metaphysically minded people from India will hate what I'm saying.

My working hypothesis is that pure awareness is not pure because it has a content.

Right.

And then the question, the research question is what kind of content could be so simple and subtle that it makes it absolutely natural for people afterwards to say, I experienced the character of awareness as such.

What would that be?

And, uh, that's what I'm trying to answer.

So I don't believe I'm an anti essentialist.

I don't think, um, you know, this also metaphysically, I don't do metaphysics, but the whole idea of an intrinsic property,

which something possesses in all possible contexts, I don't believe it.

I think there are only relational properties and only relational properties in the end also fit into the scientific scheme of explanation and knowing phenomena, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
So if there is as many claim an intrinsic essence to awareness itself, this would be a prime candidate for something that cannot be very deductively explained by science, a prime candidate, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

It's all its own sort of prime mover unmoved to, you know, go away, go back to Aristotle.

Um,

I guess when I think about pure awareness, I also think about pure consciousness events, Robert Foreman's work in the 80s.

And I've said this on the podcast before, but I got sort of introduced to that by John Verveke, who I know you've spoken to.

And John describes the way that Foreman describes pure consciousness events.

And I think in quite a poetic and beautiful way, again, in no ways do I mean poetic in any derogatory manner.

Adjectival qualia is lost, so blueness, redness, warmth, and so on.

But adverbial qualia remains.

And by that, it means presence, nowness, here-ness, potentially subjectivity.

I wanted to pick up on one of them, which was nowness or presence.

You write, I think, I mean, again, these are the earlier works, but you write quite explicitly that phenomenal states, you know, one of the constraints of them is this presentness.

Is it the case that phenomenal experiences need to be experienced now?

And if so, what does that mean?

I mean, what does it mean for an island of phenomenal experience seemingly to emerge, yet not be distinct in some ways from the flow of time?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is where, of course, um, we don't have any clear intuitions.

So, um, how to say my former research assistant, Jennifer wind, who has written this fantastic book, dreaming at press.

We have discussed a lot many years ago about what the step from MPS to MPE would be, what one would have to subtract from minimal phenomenal selfhood to arrive at an even simpler form, selfless experience.

And you can see in her comment,

on Evan Thompson in the publicly available open mind contribution that she thinks there is an experience of pure duration, just duration as such, so that the lowest level could be, as you seem to imply, some sort of temporal experience.

My intuition is rather

As the Tibetan Buddhists say, nowness is one of the three times, past, nowness, and future.

Pure awareness is timeless.

It doesn't even have nowness or the mere experience of duration.

It is an experience of timelessness.

And I think some of my phenomenological data seem to point into that direction.

my intuition is also in that direction that there is timelessness that there actually is phenomenology of timelessness.

It does exist without nowness.

But what I don't know is how to get at this without just doing it completely bottom up with the neuroscience of time representation, you know,


SPEAKER_00:
Which I still don't think we really know.


SPEAKER_01:
No, we don't.


SPEAKER_00:
I wrote this one paper, actually.

It was a kind of very, well, it's a lot shorter than the flow paper bit.

It's an addendum to the flow paper about the, I'm trying to give a computational mechanism underpinning the flow of time using, well, kind of based off Husserlian phenomenology.

So retention, primal impression, and so on.

Whatever the last one is.

Pretension.

I guess.

Well, I guess.


SPEAKER_01:
Footnote.

Footnote.

I have in 1995 edited a high octane collection, which is also a collection which is also available in English.

It's called Conscious Experience.

And there is a paper in there by German neuropsychologist Eva Runa and mathematician.

And which is called Time Gestalt and the Observer.

You may find that inspiring.

Just a footnote.

Time Gestalt and the Observer should be in your library.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, my library is expanding all the time.


SPEAKER_01:
University library, I mean.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, I see.

Okay.

Well, maybe, maybe not.

Okay.

Well, before we leave, I'm just curious.

You've been writing for a long time.

And it's a very sort of marked and productive and quite remarkable career.

And as I said, I feel like the focus will not change, but it has a certain direction towards going beyond the basic SMT theory and beyond the minimal phenomenal self to expand into epistemic self models.

And then almost like a retreat back into pure awareness.

I'm curious, just throughout the whole 93 up to 2024, I'm

just Yeah, I guess I'm just curious about what is anything you've changed your mind on?

Is there anything that sort of convinced you like, oh, the this part of the SMT needs tweaking?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, many things.

I sometimes play this guy game with myself is where was I really firmly convinced of something was absolutely wrong.

I give you three examples.

I know I can go to SMT.

The first example is the German, how do you say, tabloid press always said the terrorists of the Red Army Fraction are all hiding in East Germany, in Eastern Germany.

And I thought, ah, that's just total nonsense, you know.

That's

And that's where they caught them after the wall came, uh, uh, frame down.

Second thing is I thought it would be absolutely impossible that everybody stopped smoking.

I thought this would lead to large scale rebel.

Yeah.

And, and it happened.

So my worldview was completely wrong.

So now scientifically there's a book that fortunately never came out.

If you read the ego tunnel,

Which I have after some long meditation courses in my twenties, I had a few out of body experiences, which also led to research.

And I was deeply shocked, deeply shocked because I thought, my God, because they were so realistic.

I thought, my God, all this new age crap, this total bizarre nonsense about the astral body and the subtle body.

It's literally true.

man, I can't talk to anybody about this.

There's an immortal soul and it can leave the body, you know, completely.

And then I wrote to many people, Charles Tartt and Harvey Irvin, and said, we need to have an edited collection start research on out-of-body experience.

And I still have, no publisher took it.

And it was very good because it would have ruined my academic career at the outset.

But there was one woman from England in there who, and I hated her contribution, Sue Blackmore.

And then Sue Blackmore and her husband, the late Tom Troschenko, were in Germany in Tübingen.

And she had this, you know, this theory that those were very special kind of hallucinations and illusions.

And I went down to tubing and to straighten her out.

I thought, you know, it's totally crazy because I had this super realistic phenomenology.

And then she asked me a question.

So when you say you've moved out of your body and you've come to a stand still beside the bed, what do you do then?

I said, well, maybe I go to the window sill and try to look out.

And she said, so how do you do that?

Do you fly?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Or did you walk step by step?

I said, Oh, it's kind of in defined.

I think of wanting to go to the windowsill and look out of the window and I'm there.

And she said, Okay, what do you do next?

I said, Well, I go to the light switch to see if my fingers go through or if I can turn on the light switch if I'm only see this.

Okay.

How do you get there?

Do you walk step by step or do you fly through?

And I thought, well, it's kind of, I think of the light switch and I'm there.

And she says, see, there are discontinuities.

This is the cognitive map.

As one said at that time, your brain has of your bedroom and you are just some jumping from one landmark point in your internal representation of your bedroom.

And between there is nothing.

And that made me think.

And now I think many out of body experiences are special kind of vestibular motor hallucinations.

And I've done research on it with friends a while ago.

And this, I really changed my mind.

Yeah, I really changed my mind because this was such an indubitable, realistic phenomenology.

And soon made me see something I didn't see in my own phenomenology.


SPEAKER_00:
I could go on.

No, it's a good one.

No, it's just making me think I mean, one.

Well, there are three things.

One is that I hate to why I don't hate to but Dorothee has a really nice

bit on out of body experiences just for anyone who's I don't know if you've ever come across this 2010 paper.


SPEAKER_01:
I may not remember.


SPEAKER_00:
It's nice.

It's a nice paper.

It's myself with no body body body.

Very good name.

So that's one thing and then I guess a more what

I guess a more pertinent question to the actual experience itself was, I spoke about how sometimes I feel that when I read phenomenology, I'm being duped into recognizing in my own phenomenology, a phenomenological supposed fact that the writer is put on the page.

So Dorothea would say, okay, in out-of-body experiences, you always have a sense of a bodily self that's intending the objects of the experience.

Like, oh, of course.

I mean, not that I've ever had one, but I can imagine like, oh, of course, I can imagine what that's like.

And I can imagine, I'm not saying it happened, I can imagine that I would have, like in your case, I would have an out-of-body experience.

And someone goes, yeah, but it was discontinuous.

And I go, oh yeah, of course it was.

And I'm, again, being duped into through some nice, I'm not accusing Sue of having an agenda or anything, but I'm being duped by the questioning into, because the actual memory, the kind of engram is so fuzzy, because it's, you know, it's a

can imagine they are it you're the mind is wanting to take on any you know rigid form of experience that can be labeled okay it was discontinuous did you ever reflect on that and go am i 100 sure that her description is reflecting my phenomenal uh my phenomenological experience and also how do you contend with that yeah generally one can if one looks at this in the final one could go on for instance


SPEAKER_01:
predictive processing assumes there are priors.

One stable prior I had is it is pitch black, dark night, and there is no light in my bedroom.

I wouldn't expect anything to see anything on the way to the windowsill where there was maybe a little light from outside.

I would expect total phenomenal indeterminacy on the trajectory there.

What does it really mean?

One can always doubt and come back.

This was really an example of how a bodily sensation structured an environment very clearly.

And just a footnote, there are rare cases

I said it, I think in one of the mind wandering papers of asthmatic body out of body first thing, one has to understand there are very different kinds of body out of body experiences.

One, you might have in a wake up phase of a ketamine, um, after surgery, maybe very different from what a Yogi in this cave in the Himalaya has, you know,

one you have after an accident, uh, maybe different from one you have on a meditation retreat.

They are very different.

And there are some people, I mean, I've read all that literature at the, in the olden days, because I was so fascinated with it.

There are situations where people just experience themselves as an extensionless point from which they view the scene.

And that's a borderline case of embodiment.

I think one would say, okay, but if you're still spatially located, if your visual perspective is located at some point in space above your body, that's embodiment.

Yeah.

Yeah.

One could also say, is that what we meant by a lived body?

Right.

The origin of a visual perspective.

And we don't have a lot of data there.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, in some ways, I guess it was at the heart of your, you know, that's the heart of the original definition of the MPS was that it is spatially, temporally centered on the body.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, of course.

Of course.

And I think an important distinction we made is that has to do with your interest in egocentric in self specifying processes.

You can have an egocentric body centered

spatial spatial visual spatial model of reality that has a center but not a first person perspective in the epistemic sense that can be dissociated i think um this is something you would want to doubt that anybody can have an egocentric model of reality without a no knowing self


SPEAKER_00:
I think it depends on what one means by epistemicity.

Is it purely an intentional relation?

And we haven't even really touched upon this because there's a

I kind of, for actually many ways, it started off as a rhetorical decision, a clarifying decision.

I distinguished between an epistemic agent model and epistemic self model in this flow states paper.

And I've been thinking about why I did that.

And one is because I think I was using the term epistemic agency to describe something like auto-noetic consciousness.

So the sense of pre-reflectively driving yourself through time.

And I think that that's pretty nicely written about phenomenologically and

in the cognitive science and people like um uh wheeler and there's a whole literature on auto neurotic consciousness that was very rich but i guess the other reason why i thought that is i thought i i've actually explicitly said now in the paper that uh i'm taking epistemic self models to be a or i'm taking epistemic agent models to be a subset of epistemic self models

Yeah, I think the reason why I say that is because I think there are moments of the sense of epistemic self hood, which don't require an age and age.

But But it's interesting, because in your work, you cut you, you know, when you introduce the notion of an epistemic agent model was an epistemic agent model.

So


SPEAKER_01:
do you think that, uh, very interesting.

Let me ask you a question.

I know what you mean.

So, um, see, say somebody sits on that cushion and does a meditation technique that scientists call open monitoring.

So tries to kind of effortlessly non-agentively be with the whole phenomenal field, not a meditation object, but everything.

Yep.

And has, we also assume in a thoughtless state.

So there's wakefulness, no agenda of precision control attention whatsoever.

But there is an awareness of the whole thing.

And no thought, no verification.

Is that

maybe the I'd say the prime candidate of the for wholeness you're thinking about, would you say that this is still for the person sitting on their cushion?


SPEAKER_00:
I would I mean, I would even go beyond that and say that this is involved.

It goes even beyond the minimal phenomenal subjectivity.

such that it involves some epistemicity, such that there's a knowing relationship, right?

And I think this is important.

I mean, I guess the question I was also going to ask is, what do we mean when we talk about the sense of a knowing self?

Is it a knowing self that is agentically or agentively knowing, such that it's purposefully, seems to be purposefully driving itself towards some knowledge, some relationship with the world?

Or is it a...

can we disambiguate those two things so i think a canonical example here is mind wandering um i propose i mean it's a footnote it's not particularly relevant to the question of flow but it's just in terms of getting the terminology really fixed i propose that mind wandering is an example of uh it's an associated feature of an epistemic self model but not an epistemic agent model


SPEAKER_01:
You can daydream about an episode.

Indeed, indeed.

It gets complex, different kinds of things.

So if you read the introduction to the Open Mind Collection, Jenny Wind and I have coined the term the phenomenal signature of knowing.

We were writing about intuitions and why one should do...

empirically oriented philosophy of mind without intuition mongering, as we call it.

So we think there is a phenomenal signature of knowing, for instance, if you have an intuition, you just have this feeling, I just know this, but you don't know where that knowledge comes from.

Now, what I think this new work shows is that there can be an uncontracted phenomenal signature of knowing human brains are capable of this.

Yes, the poor.

Maybe Carl would have a completely deflationary reading of this, you know, just that the overall certainty or probability associated with the whole model.

If that is true, this might be very close to what consciousness is, and it might also be close to what you are trying to find out, right?

Isn't that it?

a phenomenal signature of knowing that is not contracted into an agent or a self.

Is that what you mean?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I guess the question is, in some sense, but I guess the question therefore is, could you have a minimal phenomenal self without it becoming an epistemic self model?

Yeah, you can cause you can then but then in some sense that that then the knowing the signature of knowing would not be at the heart of consciousness, because you would have a paradigmatic case of consciousness without the sense of knowing.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, if it is basically the bodily here and now, which is a very common the here and now is a very common meditation experience.

It could be that the presence of a signature of knowing

kind of falls out of it, or naturally reveals it in that kind of state of just being no, would it be?


SPEAKER_00:
Would it be a necessary concomitant?

Could you imagine that there is a pure here?

There's a bit where I talk about, again, this is just I think, actually, I'm just gonna point people in the direction of the paper, because I haven't really thought about this.

And I guess it's not been in explicit terms in like a conversation like this, but it's just been trying to demarcate these categories.

That

I don't think the distinction between the... I take the minimal phenomenal self here to just be identical to what I've been calling pre-reflective self-awareness.

I know the ontological commitments are different, but it was just easier.

And I make that clear.

But I make it very clear, therefore, that I don't think that there's a strict distinction between an epistemic self model and a minimal phenomenal self, because a minimal phenomenal self can have this signature of knowing, as you said.

But it makes me wonder whether you can have like is that signature of knowing an add on a build, an extra layer to pure subjectivity, or is it imminent in the subjectivity?


SPEAKER_01:
I do not know.

I can only share with you the way I'm trying to frame it now.

A living organism with a nervous system opens in epistemic space.

This epistemic space can maybe even extend across the boundaries of the body and some kinds of active entrance and so on and so forth.

But an organism is only conscious.

I think the essence of being conscious is to have a model of that space, to know that you, many ways to tell this, to know that you are an embodied epistemic space.

And the significance of pure awareness experiences like this is that you can, well, you can stabilize the model of your own epistemic space and it's not transparent anymore.

It becomes opaque.

You can notice it and become aware of it.

That's part of the interesting thing.

So I would say there's a space.

In that space, many different epistemic states can happen.

In our own case, most of them are coded as properties of a knowing self that knows, but that's not a necessary condition.

Some systems in some situations can model the space as such in an uncentered way.

And then you get this pure, uh, signature of knowing, I mean, you, maybe you would find there's a chapter on witness consciousness.

Maybe you'd find that helpness helpful.

Um, I don't know.

That's how the way I'm trying to frame this.

So a patient in vegetative coma in unresponsive wakefulness syndrome,

certainly has an epistemic space.

It knows how to breathe, how not to die.

There are gaze following movements and stuff like this, but it's entirely unconscious because it has no model of its own epistemic space.

The organism doesn't know that it has opened an epistemic space.

Same thing.

When you wake up in the morning, I claim,

that most people know what pure awareness is, but never pay attention to it.

It may be the first 200, 300, 500 milliseconds of the waking up process in the morning where you come to, but you don't know who you are.

You don't know where you are.

You don't know what place you are in.

You're disoriented to place time and person as a psychiatrist would be, but wide awake.

That is, the system which you are is just booting its model of the epistemic space.

And a second later, you know, there will be the bedroom and it will be filled with content.

But in the boot up process, there's a short period where there's just a model of wakefulness per se of becoming epistemically open to the world.

That's how I would like to try to frame it.

I don't know if it's correct.


SPEAKER_00:
No, it sounds well, in my experience, there's certainly that, that that that chimes with my intuitions, or at least, you know, my fake recollections of that.

I mean, I think you also get that sometimes where you wake up from a very deep, you know, not even in the morning.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I think as you get more protracted experience of that, sometimes the two first 200 milliseconds is there for whom knows?

The thing you're trying to get after?


SPEAKER_00:
still I still think there is but I said anyone done any qualitative work on this?

On the first few seconds?


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
What I'm just for the audience and for myself, actually, what you know, the one where you talked about the pure signature of knowing Do you recall which the name of that paper?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's freely available in the internet.

It's open minus mine net, the open mind collection.

And it's in the introduction.

introduction, you can download that.


SPEAKER_00:
What does it mean to have an open mind?

Excellent.

Lovely.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I think I have to have lunch now.


SPEAKER_00:
No, you know what we didn't even touch upon the PM IR, but I think that's for part two.

We were touching upon it then.

But it's for another time.

Because I've got a slight, I've got a slight thing to pick with the PM IR, but I'm not gonna get into it now because you've got lunch.

Thomas,

yeah, I'm going to need a nap, lunch, a bath.

I don't know what I'm going to need to do.

I really need to take a moment, but this was tremendous fun.

I mean, it was tremendous fun for me.

I really hope everyone, it's, you know, your work is just so terrific.

The depth, the lucidity tackling really, I think probably the most fundamental questions that there are.

Um,

in a astute, robust way is like, it really is something quite incredible.

So thank you so much for taking the time was very nice talking to you.

The Elephant and the Blind is out now, so people should pick that up and read it.

And as you said, it's open access.

I always like to just give people a minute at the end just to speak about anything else that they've got going on where people can find them email wise, Twitter, whatever you want.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I have an old English website at the University of Mainz, which you can find through Wikipedia page.

trying to build a new one doesn't work.

I don't know.

The most important thing for me at this stage is that I've just worked very hard for 40 years.

I'm now retired and I really don't want to work hard anymore.


SPEAKER_00:
Congratulations.

And you might want to

Is there anything you want to say about the foundation or the competition that's currently open?

Anything like that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, maybe you want to post this.

If you're interested in the MPE project, there's a website now, mpe-project.info.

And you find a lot of stuff and material there.

And there's a price.

that with British scientists like Carl and Neil in the in the jury and by 31st of September, we look for formal models for the computational phenomenology of MP of pure awareness.

So if anybody wants to win 20,000 euros, I look at that.


SPEAKER_00:
Come on, guys.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I'm still thinking.

I'm still thinking.

I got to read the book first.

Completely.

Again, so much fun.

So much gratitude.

Yeah.

Thank you so much again for me and the Institute.

It's been a real pleasure.


SPEAKER_01:
Same here.

Good luck with it all.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Thomas.

Thanks.

Great.