SPEAKER_05:
Hello and welcome, everyone.

It's July 22nd, 2024.

This is Active Inference Guest Stream 82.3, The Projective Wave Theory of Consciousness.

Robert Warden will give a presentation and we have several others to join and comment and give their insights.

So thank you everyone for joining and Robert, please begin the presentation.

And also Robert, close the YouTube on your side.

All good.


SPEAKER_02:
stream 82.3 right i've objectively unconscious it's coming through on my loudspeaker which is a problem yeah it's all good like all good


SPEAKER_03:
okay so this is a talk about the projective wave theory of consciousness and there's an already a paper about it on archive this month so you can look at the paper if you like but let me start by describing roughly the roadmap for the talk

The projective wave theory is very closely related to the projective consciousness model, PCM, and we're fortunate to have three of the authors of that model on the call today.

But I'm going to give this talk in four different parts.

The first part is talking about data, and the idea is that any theory of consciousness has to fit the data, has to fit some data in order for us to believe it.

And so the question is, what kinds of data is there about consciousness that the theory has to fit?

And I shall be arguing that the main kind of data we have is spatial consciousness.

So that's part one of the talk.

Part two, I shall talk about the projective consciousness model, PCM.

And to my mind, the big virtue of the PCM is that it does predict, account for just that, the spatial nature of consciousness.

And in that, it's a great deal.

It does a great deal better than many neural theories of consciousness.

And I should probably pause at that point after parts one and two and have discussion about the first two points there.

But before that, I think the PCM has great strengths, but I think

in common with all neural theories of consciousness it has three problems and i shall talk about what those problems are but i shall emphasize that those problems are not specific to the pcm if you buy into the classical neural model of the brain that neurons do everything then whatever your theory of consciousness i think you're going to have these problems

And so in order to get out of those problems, we have to do something that's not in the classical neural model that assumes that neurons in the brain do everything.

So we have to add something to the PCM.

And the something we have to add is there in three.

The assumption we're going to add to it is quite a big one.

It's an assumption that there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D spatial information.

In other words, neurons don't do everything.

And then part four of the talk, I shall bring those two and three together to a projective wave theory of consciousness and talk a little about firstly, how that solves the neural problems, but secondly, how it fits the data and some more general considerations about it.

So that is the route map for the talk.

So we start off.

with what are the reasons to believe some theory, whether it's theory of consciousness or anything else.

Why do we believe it?

Basically, we believe a theory because it fits data.

And there's a complexity measure here that needs to fit more data, which you can measure in bits, if you like, than the complexity of the assumptions you put into it.

If you just put in a huge number of assumptions and fit a small amount of data, that's no use.

So there's a kind of Bayesian balance between the assumptions you put into a theory and the data it fits.

And I've illustrated the Bayesian balance, a pair of scales here, and I've measured the complexity of the theory and the amount of data it tests by a so-called zip test, which simply says you describe these things in text files, you zip them up, and you see how big they are.

So established theories in science, like the theories of physics or chemistry, have a hugely positive Bayesian balance.

They have

quite few assumptions and they account for huge amounts of data.

So how can we get to that point with the theory of consciousness?

How can a theory of consciousness produce a positive Bayesian balance between its assumptions and the data it accounts for?

So the question arises, what is the data we have to test theories of consciousness?

And there's a big problem

is well known that consciousness is a private experience so there's not much public data about it but there are several kinds of data we can use such as data about levels of consciousness alertness and and being asleep and so on uh data about quality and now they are problematic because they're private phenomena but nevertheless you can two people can agree something about similarity scales of their quality like different colors being similar or different

And the form C is the shapes of things in spatial consciousness.

And I shall argue that the main manifestation of consciousness, which we have, what we're experiencing right now, is a 3D spatial model of the world around us.

And that 3D model is very detailed and quite faithful to the real world around us.

And so that has a large information content.

Going down the list, there's conscious imagination, there is consciousness of the self, there are anomalies and illusions of consciousness, and there is the hard problem, if you like, the existence of consciousness itself.

Now, I shall argue that point C, the shape of spatial consciousness, gives us much more data to test any theory than any other type of data.

So what's the testable data in spatial consciousness?

Spatial consciousness is like a 3D model of the real world around you.

That's what you're experiencing right now.

And it has a lot of the geometry of the real world, and particularly straight lines in consciousness correspond to straight lines in the real world.

And you can test this.

I won't go into the years of how.

So this agreement between our conscious experience, which is quite information rich, and the real world around us, which is obviously information risk,

gives a lot of data to test any theory of consciousness.

And I suggest roughly it gives us thousands of bits, even in a few seconds.

And I shall suggest that no other form of data about consciousness comes anywhere close to this in terms of testable information content.

So if you really want to prove your theories right, then it's got to account for the spatial form of consciousness if you're going to believe it.

And down at the right here,

I put my contention that spatial consciousness is, if you like, the elephant in the room, consciousness theory.

So we have to consider how the brain does spatial cognition.

And all animal brains pretty much do that.

They have to understand 3D's local space for a very fundamental reason, just to control their every movement, to move every movement of their limbs.

They have to understand 3D's space around them.

And there's been huge selection pressure to do this well.

And we believe that animals do it very well.

Even insects do it quite well.

And also, it appears that most of the animal brain is devoted to that.

Now, if we assume a Bayesian hypothesis about cognition, then the way animals do that is to build a maximum likelihood 3D model of local space in their brains from their sense data.

It becomes fairly natural to expect that spatial consciousness is going to be linked to this spatial model.

And the question is, is it a purely neural model, as in classical neural models of the brain?

And if it is, how does neuron firing represent 3D space?

And this is quite a difficult problem.

And really, there are very few viable solutions to it, but I shall

switch now i shall put that problem on one side and switch to the projected consciousness model pcm which has been developed by david and his collaborator since about 2017 and it's built on the free energy principle so it's based on a bayesian model of local space in the brain and for neural for its neural process model it assumes the process model of the free energy principle

And so the PCM assumes that the brain holds a 3D projective transform model of local Euclidean space.

And the key thing is that PCM then predicts that spatial consciousness is like that model.

And this is a very good prediction.

It agrees very well with data.

For instance, the trivial fact that straight lines in consciousness are straight lines in the real world.

So the PCM has a good Bayesian balance.

I should say this is very distinctive amongst many theories of consciousness.

Very few of them talk about the spatial nature of consciousness, and if they do, they probably treat it as a bit of an afterthought.

But the PCM puts it out in the front, and I think that's a very positive feature of it.

And it has a good Bayesian balance.

And it does make various other predictions, which people have talked about in the papers.

makes predictions about illusions of consciousness, and makes predictions about predictive imagination and planning actions.

Now, I don't think those are quite as significant in the Bayesian balance in the agreement with the data as the basic agreement with the form of consciousness right now, consciousness from data.

But I shall say the PCM has three difficulties.

I shall emphasize they're not difficulties of the PCM alone.

I believe they are difficulties of any neural theory of consciousness.

I'll just list them briefly here because there's going to be a slide describing them.

The first difficulty is neural selection.

How do we pick out just those neurons which cause consciousness from all the others that don't?

And the second one is neural precision and speed.

We know that our conscious model of space is a very detailed and precise one.

Can you do that with neuron firing?

I would suggest you can't.

And the third one is a complex decoding problem that, anyway, I'll come on to that.

So I'll describe these three in a minute, but the emphasis is that they are not just problems of the PCM.

They are difficulties for any neural theory of consciousness, for instance, IIT or global neural workspace theory and so on.

So what are the three difficulties?

The neural selection problem.

Most neurons in the brain are not linked to consciousness.

We know that from cortical lesions, which don't interrupt consciousness, or the cerebellum, or Bjorn Merck has written quite extensively about this.

But neuron theories of consciousness say that the activity of some neurons causes consciousness and not others.

So the question is, how are those special neurons selected?

And as far as I know, there's no sound physical basis to pick out some neurons from all the others.

So you build in some selection assumptions into your hypothesis, but those form a debit in your Bayesian balance.

So they're a debit for any neural theory of consciousness.

The second difficulty is how do neurons represent space?

Now, there are several possible ways of having neurons representing 3D space.

You can represent 2D space, all right.


SPEAKER_05:
Can you return to sharing the screen?


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, sorry.


SPEAKER_02:
I've lost sharing, have I?

All good.


SPEAKER_03:
So how do neurons represent 3D space?

There are several ways they might do it, but they all have problems of precision and speed.

For instance, there is a Bayesian computational model of how animals build 3D internal model of space from their sense data, and this is already on one of the live

the AI live streams at this YouTube address.

But that model shows that in order to build a 3D model of space, even for a small animal like a bee, you need memory storage errors to be roughly the order of 1%, as small as that.

Whereas if you model neurons accurately, properly, they don't give you this precision because in a neuron, most theoretical models of neurons are

ideal abstract neurons whose outputs are real variables of high precision, and that's shown in the top of this picture here.

Whereas actually, neurons' outputs are spike trains, which in the short time scale gives very limited precision.

For instance, in a fifth of a second possible time scale for consciousness, you may get about 10 pulses, and that gives you a precision of only 30%.

in that time scale.

So the precision you get from neural representations is very different from what you need to build a decent 3D model or what we experience in consciousness.

And this, I think, hasn't been really spotted very much because most of the neural models that you see in the literature, they don't model spike trains.

It's difficult enough to model networks of neurons.

And so they use abstract precise neurons.

So that's the second difficulty.

How can neurons store a precise and responsive fast model of 3D space like the one we experience?

Finally, can you see that change, third difficulty?

The third difficulty is what I call the hard triangle, because conscious experience, which is C in this picture here, is a faithful, hardly distorted model of the real world.

There's the real world A and there's consciousness awareness C. But what the models we have found in the brain are two-dimensional models and very distorted models.

So there are many different models and they're highly complex encoding to get from A to B. So if you want to get back from B to C, you have to do very complex decoding to undo all the complex coding that most species brains do.

And so ABC is the hard triangle.

You have to have complex decoding assumptions in any neural theory of consciousness.

And the worst thing of that maybe is that the decoding has to be species specific.

It can't be universal decoding.

So those are the three difficulties for any neural theory of consciousness, including the PCM, I believe.

So that's where we've got to.

I've covered

topics one and two of this talk.

And now I think we'll break for any discussion or contributions.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you very much, Robert.

for your presentation up to now.

I can follow it very well.

I think you point out very important issues.

I should say, and perhaps with Ken, that from the standpoint of the PCM, even though indeed we have framed it in the context of active influence and more specifically the free energy principle, we do not necessarily

It does not necessarily entails that we buy or we endorse or we believe in the current neural network models that are used in this context.

Personally, I've been a neuroscientist for many years.

I've done a lot of electrophysiology, lesion work with human patients.

Also, I worked with rodents.

lot of functional imaging and modeling and at some point in my career i thought that i did not understand the brain well enough and i stopped doing neuroscience i stopped caring quote unquote about the brain and for us what is the most important in the pcms this point is all you said is that we can capture some aspect of this phenomenology that seem essential etc etc so personally

i have given up at this point trying to devise or figure out any you know realistic neural network models and when you take just one neuron as you said robert it's a universe you just think about how

uh receptors are up or down regulated through fast gene expression all dendritic trees and their complexities and their geometry plays a role in computation i don't believe that the spiking of the of the neurons which we often call the output of the neuron are necessarily where we should be looking at and i don't know where we should be looking at i i committed a

an odd paper a long time ago in 2015, in which I kind of said, well, I explained why I had given up hope at this point about brain science to account for that, because I think we don't understand the brain.

I think there are principles we haven't figured out yet by far.

And my guess was that

A bit like by analogy with computer science, there are layers of abstraction, mechanism of virtualization that hide the detail of the hardware, which we don't understand at all.

And so, so far, it's a very open ended thing.

So to me, what matters the most about the PCM at this point is with respect to the brain, it is neutral.

We don't know.

At this point, I have absolutely no hypothesis, except very gross anatomy hypothesis or some possible details.

But you're right, that's the hard problem.

And personally, I have given up on trying to account for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, David.

I find so much to agree with there.

And so, yeah, we don't understand what's going on in the brain.

Maybe neurons are doing something much more complicated than simple spike trains, but maybe there's also this wave.

Anyway, we'll talk about that.

Carl, Ken, do you have any comments at this stage?


SPEAKER_04:
Carl you want to go or I can if you don't mind I'll just follow up with I completely agree with what David said and I will say my own sort of approach to the problem has always been sort of agnostic about the underlying realization so I've kind of started from all you know in my own thinking anyway always from the point of view of phenomenology with some kind of

you might say general acceptance of some sort of physicalism but agnostic about the details of that physicalism so agnostic about whether it's um exactly what goes on in the brain or what level and so on um i guess i've tended to

Even though I agree you can't exclude it a priori, I've tended to kind of think, well, quantum mechanical theories are probably barking up the wrong tree.

But that's just like my gut on that.

And then I... I'm sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
Personally, Ken, at this point, I'm so confused about the brain and about the physical nature of the universe that I'm even totally open that the whole thing is quantum.

I have no idea.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, as I said, it's just sort of like my gut on that, but I can't really defend it in detail for a number of reasons.

into my own ignorance um but and i would just add that uh and i i agree i think the way you presented the pcm generally was exactly right um you did mention that we do have something to say about imagination like action planning and about um anomalies and illusions and and we

We agree with you, I think, that the main set of data we aim to capture are the spatial component of consciousness and the perspectival spatial component, like what we use projective geometry to capture.

But then we do try to, as you know, try to derive certain other...

bits of parts of the relevant data from that basis.

So accounting for illusions like the moon illusion and the Ames room illusion and accounting for imaginative action planning.

And also I should add,

some data about self-awareness so we have a paper on self-awareness in this context as well um so yeah i think that's all i got so far but this is this has been very interesting so far all right thanks again carl um how can i make any comments um no


SPEAKER_00:
I'm just enjoying this as a spectator, batting for both sides.

One comment, it seems to me that we're focusing on the distinction between

principles about how the brain makes sense of its world and the process theories that attend those principles in terms of instantiation.

And there's an agnostic approach I think you can take in relation to process theories.

So I'm interested to see how much Robert's focus will be on the process theory and the actual substrates, which

I think is interesting from the point of view of actually simulating this kind of inference and also being able to reproduce it in silico in terms of creating

a kind of artificial intelligence that has this kind of competence.

So there may be a more pragmatic focus.

I was intrigued by the previous slide, this hard triangle, where you, yeah.

Just go to it there.

Yeah.

This, yeah.

I didn't quite...

resonate with this uh i think for a start the notions of encoding and decoding for people like me would should be usefully unpacked um so everything in terms of belief updating is some kind of mapping or morphism or relationship um so i'm assuming nothing is a good word for it yeah okay so the world generates sensory inputs um and then the brain um


SPEAKER_03:
represents those inputs i mean for b you just imagine you know the visual cortex with a highly distorted version of space in it all around the fovea and so on and all the other cortical maps are highly distorted representation of space somehow you have to tram all those back into an undistorted representation so you've got to decode the encoding that's gone on i see something


SPEAKER_00:
right so the conscious awareness is still part of the brain somewhere it must come from the brain somehow i think yeah yes don't we all i see so you're using encoding and decoding a sort of um uh distorting undistorting


SPEAKER_01:
like a distorting mirror you've got undistorted but i guess it relates to carl distinction between neural neural substrate and process theory because indeed if you look at the classical sort of quote-unquote 2d maps in the cerebral cortex with your retinotopy where you see a lot of

deformation but also somatosensory cortices you think about the classical you know map of the body uh uh and you are saying well if that's the way it is kind of represented quote unquote at the level of that substrate then since it is deformed and we don't experience it that way we should somehow have a process on top of that that use

some morphism to transform this deformation.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm saying our theory of consciousness has to tell us how that unscrambling distortion happens.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, but I believe that the level of observation that we are considering here, for instance, those 2D, quote unquote, 2D, because they are not really 2D, but cortical maps, retinotopic or somatotopic or topic maps, are a very, quote unquote, low level of processing, which might be very far away from what is going on.


SPEAKER_03:
There might be some other super representation somewhere, but not found yet.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and it might not be visible at the level of the anatomy.

Well, yeah, those are alternatives.


SPEAKER_03:
I agree.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So sorry, Carl, I interrupted, but I wanted to make this precision too.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, no, that clarifies it.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
But Carl, I mean, I think we can all be agnostic about certain things in the process model.

I think you and I at least are not agnostic about Bayesianism.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I would put the notion of sentience of the kind we're talking about as a process of basing belief updating, I put that at the sort of principle level, at the mechanics that doesn't commit to

an infrastructure or a realization or a process that that realizes that uh um you know that kind of principle that kind of mechanics um so i think the spatial wave theory

is really a commitment to a process theory um that could you know happily accommodate basing belief updating and its particular application the context of spatial perception and projected you know the projected consciousness model you're muted um oh yes


SPEAKER_02:
Good.

Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
So moving on.

So we've done one and two, and what we're going to do in three is add something to the PCM.

And the thing we're going to add is not a little thing.

It's the assumption, the hypothesis that neurons don't do everything, but there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D spatial information.

So that's what I'm going to talk about next.

So here's the hypothesis.

There is a wave in the brain that represents 3D space.

So it assumes there is some nearly spherical region of the brain with a diameter D, and it holds waves which couples the neurons.

And there the sphere is illustrated, and a couple of waves, wavelength lambda 2, that green wave, and wavelength lambda 1, a shorter wavelength, that red wave.

And those waves represent things in space, and they represent the red

thing R1 and the green thing R2.

So there's a kind of inverse relationship there.

The shorter the wavelength, the longer the distance to the thing that's being represented.

But obviously, if it's a spherical region, you can have waves in any direction.

So you can represent any direction and any distance up to a maximum, which is defined by the minimum wavelength.

So that wave can represent lots of different things.

And the hypothesis is that that wave acts as a working memory for space.

It's really like a hologram.

Now, one issue with that is that if you want to represent objects at very large distances away, then you get into wavelengths that are too short.

So that's why you may need a projective transform of space to pull in those long distances to be able to represent them on the brain.

on the wave.

By the way, the evidence for this wave is going to be described in another YouTube live stream, which we're making next week.

It's going to be at that address.

So how well does a wave-based spatial memory form?

It can represent approximately d of a lambda cubed independent positions, which is quite a lot.

And it can give you spatial precision, the order of lambda over d. And the point is,

that this can easily be 1% or better, which is the precision you need.

So there are significant benefits to wave storage.

It has high capacity.

You can put many objects in it.

It has high precision.

It can be fast.

And it has low spatial distortion.

It is just like a hologram.

And it's a very simple and direct representation of space.

a spoiler looking ahead to part four of the talk is that this is very much like spatial consciousness.

Question, is there any evidence for such a wave?

I think there is evidence and there's three kinds of evidence.

First two comes from brain anatomy because there are spherical regions in the brain which are very well suited to hold this wave.

In the mammals there is the thalamus and that's shown in green on the left of the picture and you see it's approximately spherical and

that is very suitably connected for holding spatial information.

It's connected to all the sense data and it's connected to all the bits of cortex that work out what to do with the sense data.

And similarly in the insect brain, there is a central body in the very center of it that is approximately spherical and it's very well preserved shape in all insect species.

So those are both pieces of evidence for a wave in the brain.

There is a place for it.

So I believe there are three lines of evidence for a wave.

One is the computational neuroscience, which I've mentioned before, that spatial cognition is a very important thing, but neural memory for it is too imprecise and too slow.

Whereas a wave storage model can possibly overcome these problems.

So that's the yellow evidence.

The evidence from the insect central body that is nearly round, very central, very well connected.

And there's evidence from the mammalian thalamus.

It's also round and well-connected, but there's also what I call a smoking gun for a wave in the thalamus that if you don't assume a wave, the anatomy of the thalamus doesn't make sense, but I won't go into that in this talk.

So together, I believe these give quite strong support for the wave hypothesis.

In fact, they give it a probability of 0.5 approximately, even if you try and weight the odds against it.

As I say, you can see the

discussion of this in another YouTube live stream we're about to make.

So then that's on from part three to part four of talk.

Assume there is a wave in the brain which holds the near-projective transform of 3D space.

And this wave is serving a very essential role to understand space, to control all movements for any animal.

And the hypothesis simply is the wave is the origin of consciousness.

that neurons have nothing to do with consciousness at all.

It comes entirely from the wave.

This solves three problems, the three problems that I outlined before.

Firstly, the neural selection problem, no selection problem because neurons have nothing to do with consciousness.

The precision and speed problem, the wave has sufficient precision and speed to do it.

And the decoding problem, the coding in the wave is just a Fourier transform.

So it's a very simple encoding

And there's a very simple decoding to give you back conscious experience.

So it has solved those three problems of neural theories.

But the main thing is that spatial thought, like the PCM, preserving the merit of the PCM, the spatial form of consciousness agrees very well with our conscious experience.

It has to be projected because we need the projected transform to pull in objects from very large distances

to represent them by a minimum wavelength.

So in summary, the projective wave theory has a positive Bayesian balance.

It doesn't have any nasties about it, and it agrees very well with the main source of data about consciousness.

So just some aspects of this theory.

What is the physical nature of the wave?

A big objection might be we've never seen the wave, because I believe

It's probably not an electromagnetic wave or an electromagnetic field.

And the main reason I believe that is that electromagnetic fields on their own don't store information for the time periods we need to store information.

And now electromagnetic fields might be part of the answer, but I think they're not the whole answer.

And the big question then is why have we not detected this wave in the brain if it's been there all these years?

I think the reason for that is if there is a wave representing space,

We would expect it to evolve to have very low intensity, so its energy consumption is very small.

And having that low intensity, we simply haven't known how to look for it.

Now, coming to quantum possibilities, the wave might be a coherent quantum excitation, and there's increasing evidence that quantum effects do have a role in biology.

And it might even be a boson sun condensate, a BEC.

Now, those examples of those are superconductors and superfluids.

They're a very rare state in nature.

But the key thing about a BEC is a superconductor can hold information for unlimited time.

So it would be good for memory.

And they're a very rare and distinctive state of matter.

And so if you assume that consciousness comes from them, you don't get into a trap of panpsychism.

Or it might not be a quantum effect, because I think that this question is entirely open.

So we'll set that on one side, and that's future exploration.

There's an issue about the evolution of consciousness.

We know that our consciousness is like the real world.

It's very like the real world.

And the question is, why is this?

And you think, well, it must have evolved that way, because there's some need for it to be like the real world.

But in neural theories, there's a problem.

Because neural computation in the brain, the classical neural model, is classical dynamics, not quantum physics, and is local.

And so consciousness is a non-physical, non-local effect, and they don't have any effect on neurons firing.

So the result is that consciousness in a neural theory has no causal effect on fitness.

That means there's no selection pressure on it to make it the way it is.

In a neural theory of consciousness, we're driven to this slightly awkward conclusion that the special form of consciousness that we have is just a bit of an accident.

That seems very unlikely.

Whereas in the projective wave theory, there is a good evolutionary reason for consciousness being like it is.

That is that 3D spatial cognition is very important

Wave is an essential part of it, so the wave has been shaped by evolution, and it's been shaped to be just like the real world, because that's the best way of controlling movement.

So consciousness then is determined by the wave, and that means consciousness has evolved to be like the real world.

So the wave theory solves another problem there.

Finally, the unity of consciousness.

You may ask this question occasionally.

Why do I only have one consciousness and not several parallel consciousnesses?

And this also is something of a difficulty in neural theories because we have plenty of neurons in the brain to have many parallel consciousnesses.

And brains can do some things in massive parallelism.

And if we had multiple parallel consciousness, it might be useful, for instance, for parallel planning of action to see which one worked.

That's a difficulty for neural theories.

The wave theory doesn't have this difficulty because it accounts for the unity of consciousness.

There's only one wave in the brain.

That is the source of consciousness.

So there can only be one consciousness.

I think I'm onto the last slide now, pretty much the last slide.

If this theory is taken seriously, it makes consciousness into a scientific problem rather than a philosophical problem.

Because a wave in the brain,

If a wave in the brain is the key to understanding consciousness, well, if there's no wave, then this theory is wrong.

Get about it.

If there is a wave, I think there are very strong reasons to link it to consciousness because it has such a good fit to consciousness.

So whether or not the wave exists, that's a scientific question.

It's not a question for philosophy.

And I think there's a good prospect of answering it in the next 10 years.

So in 10 years' time, either this theory will be the only theory of consciousness,

or it will be wrong and forgotten.

I think that's a virtue in a theory.

So, finally, last slide on the hard problem, David Chalmers' hard problem.

The projected wave theory doesn't solve that problem.

What I'd say about that is all science has hard problems.

There's the hard problem of consciousness.

Why is consciousness linked to matter?

There are hard problems in physics, like what is space-time, or what is the most fundamental particle?

Or the hard problem of cosmology, why is there a universe?

So hard problems just don't have an answer.

Scientists, we're like children, keeping asking why.

Say, why this?

Why that?

And we can go on asking why for as long as we like.

So, for instance, for fundamental particles, we thought there was matter.

We thought there were atoms.

We got to protons.

We got to quarks.

And we keep going on, and we'll never get the final answer.

But we still do science.

So I'm not too worried about the hard problem, consciousness.

So that is all.

And I've just laid out a few questions one might want to discuss in the remaining time.


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe you could share your slide again so we can see the question if you have them on the slide.


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry, is it not sharing now?


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, I see the slide still.

Yeah, so you can leave it.

Maybe check your view, David.

And then you can leave that up and we can have a panel discussion.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, thanks a lot.

Those who are here, Ken and Carl and David, please feel free to comment.

And also people will write some questions in the chat and I'll read one in if you pause.

But anyone here who'd like to give a reflection or any comments, that would be awesome.

Could I go ahead?


SPEAKER_04:
Can you hear me?

Yeah.

So, uh, if, if I may, I, I, I basically agree with what you say about the hard pro just to take the very last thing that you mentioned about the hard problem.

And this is why earlier on, when you said that, um, you had kind of a list of sort of, um, you know, when you're I, the idea of the Bayesian balance for theories of consciousness, and you mentioned the existence of consciousness as itself, something that might be a problem for all

neuronal theories of consciousness i think you did that and on the slide too yeah yeah so i i agree i think it's a problem for any theory of consciousness even the kind of um more metaphysical theories that people who reflect like chalmers and others panpsychists who reflect on the hard problem a certain way end up with you can actually raise the same set of questions for them

so there's really no progress there in my opinion so in other words if you take the hard problem as a kind of indication that um well consciousness couldn't be physical or or either that or the physical world itself must just be consciousness which is kind of the two directions they they go there i think that's kind of misguided i mean we

we have to sort of accept that our ability to penetrate cognitively

a priori into the nature of the cosmos is is limited so our the best we can do is make models and you know based on the phenomenology and try to arrive at a model that would give us some kind of neural or physical to speak more broadly physical

Testable, you know hypothesis hypotheses we can test about the physical world what we think realizes consciousness and it seems to me like that's exactly what you're doing and that's What I would think is right too, but I did want to ask you when you say that No neurons are linked to consciousness in your own model Do you mean

Maybe I just don't understand exactly.


SPEAKER_03:
They're not linked directly to the consciousness.


SPEAKER_04:
But they're somehow involved in the realization of the wave.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, they are.

Absolutely.

They're controlling the wave.

They're setting up the wave.

They're all in the cortex.

They're using sense data to fix the wave.

And it's the wave that makes consciousness.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

And on the issue of unity, well, so suppose we identify this type of wave.

I mean, it's at least, you know, conceivable that we would find multiple such waves.

Is it conceivable?


SPEAKER_03:
I think the evidence in the thalamus and the central body is one wave.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
And I think one wave is what you need to understand one space around you.


SPEAKER_04:
okay so but if you found multiple such waves oh yeah absolutely that would be an issue yeah okay i mean would you conclude that there must be multiple consciousnesses then in a single brain or would you would you think that the theory is wrong no i would have a selection problem just like neuron theories have a selection problem selecting neurons i'd have a problem selecting which wave was conscious i see

rather than conclude that there are multiple you want to avoid that and my experience is i don't have multiple consciences yes right but that might just be because only one of them gets to report yeah absolutely you know like like the way they you know i know it's debatable but the way they um

often interpreted the split-brain cases coming out of... Yeah, good question, good question.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, I say one wave, but we have two thalami, so the assumption there is that those waves are linked, and perhaps in split-brain they don't get linked.


SPEAKER_02:
Hmm, okay.


SPEAKER_03:
I think two thalami have one wave in them, but that's a detail.


SPEAKER_04:
I see.

And then when it comes to the kind of wave, like...

so you you don't think it's an electromagnetic wave uh you you you think it might be a bose einstein condenser that's that's a hypothesis i think that karen's uh smith once uh it's been around for some years yeah alexander karen smith in a and the book uh that's the yeah not not the book on the origin the famous book on the origin of life but he wrote a book on uh consciousness back in the 90s i think um yeah there was michael lockwood as well in the 80s i think

It's a long history.

Okay.

So how when you say that you think we'll be able to probe this within the next ten years, I mean, could you sort of sketch how that might go, how we might be?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I mean, this is probing the idea of the wave.

As I say, I think that there's three pieces of evidence.

There's neural models that you can't build decent neural models.

There is the thalamus, and there is the insect central body.

I think we can go further on each one of those.

We can test them.

We can test the thalamus ideas much better using connectome data.

We can test the central body using connectome data, and we can test the computational models by just trying to build them and see if we're getting it.

so there is science to be done to falsify this hypothesis and it may succeed in falsifying it okay but how would you measure uh such condensate i mean if you want to be able to demonstrate the existence ideally you'd like to actually directly detect it i i think it's a bit like when pauli in the 1930s

predicted the neutrino, he thought it was absolutely impossible to detect neutrinos, and it took 25 years to find it.

And I think it'll take a long time to really find this wave in the brain, because it's very low intensity, probably, and because we just don't know how to look for it.

And I think we have to do the biophysics until we have a convincing case for, ah, it's this kind of wave, and then we can build a detector.

But until then,

I think we won't detect it like neutrino or like dark matter, similar thing predicted theoretically years ago, but still not detected.


SPEAKER_05:
I'll read a question from the live chat.

Okay.

andrea val wrote thanks for sharing such interesting ideas i wonder how the pcm or 3d model can explain or deal with the un slash consciousness of emotions so where is affect and such in this kind of spatialized model yeah so you want to do in the pcm first david


SPEAKER_01:
If it's okay, Robert, maybe you have read some of our recent work on that, but I have a specific answer to that question.

Yeah, you go first.

Yeah, sorry about that.

Well, one thing that we realized working with that particular geometry is it transforms information in the sense of information in space.

You can think about distribution in space, for instance, that are going to be changed by projective transformation in a manner that affects directly entropy.

So if something is very far,

And you have some uncertainty about the localization of these things.

So there is a probability function that represents that uncertainty about the localization of that thing.

And there is only one thing in your field of consciousness to simplify the problem.

Then the entropy of the whole space, if you consider the whole 3D space and some scalar on it that would represent probabilities, is very small.

Whereas when you get closer, for instance, by imagination, so projective transformation that anticipate action, you get the object closer and you transform also the information, the variance, if you wish, of your distribution, so it becomes broader.

So the entropy increases, actually, as an effect of projective transformation on the distribution of information.

So how does that relate to emotion?

What we realized is that

it can account for some drives that are related to exploration or exploratory behavior or search behavior to reduce uncertainty or maximize information.

And that just does that.

So basically the projective transformation

by in virtue of making probabilities function in space change their shape as a function of perspective taking if you wish until or induce a drive to approach or avoid things or in in this context to approach

to approach behavior either through imagination or through actual behavior, because that will maximize information by increasing entropy of the object and you have more details.

So that's something that we wrote a paper that is currently under review in biological cybernetics about that with Grégoire Sergent-Pertuis as first author, who is a bright mathematician.

and we can do a demonstration and actually derive theorems about that and also simulations that show interesting behaviors that depend on projective parameters that will show that the behavior of the agent depending on the parameter will be more focused so they will tend to always approach one object because they are driven by this anticipation of increasing information through projective transformation

but with other parameters or values of the parameters.

On the contrary, they start now oscillating between objects.

They start losing focus as if they were kind of ADHD.

So there is a deep link between, let's say,

the evaluation of space the appraisal of space the drives that are that unfold from this information and the behaviors that you have for instance approaching and that geometry that very geometry we are talking about yield that type of thing so here we are talking about what is typically described as epistemic emotion basically curiosity so

we have natural curiosity and part of it that drives behaviors is a result of the very geometry that represent information in a praise according to that theory we i cannot enter into the detail on that but you can also look on papers that we wrote in

what was that 2022 in the journal of theoretical biology in which we use little robots to demonstrate adaptive and maladaptive behaviors with principles also derived from the geometry and the free energy principle or something equivalent to get a wealth of

affective behavior of approach avoidance, but also social cognition.

We can kind of simulate social anxiety.

We obtain joint attention behavior as a result of mutual perspective taking.

and there are a lot of things we could account that we can use in this model in this framework to account for emotion there is a lot of work ahead but we believe that there is and we have good reason to believe there is a deep link between space and emotion that's actually called aesthetics that consciousness is a form of aesthetics where space and emotion are untangled and that we can


SPEAKER_03:
fairly well account for many phenomena that relate to emotion and behavior through this model but that's sorry for the long talk that's great shall i get my my answer is very much along the same lines that emotion and space are deeply linked um in the wave model i mean the project

The model of space contains all of space, the external space and the internal space of the body.

And an important part of emotions is feelings in the body, and they are part of your conscious awareness, part of the wave model or projection model, just like the others.

And so basically, the PW theory, and I think the PCM says

All consciousness is spatial.

We have qualia, but they exist in space.

You hear words, you experience colors, you experience all of those, and you experience feelings, all of them in space.

So if you look at all the components of emotion, human emotion, for instance, the words we say to ourselves and the feelings we have in our bodies,

They are all represented in that conscious space.

So human emotion is a complex story, which perhaps we don't want to go into, but basically it comes down to the way we experience it is in that model of space.


SPEAKER_01:
and if i may i would have that if you take the standpoint of pure phenomenology and you ask yourself when i experience an emotion for instance deep anxiety or fear something very intense that is very salient you can ask yourself how much of that phenomenology of that experience is actually

quote-unquote reducible to some spatial experience things for instance you know the experience of the body with the heart that starts pounding in your chest and you feel it stronger your lungs that change their you know you breathe faster for instance and you can feel that movement in your body and all of that is spatial what you feel in your gut or your intestine get kind of

stretch or whatever you, we have metaphors, but actually a lot of the details of the phenomenology of emotion of feelings, let's say, uh, I believe is actually spatial, but it's overlooked.

People don't think about it, but in particular about bodily awareness, there is a lot of spatial stuff going on here.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I agree.

Um, um, mindful meditation talk a lot about space and talk a lot about the body.

I think they.

put emotion in the right place.


SPEAKER_05:
Carl or Ken want to add anything or I can look for another question in the live chat.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I have one question.

So, I mean, your current hypothesis is that this wave is realized in the thalamus.

Is that right?

That's right, yeah.

Okay, so that's sort of, would, you know, there's this kind of debate about whether or not consciousness is cortical or...

or subcortical, so this would definitely be on the subcortical.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of sense in the global workspace theory, and they were talking originally about a workspace involving the thalamus and the cortex.

I think the consciousness really comes from the thalamus integrating all that spatial information.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah so it is down so when the this follow-up uh but yeah that's fine with me uh frankly but the follow-up question is um well it's not exactly a follow-up to that it's more a general question about your way of thinking about it how

I mean, I know maybe you can't really answer this until we have a more specific hypothesis about exactly what kind of wave it is, but could you say something generally about how the wave integrates with, or what's the right way to put it, recruits the kind of computational apparatus of the brain so that you end up, you decide to

uh, Oh, I'm going to reach out, you know, yay far and grab this, this bottle.

How does the, um,


SPEAKER_03:
how does you know computationally speaking how does the wave integrate yeah i think that's a very good question and could have a very long answer but basically um the wave integrates information from all the sensitive so from your hands from your ears from your eyes all that information goes through the cortex and cortex decides where it's coming from and

broadcasts signals back to the thalamus, and the thalamus wave integrates all those signals together to produce the Bayesian best model of what's happening at this moment based on touch, proprioception, hearing, sound, hearing, vision, and so on.

So the computation, it's an integration of many sources of information, possibly in a cycle between the thalamus and the cortex.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, but if you need to

you know, for example, program and action.

So you've, that's kind of the, you got your sensory, the integration of all your sensory information.

Now you need to program an action.

How do, and maybe this is just my ignorance.

How do waves, how can waves be used

in a way to generate programming of an action and then give it back to your neurons?


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, I've only got beginnings of answers to that, but basically a wave is very good for representing 3D geometry and for calculating displacements.

I know where my hand is.

I know my coffee cup is.

So the wave helped me calculate the displacement, which way I have to move my hand to pick up the coffee cup.

So it's that kind of spatial calculation that the wave is always helping us do just to move our limbs.


SPEAKER_01:
I have a follow up question on that, if I may.

You can.

Do you mind?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, no, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
You invoked earlier Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform, so at least 3D Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform in order to do the encoding and decoding to move from the wave to the neural substrate back and forth.

Of course, as you know, there is a limit in resolution

when you do a fourier transform uh you have the uncertainty principle uh that rules the in limits resolution that you we can have of course it depends on the number of samples i mean there are a lot of arithmetics behind it that you know you can be more more and more precise as you have more and more bits of encoding if you wish um so uh you you say that you know neural classical neural theory is like

build upon substrate that lack enough precision in spatial resolution, for instance, to account for our experience.

Would you think that in the context of a wave theory, the type of uncertainty principle that are attached to it could cause a problem of resolution too, or that it's the granularity?


SPEAKER_03:
There is a problem, yeah.

There is a problem in resolution.

I alluded to it in the slides.

That is that if you've got a minimum wavelength lambda and a diameter of the sphere d, the maximum precision is lambda over d. And that can't be infinite precision.

So that's the uncertainty principle.

But the idea of the Fourier transform is not that something in the brain does a Fourier transform.

It is the fundamental bridging law for consciousness does the Fourier transform.

It says that consciousness is a Fourier transform of the wave, full stop.

And Fourier transform is there in fundamental laws of nature, like quantum mechanics, for instance.

So it's saying that this is a fundamental law of nature, just like quantum mechanics says momentum is a Fourier transform position.

So the bridging law for consciousness says the form of consciousness is a Fourier transform of the wave.


SPEAKER_05:
I'll make a short comment, or Carl, do you want to?


SPEAKER_02:
After you.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Yeah, just so thank you for the presentation.

And it's really interesting on many levels.

First, you and the paper goes into more detail on this.

You lay out what your priors are and kind of the dependency structure to actually reach at least an estimate of probabilities, which is really interesting.

It gives a lot of opportunities for people to dig in.

and say yeah i think that's ten percent likely or no it's zero this is not possible and kind of close off a branch of inquiry um and also this discussion here about uh the algorithmic and the substrate realization interaction with the substrate um and even this poly computation idea of of the observer's model of what's happening in a process and kind of like the dark matter there like the observer might suggest that there's a cryptographic process

though they couldn't decode it.

And then that would have an entropy distribution that wouldn't be distinguishable in the absence of the decryption from a noise, but it would be like still a hypothesis kept alive.

And you could say, I think it's a 1% chance of this being the case.

One thought is how high precision really is the spatial generative model in that there could be visual upscaling

We know there's attention play to make the periphery look sharp and have color vision.

And so it's possible that, especially for like distant objects, small objects, that they could be bundled

and just seen as an assembly, as a larger object, if they're touching like the car body and the wheel.

And then the same way that in the periphery, color and visual attention seem to give this extreme, like, wow, that's like exactly this angle if you were to go over there with a protractor.

But that could be, as we're sort of seeing with diffusion and generative AI models, that could be quite a low resolution structural

inference followed by a just compatible visual realization that that also and then just last comment really interesting to explore how does evolution and intergenerational change shape the substrate that the sense data wash over so that non-stationary stable states whether they're rate encoding of neuron whether glial electro


SPEAKER_03:
and all these other even potentially more exotic options how are those stabilized wow you you i mean those are real questions to investigate particularly the precision of our conscious experience and how much is quotes and illusion

But I personally think that if you look at something which is a straight line, you experience it as a straight line with some kind of precision that's of the order of 1%.

A deviation of 1% from a straight line would show.

And so that's a lower bound on the precision of your model.

But again, there can be lots of discussion about this.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, interesting.

Karl, any thoughts?


SPEAKER_00:
Just a few sort of practical and specific questions.

So the nature of this wave, if I wanted to model it, I mean, are we talking about a standing wave?

Are we talking about a soliton?

Are we talking about spherical harmonics on a

on the surface of the um the thalamus are we talking about you know what what kind of basis set might i might might i use for for this kind of wave even before asking questions about what what the wave amplitude actually means what so what what's the functional methodical form of this way uh very good questions whether it's a standing wave or a moving wave


SPEAKER_03:
I don't know, the nice thing about a Bose-Einstein condensate is that it acts like a

long-lived quantum mechanical wave function in other words it has phase which can be detected and it preserves phase for long times and the wave might have to preserve phase in order to represent positions if you have a standing wave like cos theta in some direction in this sphere then there's an ambiguity it represents plus

a direction and the minus direction and what happens to the minus direction so i would rather have phase in the wave like a Bose-Einstein condensate but they're very deep questions and i don't know the answers i mean we could start modeling and see what happens just propose some answers basically you just need a spherical volume that holds a wave excitation with a certain maximum wave vector

And we could try out standing waves, moving waves and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
What would differentiate a condensate from a formulation in terms of a time dependent scrolling a wave equation?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think your time-dependent Schrodinger wave, as everybody knows, the problem with quantum in the brain is that decoherence smashes it in 10 to the minus 20 seconds.

But that doesn't happen to a Bose-Einstein condensate.

A Bose-Einstein condensate is a long-lived quantum state.

And so that's an ordinary Schrodinger equation.

Decoherence is going to smash you in no time at all, unless you have some incredibly clever insulation like in a quantum computer.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

I mean, lifting from the microscopic to the macroscopic, I mean, that would suggest that you need very, very low temperatures, thermodynamically speaking.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, nobody's observed a B, C at room temperature yet, but we've got close.

And the idea is that nature might be cleverer than we are.


SPEAKER_05:
one angle perhaps from the quantum fep from from carl and chris fields and others is and so what i heard in the quant in the basis set question carl was um this brain region that hosts the functionality or a core aspect of the functionality like one option is it is like the the the wave is represented inside of that sphere like

just there's probably multiple ways even that could happen but it's like a little reconstruction wave but symbolized another option would be like a holograph the representation of space is encoded on the interface of that region with other regions

And so that kind of surface is maintained and stabilized and has information flowing through it.

And then there wouldn't necessarily be something in the middle, but it'd be more like a ripple on a surface, which was the basis set question.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, that is very interesting because in the thalamus, there is the thalamic reticular nucleus, TRN, which is a thin skin around the surface of the thalamus.

And you could just say that is holding the surface wave.

And the wave is projected inside from the surface.


SPEAKER_00:
It would be useful to engage Chris Fields here.

There are two very distinct uses of the word holographic here.

You could be referring to the holographic principle.

Yeah.

whereby all the information on the bulk, on the inside, say, of the thalamus was on the surface, on the reticular nucleus of the thalamus, for example, or just on the surface, in one sense.

And that is what the rest of the brain sees and possibly consciousness sees.

But that's a very different use of the notion of a holographic projection using constructive and destructive interference to encode things.

So then you're absolutely right.

My question was really searching, you know, to distinguish.

Are we talking about a wave function?

in the thalamus are we talking about application of the holographic principle to the classical information on the surface of some bulk that was the thalamus and you could then argue if you if you wanted to that the bulk which can never be observed from the outside unless you are the thalamus you never know what's happening on the inside you could only observe what's what's on the surface

that would be a different notion of a wave theory that would certainly be consistent with quantum information theory and also consistent with Crisfield's inner screen hypothesis that could be spatialised and endowed with, in virtue of the fact that on the holographic screen itself, on the surface,

there can only be classical information and that information can now be cast in terms of classical Bayesian inference.

But it also relates to, I repeat, to Crisfield's inner screen hypothesis, which is

know if you like taking quantum information theoretic principles uh and trying to apply them to uh to consciousness that eludes the problem of um the of applying

quantum mechanics that is only relevant at the very small scale or for very precise or low temperature systems.

If you want to apply that kind of maths to macroscopic phenomena, then you have to apply it in a scale invariant context.

And I think quantum information theory would certainly do that.

So yes, I was exactly sort of trying to probe, are we, is PW,

the Bose-Einstein condensate variant or alternative version of the projective wave.

is that committed to quantum mechanics, or is it really an expression of condensate-like dynamics in the context of quantum information theory?

And if it is, does it live on a holographic screen, or does it live in the bulk?

And if it lives in the bulk, what are these wave functions over?

So these are the practical questions I was trying to get at.


SPEAKER_03:
Very interesting questions, and it's all to play for.

I have an open mind about them, but my feeling is that the BEC is a way of getting past this decoherence argument from Tegmark and others that neurons have to be classical.

And the BEC, it does work very well as a memory.

That's the practical point of it.

Working memory, I think, is what you need for space.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Perhaps each can give a last round of thought, like, where do they feel this takes them?

Or what are they looking forward to?

And Ken, then David, and then Carl, then Robert.


SPEAKER_04:
i yeah i don't have anything new dad just that i find this really interesting and i remember um reading uh karen smith's book kind of arguing that the bows and bows einstein condensates might be might be important for understanding consciousness and thinking that among the quantum mechanical hypotheses i like that one the best so

But as I said earlier, I just sort of have this kind of bias, but I'm totally willing to be talked out of it.

And yeah, the reason I mean, I don't want to go into the details, but it I think Karen Smith's concern was about the unity of consciousness primarily and also kind of made the case that, yeah, as you were suggesting that maybe maybe

as you put it, nature is cleverer than we are, and there's some way to realize that Bose-Einstein condense it in the brain without the decoherence issue.

But anyway, just to say this is all very, very fascinating to me, and I am happy to continue the discussion next week, right?

Isn't it next week?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Ken.

And for my part, yes, also looking forward to continuations of the discussion.

My direction of questioning will be something on the lines that I think both Kenneth and David alluded to, which is the link between spatial waves in the brain and the projective geometry

that they speak to and the information geometry that underwrites um belief updating and the basic mechanics that that um inherit from from the free energy principle uh be it classical mechanics classical information processing or um the you know looking at um

using quantum information theory to you know to read um read belief updating i'm not sure i'm going to get any answers but that's what i'd be interested in hearing more about and the process if we haven't talked about mortal computation yet so we need to talk about mortal computation oh yes david any last thoughts well this sort of a


SPEAKER_01:
of a man who is 50 now and feels that the more he learns, the less he knows.

This was predicted in all the books I had read in my youth.

And so I'm all open to that complex universe.

I certainly believe that nature is cleverer than I am, for sure.

And I find that fascinating.

I like the rationale.

It's not like

You know, there is a lot of stuff about quantum mechanics and the brain and consciousness that to me has always sounded wishy-washy, if not completely wacko.

But I came back a bit from that.

I had a lot of, like Ken, priors, negative priors about it.

I remember once in Tucson, Arizona at the famous conference about the science of consciousness.

There were this bunch of guys who called themselves, they were German, the Quantum Consciousness Academy and they were all dressed in black and they are all, you know, headset and microphone like that and they were like,

speaking nonsense like a cult.

But I found that very fascinating because I used to like this conference back in the day when it was very psychedelic.

And I come back to that because my ignorance

I'm becoming aware more and more of my own ignorance.

I said, well, why not?

And definitely, I think that maybe Carl can try to do that.

If we could get Chris Field in the next call, he would certainly be among us, the most competent.

I tried to get Grégoire Sergent-Pertuis to the call, but he was not available.

He's a very bright mathematician, and he mastered quantum mechanics like if it was, you know, I don't know.

It's nothing for him.

or daniel benka would be the best also with gregoire but i'm afraid i won't be able to have them here but i think it would be very useful to have some people like that who definitely know more than me about those things and chris might be interested to join i don't know but looking forward to the next uh to the next discussion one correction they were swiss david they were they weren't they weren't they weren't they weren't


SPEAKER_04:
what they were Swiss they were Swiss black I think yes they kind of look like people from the Matrix like oh they were Swiss they were not German they were Swiss yeah and they had a they had a leader they were always in contact with super hot wow okay


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, please, Robert, and we'll contact Chris, but go for the last one.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you for all your contributions.

That's been really fascinating.

I think the virtue of this theory is that it is falsifiable.

In other words, if there's no wave in the brain, forget it.

This theory is wrong.

And that's exactly the question we're going to be looking at next week.

I look forward to having your contributions.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Thank you all.

See you at 16 UTC on July 29th.

Okay.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Bye.