## 7cJ8dmO3qlY

SPEAKER_00:
all right hello and welcome everyone this is the active inference live stream i am daniel friedman and this is the active inference live stream 007.0

Welcome to Team Calm.

Team Calm is an experiment in online team communication learning and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active.

You can find us at ActiveInference at gmail.com, via our public Keybase team, or on YouTube.

This is a recorded and archived live stream.

Please provide us feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

Video etiquette for live streams is that you want to mute.

If there's any sound in your background, raise your hand if you want to speak so you can be added to the stack.

Use respectful speech, etc.

Today in Act ImpStream 7.0,

I am going to try to set the context for 7.1 and 7.2, which is going to be a discussion of the paper Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems by Ramsted et al.

in Physics of Life Reviews.

This video, as the other .0s are, is just an introduction to some context, it's not a review or a final word.

The goal is to provide context for the ideas, philosophical threads, and vocabulary of that Ramsted et al.

paper, go through some of their points as well.

And the punchline is that ecosystems are multi-scale systems with implications for how we study ecological organization.

And the sections of 7.0 will be as follows.

First, we'll go through the keywords and talk about some of the publication context, go through the goals of the paper, the abstract of the paper, and a roadmap of the sections, go through some key quotations, and then talk a little bit about ergodic systems, some critiques of the free energy principle, the simulations and historiosity and how that influences how we think about ecosystems, and also the cog ergo sum.

Then in 7.1 and 7.2, we're going to discuss this paper with whoever wants to participate.

So you can also save and submit your questions or get in touch with us if you want to participate.

also and thanks for the suggestion to uh feedback was to how to relate this to previous discussions so if you want previous discussions to listen to that relate to this conversation one would be active in stream two is the free energy principle a formal theory of semantics because this

discussion and paper was asking, can we use the FEP to study meaningful systems?

So both the ones that matter for us, the meaningful systems for us, but then also the meaning making the auto poetic systems.

Another discussion was 5.0 and the 5.1 and 2 discussions, which are the context for this question about internalism and externalism, which is a question about how and where action and perception occur.

Are they internal to an organism or do they occur in this space that's mediated between the external environment and the internal environment?

And then also this most recent 6.0 and following discussions where we talked about tail of two densities, active inferences and active inference, because there we talked about how inactive or ecological approaches are broadly linked with computational approaches.

Like does one have precedence over the other?

All right, so there's a lot going on in this variational ecology paper.

So we're gonna start here with the keywords.

So there'll be pages for each of these, but here's the keywords that were on the paper.

Niche construction.

So niche construction is when some system of interest, like an organism, over developmental or ecological or evolutionary timescales, modifies its environment.

It's pretty broad and we'll talk more about it in a bit.

variational ecology.

They're using variational in a sense here to mean just broadly multi-scale and then akin to the processes of variational Bayesian methods, which are kind of like general multi-scale methods.

So they're thinking about ecology from a multi-scale perspective with a sort of flexible computationalist aspect as we've seen from those previous discussions.

Evolutionary systems theory is basically just evolutionary biology.

Probably some people prefer evolutionary biology or evolutionary systems theory.

Not exactly sure they're pretty equivalent.

Physics of the mind, we'll have a slide to discuss because there's a few different senses of what physics of the mind entails.

Free energy principle, of course, one of the keywords here, because that's sort of the big framework or the paradigm that everything is being worked on or responded to under.

And then variational neuroethology, which we'll talk about more soon, but variational again here is just meaning multi-scale.

Ethology, no, it's not Ethereum, it's actually behavior.

and neuro just meaning the neurophysiological component so this is kind of like neuro behavior and thinking about the the cause and effect between the neurophysiological parameters whether they're neural or hormonal and the behavioral outcomes and the collective behavioral outcomes multi-scale all right so let's turn to ecology first here's a quote from the paper they wrote

In summary, the niche transcribes regularities that pertain to group behavior.

They are transcribed in the physical layout of the niche through the active and perceptual dynamics of the agent, which coincides with perceptual and active dynamics of the niche.

The same dynamics entail the landscape of action possibilities, which are affordances,

which maintain the structural integrity of the agent needs system.

These dynamics resolve the free energy gradients that are induced by the physical structures of organisms in their niche and their history of dense interaction and dynamic coupling.

In this sense, the robustness of patterns of shared intentionality and an action of shared meaning is inherited from the robustness of niche and vice versa.

So to kind of ground this in some other

more non-fep ecology here's a 2014 paper by deborah gordon and here's two figures that illustrate this point that i'll make which is that there's going to be sort of this hand in glove relationship between the dynamics of the ecosystem and the

resulting collective behavioral and quote individual behavioral algorithms that exist and first off the variational approach or just the multi-scale approach means that it's kind of collective behavior all the way down like inside of that ant on the bottom right there's also a collective of neurons or you know it's just going to be that type of a interactions of different scales all the way down that's sort of the variational realization

is that it's all going to have to be at least coarse grained at the high and the low end, if not tried to be modeled explicitly.

But we can at least...

draw a border of analysis around an ant and track it as something that we can identify as a functional component of the system.

And so in the two figures, there's two examples of axes of ecosystem variability.

So on the right side, figure one, it's patchiness in space and time.

So in A, where the resource is distributed really evenly across space, then there wouldn't be any type of mass recruitment pheromone because there'd be no reason to bring an ant to where you just got that one little blip.

Whereas under ecological regime B, it would make sense to have something like a recruitment regime because it could be an exploitable resource that might be patchy in space and time.

uh and you might see ants that could switch different strategies however one ant species may specialize on one or the other in figure two it's an example of a high versus low operating cost environment so when operating costs are high things are tending to be off until they're stimulated on like a fever because operating costs of a fever are high whereas when operating costs are low like for example the maintenance of uh leaf cutter ants under certain conditions in the rainforest

to maintain territory versus the bioenergetics of moving let's just say under one example that is often brought up here until there's a disruption there's a continuation of function so this is sort of a similar realization to what is described in the paper that there's this statistical co-variation between the collective behavioral algorithms and the niche regularity

Here is another paper by Professor Gordon in 2011 called The Fusion of Behavioral Ecology and Ecology.

So on the left are just a bunch of animals, a bunch of things that people have studied.

And then ethology, again, is just kind of a funny word that is used by some behavioral biologists, but not all.

But this is kind of an example of the different range of things that people have worked on in that area specifically.

One cool quote from this paper was, until someone discovers a fossil record for behavior, we can in practice only investigate what are the ecological consequences of a trait now.

That is the evolutionary ecology of behavior.

So we can sometimes see, for example, this, you know, an amber that traps one insect capturing another one.

We can say, okay, this pickup move may have happened one time or it may have been frequent.

but all we have from a behavioral observational perspective are actually the live realizations of today.

And so the implications are that because the local rules of engagement in ecology can change, it appears that selection shifts in space and time.

So we know that selection pressures can go in one direction or have a certain intensity on one trait and then change in a different year or in different time.

This is why a behavioral ecologist who studies the ecology of a trait in one time and place will find the outcomes different than another.

The main project of evolutionary ecology is to understand when and why that happens.

The effects of local conditions on species interactions create different ecological pressures in different places.

This produces the spatial mosaic of diversity.

And then another quote there was, context dependence requires us to redefine the project of relating behavior and fitness.

It is not realistic to hope to find any reason why any trait would always be adaptive.

Any trait, behavioral or otherwise, is deeply linked to others genetically, developmentally, and functionally.

And if so, if no trait, so no trait has ecological impact independently of all others.

Moreover, even if we can ascertain what variation in certain behavior is associated with variation in reproductive success, changing conditions will still shift around that relation.

So that's non-stable or non-stationary fitness landscapes.

Adaptive landscapes are full of small bumps, and the behavior itself modifies the landscape.

If we watch long and carefully enough, we will see different consequences for reproductive success of the same behavior.

The project then is to learn how conditions determine the ways that behavior contributes to variation in reproductive success.

So behavioral ecology, already there's the realization that it's important to think about this interplay between features of the organism as a ethological unit, neurobehavioral unit, but also at the ecological and the population scale and the evolutionary scale.

A little bit more specific about niche construction, drawing a figure from this paper by Kendall et al.

Niche construction is a pretty broad term, and a lot of outcomes and processes can be placed under this framework.

It has to do with the way that organisms modify their niche, and this is almost a

always going to be the case when you have conspecifics in individuals of the same species, because almost by definition, they're going to be taking up an overlapping set of the canopy elevation in a rainforest or foraging preference.

And so this diagram

shows how you can have natural selection operating to shape based on instantaneous relative fitness the distribution of the strategies or genotypes and phenotypes on the right this great line coming down here that's genetic inheritance but then also you have the outcomes of collective behavior which are

influenced by the changes in the genomic and epigenomic and niche and developmental factors and cultural factors then influencing the way that natural selection shapes that and that can be through semantic information or through physical resources like uh you social insect colony so

One example here of a cool niche construction.

This is a clearing in a rainforest.

And the clearing comes from these ants that trim, that live within a specific plant and trim the ground around it.

So here's the paper, The Devil to Pay.

A Cost of Mutualism with...

So, like, this paper is saying there's ecological trade-offs, so it's just, it's representing a different strategy, and there's obviously a reason why these

Devil's gardens don't just proliferate and sweep across the whole area.

They clearly have limiting factors.

So it makes sense to study the bigger context and understand what these limiting factors are and where they break down rather than just say, well, it's just simply a good strategy.

So it's always going to be about kind of the bigger level of analysis as well.

All right, kind of broadening from ecology to ecological psychology.

This is related to some often human centric, obviously, as psychology might tend to be.

modeling of systems around people and we were all children and so there's a developmental aspect there's also these immediate to indirect aspects of our system so there's a multi-scale and a multi-time

aspect to ecological systems theory and also on the more direct psychological side there's this three-way diagram that comes from a 1976 paper and there's it's sort of like a cycle you have the on starting on the bottom left the schema is what directs action and what action accomplishes exploration what exploration does is it samples what does it sample it samples

percepts like ocular motor um sampling and stimuli what does that do it modifies your schema what would be identified in the free energy as the internal model and ecological psychology also is where we get the development of ideas like affordances and the fields of affordances the skilled intentionality framework what the organism or system can do and that can reflect

technology as well.

So in our constructed niche, that can be technological embedding.

And this image is nice, because it shows the clarity of the phone, the hyper reality of the phone, in relationship to the blurriness of the embodied.

And so it captures that what's at hand, what we can act on what we're using for information that can overwhelm our field of performances.

One term that I definitely had to look up and think about a few ways that it applied was this physics of the mind.

I was just like, okay, what is that going to mean?

And I think that there's a few different ways.

I'm happy if someone has another way to add or if there's a more specific way to state it, but

One sense of physics of the mind is that there's a search for lawful rules and simple equations for the mind to make neuroscience in some sense more like some people's conception of physics.

So that there'd be laws of motion or an invariance principle or symmetry principle or a relationship with some other physics equation for the mind.

Another branch of physics for the mind is that whether or not it is what the brain really does, that this branch of engineering-oriented analysis of neuro systems would facilitate the development of systems engineering and complex systems and control systems.

So kind of like applied physics being engineering, that's sort of where these micro sensors and

brain computing interfaces are at.

It's at the implied physics level.

And then another sense of

physics of the mind is that there might be some understanding of the physical basis slash substrate of the mind, which is kind of the hard question of consciousness.

And it also relates to questions like soft matter physics and crystals, quantum, microtubules, what kind of, quote, computation is being done in the brain?

What is the brain doing?

These are all kinds of questions that

uh is you know is it an antenna or a processor is there is it which metaphors and which aspects of them are instructive in that regard and the big question oh sorry that all of these senses of physics the mind are getting at is can because the mind is explicitly a metaphysical thing as opposed to the brain is can metaphysics join with multi-scale systems neuroscience physics molecular genetics

evolutionary ecology, etc.

Then they mention in the title that it's a variational ecology physics of sentient systems.

So what are sentient systems?

Because initially I think I had the wrong...

reading here.

So VNE and the VANC, which we're going to get to in a second, are about enabling the application of the FEP to phenomena within and beyond the brain.

These approaches hold the promise of extending the variational free energy approach to the dynamics of sentient systems, i.e.

systems with sensory states across spatial and temporal scales.

So this is not a paper or a discussion on consciousness or awareness.

this is going to be about emergence in multi-scale biosystems, which is pretty compatibilist with either interpretation, but this sentient, that doesn't mean awareness.

It's not about tearing tests.

It's about sense systems.

So this is about being able to model simpler sensing systems, you know, thermometers and that type of control system in a very simple way, but also more nuanced systems like sensors,

other organisms in a more uh rich way all right so how do we get here what is the literature context for this variational ecology paper

The FEP has recently been leveraged to furnish a fully generalizable meta-theory for adaptive behavior in sentient systems across spatial and temporal scales called Variational Neuro-Othology.

So let's talk about what is VNE because this paper is going to reference it a lot.

What is VNE and what scales or types of phenomena does it model?

So we're going to get to VE, variational ecology, via VNE, variational neuroethology, by contextualizing within a critique that leads to this paper.

So, in PhysLifeReview 2018, there's a paper by Ramstead et al.

answering Schrodinger's question, which is, what is life?


UNKNOWN:
1944.


SPEAKER_00:
A free life formulation.

Now that paper led to a bunch of responses, which led to the clarification on some of these responses and sort of the drawing out of this variational neuroethological approach.

And one quote that arises from the paper, the Schrodinger's paper, was, given the success of this explanatory framework in biology, we suggest that Tinbergen's levels of inquiry might be apt to elucidate structural laws that supplement the general principles provided by the FEP.

The FEP describes a general biological modeling imperative, while Tinbergen has offered a distinctive but complementary framework that allows us to develop substantive explanations for the phenotypic traits and behaviors of any given species or organism.

And so here is the 1963 paper by Tinbergen and then a 50 years update by Bateson and Lalonde.

And we talked about this in one of the previous discussions, but this is a two by two grid that represents Tinbergen's

for quote wise it's kind of like aristotle's four wise it's about having multiple different kinds of explanation that are at different types and different scales of analysis so the historical how is how did this organism get here is development

And how did it get here in the very short term?

The contemporary how is like the ultimate mechanism.

How did my arm get here?

Because it moved from this other place.

Ultimately, or a little bit more historically, but approximately, it got here because it was an arm bud.

And then the contemporary why is the function.

Like what does the thing do right now?

Just at this moment, like why is there a mouse on my desk so I can use it?

And then historically, why is there a mouse on my desk?

Why is it as opposed to not using a desk or not using a mouse?

Because of evolutionary processes.

So that's a little bit of a broader level question.

So that kind of compatibilism amongst answers is going to be complemented by a way to specifically connect multiple levels through potentially even more formal or...

uh modeled or testable ways of thinking about the relationship between these four categories thus constituting you know a complete answer at least within this fourfold framework that's been very helpful so that is where variational ecology comes in and

we're going to talk about it in the context of building on vne and what that is too so the paper is variational ecology and the physics of sentient systems in physics of life review 2019. ramsted constant badcock and friston so the goal of the paper and

Again, we're going to return back to these things.

Specifically, we review a framework for modeling complex adaptive systems for multi-scale free energy bounding organism niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modeling strategies and heuristics of variational neuroethology, VNE, with a broader perspective on the ecological nestedness of biotic systems.

We extend VNE beyond the action perception loops of individual organisms, i.e.

active inference, by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction, VANC.

to explain the dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche.

So the big question is how can we make a multi-scale ecology framework that builds upon eco evo devo and also adds insights from physics and mathematics and complexity.

So first part of the abstract.

This paper addresses the challenges faced by multi-scale formulations of the variational or free energy approach to dynamics that obtain for large scale ensembles.

We review a framework for modeling complex adaptive control systems for multi-scale free energy bounding organism niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modeling strategies and heuristics of variational neuroethology with a broader perspective on the ecological nestedness of biotic systems.

So as stated in the second part here, it's going to be a framework, which is theory plus tools.

That's going to be about modeling complex adaptive systems as control systems.

What are they going to be controlling?

Something about the free energy boundedness of their systems.

own interactions with their niche so rather than just thinking about how the physiological or the neuro aspects are related to constraints on behavior it's now also about behavior looking up we extend the multi-scale variational formulation beyond the action perception loop of individual organisms by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction

to explain the dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche.

We suggest that the statistical robustness of living systems is inherited in part from their eco-niche as niches help coordinate dynamical patterns across larger spatial temporal scales.

We call this approach Variational Neurothology.

We argue that when applied to cultural animals such as humans, variational ecology enables us to formulate not just a physics of individual minds, but also a physics of interacting minds across spatial temporal scales, a physics of sentient systems that range from cells to society.

So briefly, here's the roadmap.

Section zero is the introduction.

They first talk about the variational or free energy formulation and specifically about how active inference models and generative models are related to it.

We're not gonna go through the figures in this discussion though.

The second part of the paper is about variational neuro-orthology, which is about how ensembles of Markov blankets underlying the organismal level facilitate the

organism niche environment that was sort of the neuroethology level of analysis then they take that sort of organism upwards view of niche construction with variational approach to niche construction in the ontology of affordances

and reach the variational ecology, which is really just connecting these two at the organism and just making it a multi-scale ecology and then subsuming the behavioral component within it.

All right.

So to get to variational neuroethology, especially if this is...

new learning about active inference and how it relates to other areas in neurobiology some of the comments about variational neurothology from other um authors in response to the articles and just points and comments that are really sometimes uh

parent, other times not in the literature, but areas for improvement in theory.

One thing that's cool about the active inference area is it really draws people back to these fundamental questions that really were long-term about top-down or bottom-up forces, for example, in ecology or behavior.

Different

you know role of condition of historicity ergodicity these are long time debates but now coming into this new area where we can at least address them head-on so let's think about that perspective and i'm trying to uh think about how coming from a regular behavioral sciences perspective this might play so

Could this reflect a fundamental distinction between the free energy principle as an explanatory principle for the clearly bounded ergodic biological systems and the greater complementary forces at play that constrain complex adaptive systems in general, including groups of organisms in their ecological niche?

Should we restrict the FEP to level the organism and explore how the model connects meaningfully to other key concepts in evolutionary systems theory about the agent-need relation?

So that's restating the question whether the FEP for some reason would stop applying at the level of the organism and then it would break down at higher levels.

The aim of this paper is that they're going to address the challenges, these comments that people brought up about the VNE by addressing how it sits within broader level questions.

And so there

things that the field of behavioral sciences has also been thinking about.

For example, you can watch one bird's behavior, it's what you're gonna be tracking, but then it's gonna be related to everyone's behavior.

So at some point it's gonna be like studying collective behavior.

So what they're going to do is add the variational neuroethology, which is the multi-scale plus the neuro plus the behavior plus this niche instruction just to additively create this variational ecology, new acronym, new PAPE, why not?

by putting together ensemble dynamics or collective behavior, eco, evo, devo and niche construction, complex systems, free energy principle, multi-scale systems and active inference and nestedness and embeddedness.

And then kind of just think about how it could apply to systems that persist

Far from equilibrium within this flow state valley of things that are small and fast on the bottom left to big and broad geospatially on the top right.

But we won't go through the figures in this talk.

All right.

To date, VNE has, this is before this paper.

To date, VNE has only provided a principled method of analyzing nested and mutually constraining biological systems and their complex adaptive dynamics across spatial temporal scales.

It has yet to offer a way to individuate systems at scales beyond that of the organism acting in its environment, large scale ensembles such as societies or ecosystems that realize free energy bounding dynamics.

But of course, part of the question is, do they?

And so VNE was really a theory that was about the organism and the ecosystem from the perspective and the focus of the organism's dynamics in the immediate environment.

For example, affordances, even if those affordances were subtle or relied upon this skilled intentionality or like, you know, learned behavior or sophisticated counterfactuals, all these things that especially more recently have been receiving focus.

This did not articulate clearly or at least had not been specified specifically that it was linked with a collective behavioral or ecological or cultural phenomena.

which is as much a phenotype it's as much biological as an organism level trait like arm length or genome composition there just isn't a difference between a bio cultural versus bio in this variational framework it's just different scales different mechanisms but it's not even about categorizing different things it's about how you model them and what they are

So the variational neuroethology was a more clearer downwards projection about how things like behavioral and hormonal and neural timescales, developmental timescales, were related to organism behavior, which is physiology, neuroethology, but the eco, evo, devo was less clear.

The issue was cogently articulated by Breuenberg and Hess and Kiermaier in their critique of variational neurothrology.

They asked also whether the Markov blanket and B-formalism leveraged by the VNE to individuate systems is adequate for modeling phenomena at the scales beyond that of a single organism.

like sociocultural dynamics, since phenomena at these scales may be too transient or not sufficiently robust to license the MB, markup blanket, formalism, which is defined in terms of conditional independencies in weakly mixing random dynamical systems, which we'll also get back to.

But BHK catalyzed this perspective, and this is going to be broken up into a few different sections.

Markov blankets, so open parentheses, Markov blankets are the statistical, using their words, conditional independencies, which is kind of like saying that it's the opposite of the causal relationships.

And so it's equivalent to finding the causal relationships through their violation of the independence.

So finding which variables are insolatable from each other

In a sense, if you think about what kind of information from a generative model you need to understand which variables are conditionally independent or just sort of straightforwardly correlated, that's often related to causal state estimation about the world.

that Markov blankets are unable to explain slash predict slash control ecosystems and other collective behaviors, quote, quote, even though it's collective behavior all the way down at scale, because the Markov blankets are not robust enough to capture transient or historical phenomena.

So to go to the paper, they only worked through one example in the paper, which was how this hierarchically mechanistic mind evolutionary systems theory can be used within that VNE framework to study the scales of human sociobiocultural evolution in humans.

And there was this table provided with some pretty simple slash just

one-line equations about how different levels of analysis would be modeled, but there was a critique, which was

This downplays a lot of features of ecology, and the formalisms that apply to strongly sensorily or strategically bounded systems or certain spatial or temporal timescales may only be weakly explanatory or valid at different timescales for a number of reasons, which is something that we're going to return to when we talk about the ergodic systems.

So here's kind of a theory tree.

The FEP is on the bottom.

It's sort of the paradigm level foundation because that's where we're going to try to make things emanate from and to.

But again, we could just think about what would be the effect of switching that out too.

Why not?

From left to right, we have active inference, Tinbergen's four questions, evolutionary systems theory, and then eco, evo, devo.

So variational neuroethology is like Tinbergen's four questions, which was what we heard the quote about, with an evolutionary perspective, but a simple, at least a sketch of one, and then more of an emphasis on active inference and on smaller scales of analysis.

The variational approach to niche construction, VANC, was also drawing on the evolutionary and the pluralist Tinbergen framework, but drew a little bit more from the eco, evo, devo, and active inference side.

It has that orange one.

And where VE comes into play is with bringing in this synergetics idea from the variational approach and also the collective behavioral approach.

And then just, again, making a new acronym kind of more specifically combining previous acronyms

I think it's worth unpacking, it's worth tracing out some of these relationships and just seeing what parts get subsumed into what, but VE is just, it's just a more high resolution area where mapping can now be performed across these different domains.

So it's kind of like a mapping domain.

So here's some of the specific parts where they talk about that kind of a mapping domain.

this multi-scale framework active inference is inherently a group activity that is the entire ensemble of nested markov blankets are bound enslaved and constrained by dynamics at higher scales while the lower microscopic scales furnish the macroscopic states at any given level this construction evinces exactly the same circular causality that underlies synergetics hakan not fuller

However, here it is generalized to a recursive hierarchy of scales, i.e.

the hierarchical composition of blankets of blankets.

Intuitively, the dynamics at one scale provide constraints.

Technically, they establish probability gradients on dynamics at other scales.

Active inference destroys free energy gradients at each scale under the guidance or control of a generative model at the scale above.

This guidance is exerted through influences on sensory states where circular causality means that the action of any Markov blanket in an ensemble of Markov blankets could be involved in sensing, action, or perception depending upon its role at the superordinate scale

i.e.

it has a sensory active or internal state at the level above.

So it's this kind of Bayes all the way up and down approach that they're proposing that from the level of the organism can go downwards into the cellular, the neuro, and all this level, and through time, through the evolutionary, through the Tinbergen quadrants, and then also outwards through niche construction.

In the multi-scale setting, an effective state at any scale, like let's just think of our temperature, becomes the expression of an eigenmode of blanket states, namely the principal eigenvectors of the Jacobian, the rate of change of flow with respect to state.

These mixtures are formally identical to order parameters and synergetics that reflect the amplitude of slow or unstable eigenmodes.

In terms of center manifold theory, they correspond to solutions on the slow, unstable, or center manifold.

In short, the Markov blanket of a system or particle at any scale constitutes an ensemble whose order parameters subtend blanket or internal states the scale above.

So that's like

The temperature being above equilibrium with the room is because it's part of a sort of closed or semi-closed regulatory system that's keeping molecules that are in one part of the room, constituting my body, a different temperature than the rest of the room.

Note that the constituent microscopic states of an ensemble are always blanket states, although their order parameters could be blanket states or internal states at the microscopic scale above.

So a neuron could be sheathing something from a temperature perspective from one side, but receiving information in a different conceptualization of the blanket network.

This follows from the fact that the only states that matter are those that influence other blanket states.

Effectively, all we are doing here is applying the enslaving principle or center manifold theorem recursively to Markov blankets of Markov blankets.

Imagine you are an employee at an institution where you transact your microscopic affairs with other personnel to self-evidence your prior belief that you are good at your job.

This would entail responding to corporate or institutional goals that emerge collectively, i.e.

an implicit generative model at the macroscopic level.

Note that your job may be homologous to an internal state at the institutional macroscopic level relating only to other employees.

Alternatively, you could be working on reception, i.e.

a sensory state, or issuing press releases, i.e.

an active state.

And this is actually an image from a paper that TeamCom wrote on 992020 and one of the figures, and it was about how remote teams and a lot of other kinds of groups that might not be traditionally considered remote teams can be explicitly mapped and from systems engineering perspective modeled

as this nested Markov blanket framework.

And so you have, for example, the team members who have their own digital interfaces, their own sensory and active states digitally.

Some of these team members can be augmented or can be bots themselves.

And they're interacting with certain databases and then they're able to also undertake team operations.

This is where the variational approach to niche construction comes in.

VANC exploits the expression of expected free energy as expected cost plus ambiguity to propose that agents upload, as it were, much of the legwork in computing expected free energy to their self-tailored constructed environment.

More precisely, it argues that niche construction can be cast as the collective activity by which organisms act on their material environment to create unambiguous structure, which can then be leveraged via active inference, like creating books so then people can scan their eyes over.

Lasting changes to the niche capture the fact that environmental cues function as an unambiguous indicator of the affordance of action possibilities.

Like, if you're culturally sensitized, you know what a book looks like, you know what it's for, you know that if you scan through the first three pages with your eyes and it's culturally specific, whether the first pages are going to be on this side of the book or on this side of the book or whether the text will read this way or this way.

This structure can be cast in terms of epistemic resources that flag the actions that resolve the ambiguity associated with future observations while conforming to the prior preferences of the organism entailed by its generative model.

So you're in the library, you're doing some optimal foraging for a book about a certain topic, and you expect that there's a certain structural organization to the books, and that if you find something where it's written on the back of the book that you think it's the book it is,

you expect that the title page is going to conform with that so these are like epistemic resources that are more visible more scannable that's what allows that information to be found and therefore leveraged so that's niche construction in terms of direct epistemic resources but you can also think about in cases like social insects where they're extended niche their nest

is something that they pass on potentially even intergenerationally and that the structure and the form of the function are all linked through their collective behavioral algorithms with the architecture influencing their behavioral uh proclivities and there's some interesting work by professor pincer woman on that in the harvester ants um then that physical structure becomes a epistemic resource as well in that it becomes part of their extended cognition all right

so for this last section of section 007 of the live stream my friend sean had a great question and so for this last section it will be a little bit about ergodic systems and as with

You know, all other areas of this sort of discussion.

It's it's a playful and it's a partial recap of the idea.

So if someone knows more, I would love to go deeper into some of these ideas.

I just kind of laid it out in a way that hopefully might

relate to an informative way to onboard onto thinking about things from an active inference perspective.

And there's definitely perspectives on YouTube and elsewhere that are a lot more rigorous and comprehensive than what I'm about to go through.

But this is gonna be a couple minutes on linking ecology, which is what we're trying to explain.

we're not just trying to make theory after theory we really want to return to the ecology and make variational ecology a theory about ecology that allows us to do the things that we want to do in ecology whether that's conservation or just understanding so many other things that ecology can teach us but we're also going to talk about ergodicity about cog ergo sum and of course active inference

All right, so what Sean asked was, are thinking beings or their environments weakly mixing ergodic systems?

If not, do they fulfill some of the assumptions or axioms of the mathematics underlying the FEP?

So this was kind of a great question by Sean because

It really came at a perfect time when I was preparing these slides.

And if we go back to the critique slide where the variational neurothology was being presented, remember it was that there was the critique of the VNE that got us to the V, the response to that, that got us to the VE, as far as connecting the organism down with the VNE, with the organism up with the niche construction, just,

connecting the two points into a line and calling that variational oncology.

And the critique was that there was gonna be some violation of some of the lower level sensory coherence of say an organism.

that because of that it wouldn't that the same formalisms wouldn't apply and so this is someone coming from a more like thermostatistics um background and seeing a very similar phrasing a different way and just asking a really interesting related question

And as he put it, the argument of the free energy principle is two parts.

The first calls on the lawful dynamics of any weakly mixing, aka orgotic system that persists in a changing environment from a single cell organism to a human brain.

These lawful dynamics suggest that internal states can be interpreted as modeling or predicting external causes of sensory perturbations, a.k.a.

embodying and acting a generative model of adaptive policies and phenotypes.

In other words, if a system exists, its internal states encode probabilistic beliefs about external states.

And so when I read that, you know, I didn't know.

It's like, is he summing that up as like the insight, as like the final...

the distillation of something that he finds deeply true or is he bringing this up as sort of a well that's a tautology that's a circular logic or that's an argument that holds nowhere so i i didn't know but uh it turns out that there is a paper from 2015 called i am therefore i think so um this last little part is going to be about that paper

which I hope will be interesting whether you're familiar with these ideas or not, but also with some of the mathematics behind the ergodicity and about why there's still significant reason to understand how ergodic systems and non-ergodic systems are related to the FEP.

So I am therefore I think is kind of related to this.

I think therefore I am call Gary go some but of course it's just a meme.

So here's a few other versions.

I think therefore I am not here or a comic where it says I think therefore I am and then the other person is I don't therefore I'm not.

And also the cogito ergo sum.

I think therefore I am.

I think therefore I overthink.

I think therefore I regret.

I think therefore someday I won't.

So all these different implications.

What are the real implications?

What logic can we make claims about?

That's not exactly what this is about.

This is going to be about two kinds of systems, which are ergodic systems or ergodic systems.

And this isn't something that's a hyper abstract, but it definitely does recall a lot of generalizable principles in math.

So to make it very specific and empirical,

we're going to discuss it in terms of the ergodic hypothesis.

So it's a specific hypothesis that we're talking about.

That means it's something we're going to test with data.

And the hypothesis is we hypothesize that mixing through space is like mixing through time.

And let's talk a little bit more about that because it's kind of a wild and interesting idea.

So the first thing to know is that it's a hypothesis, this ergodic hypothesis.

It's not the ergodic law or the ergodic pattern or anything like that.

It's a hypothesis that can be tested using data and statistical models that are transparent and reproducible and just open to understanding how changes in their parameters influence the kind of conclusions that are reached.

So that's something about what we're discussing here with the ergodic systems.

Also, the ergodic hypothesis depends on the spatial and temporal scale, and then also the measurement or the analysis space.

And potentially this comes into play a lot more when you're really getting down into the weeds of the math or the application.

But often the way that you measure something or which sections of the time series you allow for burn-in, for example, or mixing, these things are all really critical.

And what scale, whether you're looking at a tiny, tiny, tiny

cube and seeing if there's random association between chemical particles for example versus looking at a one meter cubed uh blocking of the world so the coarse graining matters a lot

Now, ecology and history are often strongly critical of applications of ergodic methods or the methods that often are used to model ergodic systems.

So first let's talk about the ergodic hypothesis and what it actually says and does, and then talk about some ecological critique of it, and then see how the cog ergo sum comes into play.

All right, so the ergodic hypothesis is defined by the time average

being equal to the space average.

So that is, again, this sort of mixing through space is like mixing through time idea.

And one way to think about it is like, if you have a box with a gas in it, and you're gonna trace one molecule and take snapshots of it at 100 times,

would its trajectory in some statistical way be similar to if you just selected 100 particles in the box at the same time or if you let loose one molecule bounce 100 times by itself all these different ways of asking it but it kind of relates like is it basically fair to sample you know one roulette table through time or 100 roulette tables at the same time every roulette spin is like the same so in in it's very different than um

something where the strategies evolve through time, for example, you might already even be seeing.

And one more slide of just the definition is that there's this generation of an ensemble.

So that's sort of already for saging this ensemble group selection dynamic versus the time elements.

And this paper was very interesting that I found while preparing for this

stream and i'll just go through it because i think it's also a really cool story about philosophy of science and about how the way that we think about different hypotheses and axioms and principles really influences the kind of science that we do so it's called from the ergodic hypothesis in physics to the ergodic axiom in economics by kirsten 2015. so the the work is summarized as

This contribution seeks to clarify the specific relation between the idea of non-ergodicity, which is drawn from statistical mechanics, and its role in and for economics and finance.

The identified change of status is how the ergodic hypothesis in physics became the ergodic axiom in economics.

Therefore, we follow the idea from rational mechanics of Gibbs to Samuelson and eventually from the latter into rational economics.

The methodological spillover from the natural sciences to economics and the assumption of ergodicity in particular enabled and shaped the mathematicization of economics seen since the 1940s.

So, it shapes the field's direction depending on how people use methods from ergodic assumptions or not.

And this was a nice diagram where Boltzmann and Poincaré and Gibbs and how it transduces through different generations and it's kind of like a citation network here.

And I think a great example which was used in the paper is this St.

Petersburg paradox.

And this is a really fun kind of game theory and thought experiment complexity classic that's related to economics.

So I'll just read it as it is from the paper.

in seven it's called the saint petersburg paradox in 1713 swift mathematician nicolas a bernoulli posed in an exchange of letters with a french mathematician pierre remote de montmore the following problem what is the reasonable price p for a ticket for the following lottery so on the first flip it's going to be a fair coin and if you win

you can either take one dollar and then uh game's over or you can play again and then on uh uh the second flip if you keep playing so there's there's multiple versions in this version in here it either gives you a dollar or you keep playing and so you get a payoff at each time

if another version is where you can decide to keep playing and then you can imagine that getting a 50% chance of that first one is kind of like now the games are very similar because you can either

either by force or by not.

So in either case, you can ask yourself, how much would you pay to play either of those two little variants of the game?

And it turns out that people don't wanna pay infinite money to buy in.

So especially the one where you either continue or get the payout, the expected value of all the ensemble of trajectories, one in a million is gonna make two to the n money.

And so one in a million is gonna make so much money

So the expected value across the ensemble with the geometric mean or the arithmetic mean would be like very high, but it still wouldn't be worth that much.

Why?

So let's go into that.

Why does that St.

Petersburg paradox challenge ergodicity?

one answer is it's about pragmatics your life is not ergodic you're not well mixing across um you know different places to eat across different places to sleep there's a regularity to your life and so especially considering it in the sort of niche construction for your own uh uncertainty reduction slash precision maximization

even putting that all aside it's just your own singular trajectory from a strategic perspective doesn't resemble the assumptions that are under the distribution conforming norms of well mixing gas molecules that's for sure

And another way to say that is that the realized risk profile through time is not the same as through space.

So if you're playing that game, who wants to be a millionaire and it's going up, okay, I've got 12 coin flips in a row.

I'm at $1,000 or something like that.

I could take the $1,000 or I can go home with nothing.

At some point, it's just not going to make sense to go double or nothing on some insane value because there's this realized trade-off between risk.

So that's part of this historiosity and non-ergodicity of your own trajectory.

ecosystems may not be ergodic.

So that would be like because of succession dynamics or nonlinear perturbations or resilience properties, ecosystems may or may not have this sort of roulette wheel property or other nice aspects of

high or low dimensional systems that physics prefers so there's interesting theoretical work oh well imagine if every patch of the ecosystem was like a spin glass that would be a phase transition but in the real world it's always a little bit messier than that

So then just take that sort of St.

Petersburg paradox and literally the money one, now adding niche construction.

And so I was just thinking, well, yeah, what if every city in the country gets to play this paradox and then one city or one individual wins just a ridiculous amount and a few people win a small amount and most people win nothing.

And then that city does infrastructure investment.

So how does that change the way that future people would be able to, for example,

play the paradox later so that's niche construction so now think about the historiosity and the niche construction whether that's social insects or humans and you can see how some of these ergodic assumptions as they apply to cultural behavioral systems may be like a little bit tenuous or metaphorical at best here's a few nice figures from this paper though too

So on the bottom right, there's this ergodic case.

And so one of the features of ergodicity is this time reversal.

Like the molecule bouncing around the room, it's kind of this general time reversible family of models that allows extremely...

interesting bidirectional computation in a way that historical systems don't.

And so timelessness exists in a current t equals zero.

That's the present moment.

And then there's like this analytical time, like reaction coordinate for a chemical reaction.

When the two molecules come together, it's not graphed in terms of time, but reactions do have time distributions that they occur on.

But the way that that is represented is on actually a free energy landscape, Gibbs free energy, with a reaction coordinate.

because that's like this ergodic hypothesis about the way that these reactions are reversible through time.

contrast there's the non-ergotic case on the top and in the top there's a symmetry break in the present moment so that means that there's events in the present moment that change the distribution going forward in a way that doesn't make time reversibility a tenable proposition and that's because they happen in historical time so that's kind of a cool idea and then there was yet another great figure from this paper where with kind of a lot going on but i think it's worth looking at because it was so cool so

First, there's the not analyzed.

Not analyzed is just before your data window is available.

Then there's this realm where you use the ergodic methods, ergodicity.

It's almost like the name of a city.

And what you see in this window is a spurious, quote, causal relationship in your observation window.

So let's just say like, you know, between Bitcoin and exports of some other resource or something.

And even if everyone knows correlation isn't causation, but then there's methods like dynamic causal modeling, Granger causality and machine learning methods that try to quote learn.

So there's so much in the way that people use methods, whether or not they think they're they at the very least will say they're using data from the past to reduce their uncertainty about the future, which is what led to financial collapse.

It's what

It's what leads to a lot of strategic strengths and weaknesses in a lot of different areas.

So that's the ergodic fallacy, valley.

Now, the non-causal window is like, let's just say, where there's a different window of time, whether it's window two or window four, and under either of those time intervals, under consideration, the same factors that were at play in one may not matter that much.

Like, if you observe the first post-forest fire three weeks, the rules that dictate that regime...

let's just say the spurious causal relationship, oh, nitrogen is a limiting factor or, oh, insects don't play a major role in this process.

That may or may not be true in a future time window that's not overlapping or partially overlapping.

Seems pretty fair, pretty valid.

I think it's a great figure.

And then also there's like second and future symmetry breakings as well.

So even if you go, well, there was a major systems change in the present moment or at X time, but, uh,

things are still the same in this regard, or this invariance still holds, or this measure is still valid, but then they can't guarantee that there's gonna be this invariance in a future arbitrary symmetry break.

So what are the frameworks that will carry us through these symmetry breaks and not just have very weak underbellies with respect to things that we don't even perceive on the horizon?

So let's return to

Debra's paper about fusion of behavioral ecology and ecology, and talk about whether simulations, variability, historicity, and other sort of not quantitative questions, but qualitative ideas, it challenged this ergodic hypothesis.

So she wrote in Behavior and the Illusion of Ergodicity in Ecology.

It's a section in this paper.

Ecology often represents ecological processes in terms of the functional relation among average values.

For example, to ask whether an invasion will be more successful when there are many species in the community, to ask how an average crop yield will fare when the average population size of many local species are high.

Methods for evaluating ecological outcomes often assume ergodicity, that all samples are homogenous and that populations being sampled are invariant.

This can be misleading.

Behavior is a response to conditions, but individuals vary in response and conditions change.

The result is that ecological processes are not ergodic.

Samples are not homogenous and processes can change over time.

very nice and a well titled section and to kind of add on to this perspective and return to this question about non-ergodicity in historical processes like ecology here's a paper in 2016

replaying life's tape simulation metaphors and historicity in Stephen Jay Gould's via life.

So not a endorsement or critique of Stephen Jay Gould, it's to bring it up as a philosophy of science point, just as any other paper I would address.

So this is from the paper and it is a 1974 paper of Raup and Gould.

and what they did is they did simulations with where branches node branching rates were a parameter and then also there was like mutational changes and they're like wow the extinction distribution looks like we see in the fossil record and the morpho distribution looks like we see in the fossil record maybe selection doesn't matter or maybe it's just random stuff and to kind of build on that

in another figure in the paper, this is two outcomes of the simulation that they later ran.

See, this is probably a later paper from them or from colleagues that use again, kind of like a birth death process.

So like the lateral line is a birth of like a new clade speciation event of some type, maybe with niche displacement, maybe not.

And then there's also the population size growing or shrinking by a small amount, but when it reaches zero, it kind of goes extinct.

And so they were seeing, wow, we're seeing big variation between quote clades or different levels of organization in terms of their biodiversity or in terms of their species number or their morphological diversity.

So again, maybe it's just the random punctuated equilibrium events that end up driving the ship.

Now,

This comes down, and you can come down on the Stephen Jay Gould side or not, on this question whether the historiosity of the past, the uniqueness of the trajectory or the, I guess, the timeline that we appear to be in

Whatever your feelings on the historicity of that, the question is really from an instrumentalist point of view, from a functional point of view, can you use these methods that may have statistical assumptions underlying them that assume ergodic processes?

So for example, when you do a t-test, it's like making the assumption that with respect to other variables, all else is equal.

And everyone says, oh, well, of course, if you sample group A in country one, group B in country two, it's conflated.

But the t-test doesn't know that.

And so where we don't know that, the t-test doesn't know that.

And more complicated machine learning methods are only able to do this in a really more nuanced way in certain situations, especially with large data sets.

So for the Stephen Jay Gould camp, it was the incidental long-term deep time events, black swan events that drove the ship.

Whereas another way to think about it and the one that I personally would probably end up,

emphasizing at the end of the day is that it's actually selection on the morphology locally over that deep ecological time there's also the day-to-day of those little trilobite creatures having to live in their niche and so selection is continually on their morphology and behavior and then yes events happen over longer time periods and the whole question about multi-scale biology is how to integrate those two rather than saying well oh well clade formation is random versus oh it's really strongly driven by niche partitioning

so to kind of actually close this with a with a cogito ergo sum uh part here's some figures from the i think or i am therefore i think paper with friston and matthias so

This left side is I am ergodic, therefore I think.

Let's just see what the authors say, because with all these critiques from ecology and from cultural biologists on ergodicity and on the brain, the mind, and everything.

So here is sort of a two-stroke engine, and it goes from resus extensa, which is sort of the behavioral action policy selection flowing out,

And then the res cognitive is like the belief partition of the brain.

So the belief could be, I believe that the train is going to come in five minutes.

And that would be like corresponding to a detachable thought or debate, whether it's a representation or whether it's a metaphysic component.

And then this is just one partitioning they're throwing out there and we'll see another one in a second.

And then this free energy functional is being used to select the maximum likelihood policy.

And so that's why it's doing this pursuit of the minimally surprising across the variational scales of analysis of surprise.

It's trying to select the control policy that's going to bring sensory observations into alignment with a deep generative model.

So the belief I am ergodic could lead to behavior that at least pursues ergodicity.

Is that enough?

And then they kind of build it out one another level, which is I think I am ergodic, therefore I am.

So that kind of is an inversion of I am, therefore I think.

I don't know how you get from here to there.

Maybe there's other figures to make or other arrows to draw, but it is interesting to think about how basically it's a little bit unpacking the

res cognitans beliefs from a Bayesian perspective into the posterior belief and then the likelihood and prior belief.

So that's like the, now there's like a Bayesian two-stroke engine up there and then out of the free energy functional reflecting the likelihood and Bayesian beliefs is also the policy.

That sort of relates to our discussions on the generative model being a policy model.

All right, here's kind of a funny figure with focusing on the ear of this statue and just, it has equations on the ocular motor being linked through the action.

So action causes the ocular motor to move and the eye sends back visual sensations and proprioception.

So that's SQ and SP.

And it's like, that's the interface for the eye.

That's the API for the eye.

That's what we have access to.

And that's what we can model.

And it's that dual instrumentalism.

The one layer is like, yeah, these are the areas of signal that the eye gets and receives.

So from an engineering perspective, the scientists instrumentalism is like, yeah, it's good enough for us just to model the system that way, because there's basically nothing that goes outside of that flow state, even though each one is complicated.

But then the second one would be, this is actually how the eye works.

And it turns out that some of these hypotheses about how the actual streams of information or communication should be in the brain, that they are concurrent with some of these inference schemes, which is interesting.

And this figure was about how like looking at the same statue, there's the stimulus, which is the actual image itself.

And what the visual input is is the retinal cells which are activated, let's say, by edges.

And then the salience could be in terms of a deep generative model as far as what area of the sample

or what area of the visual field would be most optimal to sample, ergo which action policy would be optimal to undertake.

And we see this sampling, which is a little bit outlining the face if you kind of look at it and overlay it, because these are the optimal places to forage, so to speak, for information to resolve what it is.

I'm just gonna go through this last figure from I Am Therefore I Think, because I think it's kind of interesting and funny.

So here's how we can walk through this.

a behavioral sequence is embodied.

So that's the oculomotor red dots moving around.

It's like .

So the behavioral sequence is embodied or enacted and also encultured and embedded.

That's the whole variational approach.

So right now we're focused on the oculomotor dimension to really unpack it, but

it's something that we could have moving up.

Like in one culture, they learned that avoiding eye contact is, you know, or people's status is signaled on this part of their body, or nope, it's in the eyes where you determine something.

So this is not just a one size fits all solution for human vision.

This is about a model framework that we could use to model what we want to model.

But a behavioral sequence is embodied.

by acting to converge towards beliefs about hidden ocular motor states.

So right there on the y-axis is this hidden ocular motor state, and then there's the proprioceptive expectations.

So that's like if your muscle with one side, like if your bicep contracts, your tricep will relax.

And if that breaks down, if that communication of expectations of, oh, hey, I'm contracting or I'm contracted, if that breaks down, you get a lot of different types of muscle phenomena, ranging from pulled muscles and strains to post-injury or even without injury, changes in the muscles perceived healthy range of motion or limit or minimum or maximum force.

And that has to do with a lot of the proprioceptive information being integrated with the beliefs about the hidden states.

What that results in is that observed sensory states, which these are the visual samples.

So that's, we're taking one, the hidden ocular motor states, we converge towards belief on those.

What that results in is the observed sensory states.

So here's like an eye, an eye, an eye, and you know, there's five dots here.

And so you're going to get more sampling on the eye, but that's kind of what the camera sees.

And then it says absolute data or surprise or prediction error, because this here is like showing the visual samples as kind of camera snapshots of what is being seen.

But in the predictive processing framework, you could imagine that actually what's coming back is like a parameter update message passing thing that's actually about deep expectations about what to see.

So that's not even included in this model, but that's part of other models.

And what that does when the sampling is like, oh, I expected an eye there.

I looked at her third eye and I didn't see it visually.

Hypothesis confirmed.

So that type of sampling is also informative.

And so what we see on this graph is that the expectations about hidden perceptual states, so our sort of fuzziness on the whole map, decreases through time.

And what that results in is that the corresponding percept remains sharp and concurrent with a coherent generative model through time.

So I always just think about vision in this case, like your whole visual field, unless there's other secondary issues, is clear and has color vision across the entire field.

and so this is maintained even though there's a large blind spot your resolution is lower outside of your central area and also there's not as much color perception outside there's a bunch of other visual illusions too so it's clearly we're perceiving our generative model visually and why not in other areas too when it's as clear or clearer so we have this face just coming into clarity based upon a deep generative prior

which is why when there's things that you don't know how to extract the information from, it's hard to know how to do ocular motor scanning, let alone to how to do the semantic mapping.

Now, isn't that the big question, is will this kind of static face, fixed image scanning to resolve uncertainty, will that level of functional closure relate into EcoEvo scales of analysis?

So you can imagine this is just a static face doing classification, but would this extend into adversarial relationships with one person?

Would this extend into deep counterfactuals with valence and skills and team reformation, hypotheses, all these things playing out that are happening in social scenarios, would that be able to play out?

This is just eye scanning.

So will that level of analysis

of the group or the community, the evolutionary trajectory, the cultural unit, the ecosystem, any ecosystem, will that level of analysis lend itself to this multilevel framework?

and isn't that the question so that is all i thought i would close with it as an opening to whether people thought yes or no or i think i'd like to know this piece of information before we made a decision i'm i'm open you know i want to learn more i want to figure out what that actual answer is is it going to be that we'll have some

very tight and coherent Markov blankets that we can just do simulations and understand the interactions between, and then let that higher level parameter just move freely?

Or will it really be the case that there are order parameters that are just beyond what we can

currently understand as mapping onto this framework or some other framework, who knows?

Anyways, that was kind of a interesting discussion.

So I hope you liked it.

And I just say thanks for participating.

We will provide a follow-up form to live participants.

Feedback, suggestions, and questions, always welcome.

and yeah just stay in communication we're gonna have number 7.1 and 7.2 in the coming two weeks and uh if you want to participate in your listening before them then get in touch also we'll hopefully still be uh

looking for papers to read and for people to have on discussions as long as you're listening to this so just give us a comment or a message and it'd be good to get in touch so any thoughts especially on this video on where does the fep fit into all this where does active inference fit into all this what are we looking to understand with variational ecology how are we going to use variational ecology how is it going to map on to classical ecology

what ecological questions are we going to be able to address first how is this going to relate to the kinds of explanations and design solutions that ecologists have worked with before versus proposed deeply uh hypothetical systems a lot of interesting questions plus of course hearing from everyone else on their perspective on

the implications or strengths or weaknesses so anyways cool thanks for listening i hope that you had a good time and found some parts of it interesting and i will talk to you later

## 72g62XJ-SpA

SPEAKER_00:
All right, hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference Livestream.

This is Active Inference Livestream 7.1 and it is October 27th, 2020.

Welcome to Team Calm, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter, at Inference Active, at our Gmail.

You can find us on Keybase or YouTube as well.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams, mute, raise your hand so that we can get to everyone in the queue.

Use respectful speech and try not to use the chitzy chat if possible.

Today in ACT-INF 7.1, we're going to start with a warm-up, just briefly introducing ourselves and checking in, and then we'll work through some of the sections of 7.1.

The paper we're going to be discussing is Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems by Ramstad et al.

in 2019.

And today we'll talk about the goals, the abstract, the roadmap, potentially move through a few key quotations, and then preview the figures, mainly with a focus on seeing what each figure represents.

And today in 7.1 and next week in 7.2, where we may or may not be in costume, we will discuss this paper.

So please save and submit your questions, whether you're on the panel now or whether you're watching in replay and get in touch if you'd like to participate.

So for the intros and check-ins, it'd be great if everyone could just introduce themselves and their location, say hello in a short intro, and then pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken.

So I'm Daniel, I'm in California, and I'll pass it to a first-time discussant, Cameron.


SPEAKER_09:
Hi, yeah, I'm Cameron.

I'm here in Zurich, in Switzerland.

I've just started a PhD in philosophy of mind at the University of Zurich.

First time at this group.

Shannon.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Shannon.

I'm a PhD student at the University of California in Merced.

I'll pass it to Lee.


SPEAKER_08:
Hi, everyone.

I'm in London, a PhD student at the University of York.

bit of an active inference beginner and I will pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_05:
Hello.

I'm in Moscow, Russia.

I'm a researcher at systems management school.

And I pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_06:
Hello.

My name is Sasha.

I'm in California and I'm a neuroscience graduate student.

And I will pass it to Muddy.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Muddy.

I'm the director of AI at Versus Labs and the Spatial Web Foundation.

My link to Active Inference is I did my PhD with Carl Friston four or five years ago, still very much a beginner.

And I'm currently in rainy Liverpool.

And so I will pass it to anybody who would like to volunteer because I can't see the screen.


SPEAKER_04:
apologies um hello it's steven here i'm in toronto i'm doing a practice-based phd at canterbury christ church university in the uk and i'll pass it over to maxwell hey everyone i'm maxwell ramstad i'm a postdoctoral fellow at mcgill university in montreal i'm skyping to you from the montreal suburbs


SPEAKER_01:
And yeah, I work on multi-scale extensions of Active Inference.

I'm the first author on this paper that we'll be discussing.

Very grateful to have such a great group of people as discussants.

And I will pass it to, I believe Lee is the only one who hasn't spoken yet, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yeah, I think that gets through it.

Perfect.

Great.

Thanks everyone for the intros.

So in these two warm up questions, any thoughts related or unrelated, anything that kind of gets you excited and helps on ramp to the discussion we'll be having.

What is a physical or informational ecosystem that you care about or have studied?

And while people are raising their hand, the first ecosystem that came to mind for me was in Southeast Arizona, where there's a grassland ecosystem, where there's a lot of cool ants and also the grazing agricultural use by cows had a big effect on the ecosystem, kind of pushing it from a grassland regime into a very different sort of pebbly regime.

So when I was thinking about this variational ecology, I was kind of thinking about the desert ecosystem and the Southwest.

And go ahead, Muddy.


SPEAKER_03:
So I'm interested in slightly different non-biological ecosystems, but still ecosystems where we have agents that make decisions.

We build our microservice meshes by having multiple agents that can make decisions and can decide for themselves whether they are appropriate to a given computation or not.

So we treat them as ecosystems and we are using active inference very much to model the life cycles of these various microservices.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And if anyone else wants to raise their hand, Muddy, I'm actually just kind of curious.

Let's go to Stephen first and then I'll follow up if possible.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I'm interested in kind of intentional spaces, but learning spaces or workspaces.

And one thing that really came up for me was when I was in a place called Ingwavuma at Mponchini School back in 2004, when I visited there to do a project, or just at that time, just to engage the community.

It was at a school there, Mponchini School, in a rural area where they'd only just

built the school 10 years before so they didn't actually have schools there before that and um in in and you know around the outside you've got the fence with the barbed wire on the top in the middle of this area with no electricity and it was and i i i sense at that time there was this kind of disconnect between the students understanding what this niche was that they were

immersed in and an area where um you know while they're learning stuff there's also 35 hiv and the big challenges and and this kind of learning environment which was kind of coming from a colonial background so i this this kind of difference between the world which i was seeing in that community in the world in this this school kind of you know as i've seen in certain workplaces you see this kind of disconnect this kind of like

learning isn't just the knowledge, it's something about how to fit it together.

And that's when I sort of later became this idea of a social topography, where there's somehow, what's that kind of landscape of meaning?

When is it more than just knowing the facts?

And I think that's where that ecosystem sort of comes together.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I like how we're exploring a lot of these types of ecosystems, and those are definitely what we want to encompass in the variational ecology discussion.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so I'm interested in the microenvironment that neurons grow up in and how that affects their activity levels and how they make connections with others.

So one of the things that I'm studying for that is how different immune molecules and turning on immune genes affects this process and

This is something that I wanna learn from this paper, how to apply that to my own system.

But one parallel I'm also thinking about is the immune landscape, when people are isolated and aren't exposed to as many people, what their kind of immunity is like, especially in a time when we're really thinking about our own health and immunity.


SPEAKER_00:
Just from writing down some of these little notes, there's ecosystems across scale.

That's definitely going to come back.

And then there's this idea of community ecology, which in the bio sense is usually about different species.

But then there's, of course, as Stephen was talking about, this group and historical dynamics to our community ecology and then ecosystems that are of different technologies.

so the second warm-up question is what is something that you're curious about or want to explore in today's discussion and while people are raising their hand i think the question that almost motivated or seems to motivate this paper is the one i'm curious about which is about applying the

the free energy principles, formalisms to larger scale systems where potentially the stability of the Markov blanket or some of the other dynamics of the system are so rapidly changing that it really questions how we're going to study it from this framework.

And I know that's something that we'll return to.

Muddy.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think what's fascinating from from this work that Maxwell has been doing

is helping us actually get really fine-grained detail onto the computational currents of certain problems, such as, you know, when do I stop modeling my subsystem, and when do I start representing my subsystem as a parameter?

So when, you know, this transition between a parametric approach and a modeling approach to then feed into a hierarchical model, that is quite an art, and it's an ill-posed approach.

sort of problem.

So I think this work is really, really fascinating from that perspective from me personally.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Maybe Maxwell, I'd be curious, what is that relationship with the parametric and the modeling approaches?

Like how do we go about exploring that or what does that mean from a modeler's perspective?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not sure I understand your question.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm like muddy was talking about how this, uh, question of modeling, like when to stop and when to include a parameter at one level versus another what's an introductory thought or what's the rationale or the motivation behind doing that kind of a thing.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, so Mel Andrews has thought about this a lot more than I have.

I mean, uh, I wish they were here, um, but they're sick today.

So, I mean,

Roughly speaking, the generative models that we employ under Active Inference, they harness what Mel has been calling the existential variables of the system.

So, you know, the variables that actually make a difference to survival.

So, you know, you can think of stuff like a core body temperature and so on.

I mean, ultimately, there is always going to be an arbitrariness involved in the modeling effort because we have to make

kind of science side decisions about what are the relevant things that we're going to model or not.

But

That said, there do seem to be some variables that are more critical to the continued existence of the systems that we're interested in.

So I don't know if that addresses the point.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I think we'll return to it, especially as we think about what are the vital signatures or the vital variables for ecosystems, because we want to be thinking about them in this similar framework.

Cool.

Here we go.

So the paper that we're going to be discussing in 7.1 today and in 7.2 last week, as well as in 7.0 last week, yeah, people can figure that one out, is Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems by Ramstad, Constant, Badcock, and Friston.

And the goal of the paper was stated as reviewing a framework for modeling complex adaptive systems for multi-scale free energy bounding organism niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modeling strategies and heuristics of variational neuroethology or VNE with a broader perspective on the ecological nestedness of biotic systems.

We extend variational neuroethology beyond the action perception loops of individual organisms, i.e.

active inference,

by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction to explain the dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche.

And so I quoted that directly from the paper because I think it's a really direct representation and foreshadows the fusion of the VNE and the VANC, which we can talk about, but to kind of rephrase that in non-FEP language, it's a question about

how can we make a multi-level or multi-scale ecology framework that builds upon eco evo devo that's ecology evolution and development but also adding in insights from physics mathematics and complexity or complex adaptive systems so it certainly is an ambitious scope and it's kind of linking together this organism and downward

story of the variational neuro ethology with a niche construction aspect.

So kind of we have the organism looking downwards, that's the neuro molecular components of behavior.

And then we have the organism looking upwards and outwards with ecology.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, if I could comment on that briefly, um,

Yeah, so basically, if you're looking at the history of how this came about, so I was working, I mean, between 2000, I guess, 16 and 18, I was mostly focused on developing this multi-scale active inference story.

in large part with Carl Friston, and that resulted in a framework that we call the variational ethology or variational neuroethology in our 2018 Physics of Life Reviews paper, Answering Schrodinger's Question of Free Energy Formulation.

And so the variational neuroethology is essentially a theory about the kind of, if you want to think about it like visually, a kind of vertical stack

of systems.

We've discussed this on this podcast before, but like this idea that systems are made of nested systems of systems so that essentially, if you look at the ontology of a system, what you have is a stack of segregated systems at different spatial, spatial and temporal scales that effectively compose each other.

So cells composing tissues, composing organs, composing organisms, composing social groups and composing species and so on.

And so following the publication of that paper, I started working closely with Axel Constant, who was riffing off work that Jelle Breenenburg had been doing in Amsterdam with his group over there.

And Axel and I developed basically a niche construction account of Active Inference.

What we highlighted was the fact that active inference is a symmetric formulation in the sense that it tells a story about how internal and external states attune to each other, internal states attuning to external ones through things like perception and learning and phenotypic accommodation and development, and external states tuning to internal states through action notably, making the world more like the way that we expect it to be.

So that gave us a kind of horizontal dimension where basically at every kind of level of this vertical stack, which you have is effectively a relationship between an ecological niche and the denizens or inhabitants of that ecological niche.

So this paper aimed to combine both frameworks.

So the niche construction stuff and the nested systems of systems stuff into a kind of principled approach to biological systems.

And so, you know, moving from an ethology and a theory of niche construction.

So ethology being the study of animal behavior, essentially.

So combining these two things into a bona fide theory of ecology using the variational free energy principle.

I'm sure you're going to mention this after, but the last ingredient that we added to this mix is the skilled intentionality framework from the Amsterdam group, Eric Goodveld, Julian Kiverstein.

Yella Breenenberg, what they add to the mix with the skilled intentionality stuff is connecting this predictive processing framework to the ecological psychology notion of affordances.

Yeah, so this paper essentially takes the ecological psychology stuff on affordances, the so-called skilled intentionality framework,

the variational ethology and the variational niche construction stuff and proposes this integrative model.

Yeah.

So that's the kind of history.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Great summary.

Thanks so much, Maxwell.

And just to kind of restate that in this nested framework, you have the

bottom up or emergence features of the system you have the top down features of the system and then the lateral are kind of like the collective behavior so we're thinking about all these ingredients that maxwell just mentioned especially coming from the skilled intention intentionality framework and a few other areas bringing them all together so let's check out the abstract

This paper addresses the challenges faced by multiscale formulations of the variational or free energy approach to dynamics that obtain for large scale ensembles, such as ecosystems or groups of organisms.

We review a framework for modeling complex adaptive control systems for multi-scale free energy bounding organism niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modeling strategies and heuristics of variational neuroethology, which remember was really focused on the organism's feedback with its local affordances, with a broader perspective on the ecological nestedness of biotic systems.

So like a lot of times in this podcast, we've talked about the affordance of getting a jacket or of changing the thermostat, but that's actually part of the constructed niche of humans.

It's not just a human in a box doesn't find himself without affordance, unlike some of the biomechanical affordances, perhaps.

We extend the multi-scale variational formulation beyond the action perception loops of individual organisms by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction to explain the dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche.

And that relates to this symmetry that was being discussed a few minutes ago.

We suggest that the statistical robustness of living systems is inherited in part from their eco-niches as niches help coordinate dynamical patterns across larger spatio-temporal scales.

We call this approach variational ecology.

So it's kind of like the affordance of driving in a car is part of the constructed niche of the highway network, and then that shapes the movement patterns.

We argue that when applied to cultural animals such as humans, variational ecology enables us to formulate not just a physics of individual minds, but also a physics of interacting minds across spatial and temporal scales, a physics of sentient systems that range from cells to society.

And this should sort of invoke that warmup discussion about the different kinds of ecosystems, especially when talking about humans and our technologically enabled extended niches,

part of the ecosystem is informational it's symbolic and so we also want to be thinking about information ecologies in the way that these dynamics apply not just to the ants on the pebbles but also to humans and the the paths through the parks that are discussed in the paper and also ways that long-range technological communication might come into play

So just to briefly run through the roadmap, this paper is zero indexed, which I found very interesting.

And it starts with the discussion of the variational or free energy formulation and just briefly reviews active inference and generative models.

It's really great that every paper sort of starts with this section on just what it is that we're talking about with Act-Inf and FEP.


SPEAKER_01:
They're so annoying to write though, honestly.


SPEAKER_00:
You don't want to plagiarize.

You don't want to just copy the paragraphs you've written.


SPEAKER_01:
It's like how many ways can you explain the same thing?


SPEAKER_00:
And it's like if there really is a smooth energy landscape underlying these explanations, we're treading many, many paths.

and exploring many on-ramps, turning these ideas around through discussion and through more papers.

So yeah, there's a repetition element, and there's also potentially a way that we make bigger and more accessible explanations by rephrasing it again and again for different journals or different specialties.

So then the second section is on variational neuroethology, and that brings into question multi-scale levels of analysis, as well as ensembles of Markov blankets, as well as a few figures that we'll scan through.

The third section introduces the sort of organism and upwards perspective that is given by the niche construction, the variational approach to niche construction, and relates that to ontologies of affordances, some of which we've talked about in previous discussions as well.

Another figure on the Bayesian mechanics and active inference.

And then as usual with these papers, they're sort of the foundation, then idea A and idea B, and then A and B are linked together.

And so we get to section four, variational ecology, the physics of shared minds.

And this also relates to discussions we've had about what it is that's modeling.

Is the organism a model of its environment?

Does it have a model?

And agreed that Mao's thoughts on this are super helpful.

And then there's some concluding remarks.

And just to really quickly visually outline this,

theory by addition approach that's being enacted here.

On the very bottom, we have the FEP, which is that paradigmatic ground rock that a lot of these other theories are going to be built on top of.

Then from left to right, we have active inference, Tinbergen's four questions, which are explored a little bit in number 7.0, as well as some previous discussions we've had.

EST is evolutionary systems theory, which is basically evolutionary biology with a systems perspective.

And eco-evo-devo, which is also a very interesting and rich area that emphasizes that the way that evolution occurs is not just ecologically embedded and enacted, but it occurs through changes in development.

So you don't just get a longer femur.

You get the developmental proclivity to have your growth plate be open for a longer or shorter time, resulting in a phenotype that is changing,

it.

Active inference and Tinbergen's four questions and evolutionary systems theory were basically summated.

This is not a perfect summation.

It just sort of building it up a little bit to VNE, which was a very organism and biobehavioral centric approach to explaining action perception loops of organisms.

On the other hand, also drawing from ACT-INF was the variational approach to niche construction, which drew a little bit more extensively from the eco-evo-devo motivating questions and literature.

And then to bring in synergetics, which is this relationship between the higher order parameters, the bigger, slower things, and then the lower level parameters, the faster and smaller things of Hakan 1983 on the left side,

And then the collective behavioral approach, these lateral relationships between nested systems.

It all kind of comes together to get to variational ecology, which hopefully builds upon the strengths of all of these different antecedent theories and gives us something that is going to allow us to dip back into, for example, behavioral explanations of organisms or dip into the niche construction approach or the collective behavior across different levels of analysis, as well as providing a helpful path back

to understanding how previous formulations, for example, a modern synthesis type evolutionary biological explanation or a non-FEP eco evo devo explanation, it gives us an interpretation path that we can walk to understand a lot of the previous literature.

So just pause here.

Does anyone have any thoughts on this theory summation or is there any other areas that we think might be relevant to draw in?

One that I was wondering about is this introduction of the minds and the sentient systems.

And so there was a sentence in the paper about the sentient systems being sensory systems, though often when people talk about the search for sentient life and things like that, they're talking about the experiential dynamics as well.

And so the idea of getting the interacting minds

from the interacting evolutionary systems.

I just thought that was kind of a curious thing, maybe foreshadowing in integration with psychology or with phenomenology.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so the sentience aspect is really, I think, just to highlight what the free energy principle stuff does.

I mean, at the end of the day, the free energy principle shares with perceptual control theory the idea that action is about the control of perceptual input, namely keeping it within certain bounds.

So that might be relevant to...

I mean, yeah.

So from that point of view, sentience is the capacity to be affected by the world in a way that allows us to control how the way the world affects us.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Like something hitting a rock still could be felt or is still as influential on the state of the rock, but it doesn't necessarily have the ability to then act, especially in a proactive way.

to get around that.

And also just one other note is actually the Schrodinger's question paper from 1944.

And then the answering Schrodinger's question paper from 2018, I think are also great places for people who are kind of coming at this from a first principles of biology perspective, because Schrodinger's question was about how organisms are organized.

And very interestingly, and nine years before the discovery of the structure of DNA and many years before a lot of the other approaches that would come on the scene with the molecular revolution in the second half of the 1900s, Schrodinger said there has to be something like a quasi-periodic crystal.

And organisms have to organize at least locally.

They're not gonna violate the laws of physics.

This isn't vitalism, but at least locally, you have to be able to take the bag of sugar and then organize it into biomolecules that constitute an organism.

That's a increase in order.

How does that happen?

Is that the defining principle of life?

And in some ways, as we look on Earth and elsewhere for life, these two ideas of Schrodinger really remain as prescient as ever.

So I find that just really interesting.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
I know you're probably going to mention this, but I suppose the idea of ergodicity sort of comes in through the active inference piece more than it normally is thought of in the other areas.

But that maybe synergetics is another way that these kind of

ergodic ways to extract information are present and I suppose the question is is that non-ergodic processes the ways to tap into things which are non-ergodic and sort of causal is that something which is when you then step outside of normal active inference and you have this extra structure on top which is our cognition which allows us to

sort of process things that are kind of non-ergotic so i think that might be interesting like in terms of how we construct things as humans as opposed to that kind of more organic niche construction but that not that that's really touched on here but i suppose it's just just the idea of how patterns are extracted and what levels of meaning or what processes of


SPEAKER_00:
like attuning or constructing or relating what what's that kind of dynamic at play thanks for that comment i think the word ergodic is really what a lot of that idea hinges on so if anyone wants to have a take at what the word ergodic means i tried to go through it a little bit in 7.0 but um

if anyone wants to explain what an ergodic system is.

And Stephen, what your question gets at is really whether the models of ergodic systems, of systems where the time average is equivalent to the ensemble or the spatial averaging, though there's also other ways to phrase that or perspectives on that,

in systems with extreme historiosity, like niche construction.

If you build a road in one place, the whole society kind of leverages around that.

Or if there's an introduction of a new species into an area, that can irreversibly and extremely historically change the trajectory of that ecosystem.

So how are we to model these systems using ergodic frameworks?

Stephen, and then anyone else who wants to step in on the ergodic question, because it's kind of a key term.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think this is a really interesting, I thought, relevant point because the thing with the godicity is I sort of was –

looking at the video for this session that you made and sort of comparing it to what I've been thinking is, it could be that there's lots of small patches or periods or blocks where there's kind of enough ergodicity due to mixing to extract information or to find patterns.

So it could be that there's not this idea that the system is ergodic,

but there might be lots of times where there's moments of mixing that ergodicity is present and you can extract or make inferences from that so i think that's quite um that changes things a little bit in terms of how you know makes it more plausible maybe for how ergodicity can creep in um and it also i think then starts to give you a rationale for how you

can engage with the whole entropy question as well.

Because normally entropy is brought into the equation.

So it could be that talking about multiple levels and things dissipating and suddenly it's like, well, if you've got periods of ergodicity, then you've got a way to extract or...

get a grip on the noise that's going on out there over time.

And I think that that's important.

I think that's also important in terms of trying to explain it to other people, because most people, when they think about the world and systems, and actually there's a whole debate on the Viable Systems group about this, is that they just take a snapshot, a perspective on a system.

and they say this is what the system does, but that's not the same as something which is happening over time and there's a pattern over time.

It's like it's a different way of thinking about

the world and even think about systems in general.

So that piece is really important about how does it happen over time?

And is it lots of bits of ergodicity that add together or is it like we have to have ergodicity over a hundred years, over 10 years, over five years?


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Let's go Shannon and then Muddy and then Maxwell, if you want.


SPEAKER_01:
I would just like to jump in quickly just to clarify a few things about ergodicity, if that was okay.

Let's go.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, you might actually answer my questions before I ask them.


SPEAKER_01:
Perfect.

Maxwell, Shannon, Muddy, go ahead.

Okay, so ergodicity...

from a mathematical point of view, you can understand it heuristically as the, you know, so a system is ergodic if the average of our measures of the system converges to a measure of the average of our, the value of whatever we're measuring.

So another way of thinking about it is that like wherever your system starts in its state space,

With an ergodic system, it will end up in a regime of characteristic states.

So no matter where you start, you end up in these states.

So I mean, you can think of my body temperature, for example, would be describable in this way.

It varies a bit, but it ends up continuously converging to 36 and 1 half degrees Celsius

So there's a lot of confusion in the literature and in discussion about this ergodicity thing.

One thing to point out is that so to the extent that it is implied in the framework, the notion that we're considering is only local ergodicity.

So we're not saying that, you know, because the maximal version of like an ergodic system

like a system that's globally ergodic is a system that doesn't really have a history in the sense that it doesn't really matter where you start.

You always end up in the same place.

The notion of ergodicity that we're employing in the free energy framework to the extent that it's employed at all is a notion of local ergodicity, which means that on some appropriate scale,

temporal and spatial scale, it's useful to think about the system as being ergodic, as in that it will regularly converge to the same set of states or values of those states, rather.

So I guess there's a lot to say here.

On the one hand, you know, this local ergodicity thing is important.

So when we say that the Earth is round,

You know, we're not saying that it's not flat enough locally for us to build buildings on it.

So like locally, the earth is flat enough, has a negligible enough curvature that we can build, for example, a building on it.

And this is the same kind of idea.

So the ergodicity at play is that, you know, on some appreciable time scale, systems converge to the same set of values effectively.

And, uh, yeah, so I guess that's one point.

Uh, another related point is that our ergodicity actually isn't, um,

they, well, it's not really baked into the free energy principle.

All you really need to get the free energy principle running is a Markov blanket and a non-equilibrium steady state or generative model, which we've been discussing over the last few weeks.

So generally notions like ergodicity and weakly mixing also appears in some of these discussions.

It only applies to certain kinds of systems with multiple particles.

under special assumptions, namely the assumption that all the particles are exchangeable.

So if we're dealing with a single particle, this kind of probability distribution in general doesn't exist.

The only probability distribution to which we have access is when we sample the state of a single particle over time.

Yeah, the real assumptions on which the free energy stuff is built is this non-equilibrium steady state assumption.

And it's related to the ergodicity thing in a certain sense.

So non-equilibrium steady state, we're saying that the system has a set of characteristic states to which it tends over time.

And so if a system has a non-equilibrium steady state, then under the conditions that we just described, where there are particles that are exchangeable, then you can treat the system as ergodic.

But it's not as crucial to the framework as some would suggest.

So I've heard in the bushes that

Some people are mounting a critique of the free energy principle based on the idea that living systems aren't actually ergodic.

I think that's a bit of a waste of time because we're not claiming that biological systems are globally ergodic, just that it's useful to treat them as ergodic at certain scales.

And, you know, the way that we get out of this kind of weird

place formally speaking is by pointing to this nested systems of systems thing so the idea is that from the perspective of any layer of the system the layer above it might as well be stationary so from the point of view of my bot of my cells for example my body is essentially stationary you know so their entire life cycle you know from birth to uh cell division uh

will occur without any major structural change happening to the non-equilibrium steady state of my whole body.

So you get around the implausibility of the strong interpretation of these assumptions by pointing out that, well, what's actually at play is a nested series of systems.

And you only need things to look ergodic locally relative to other layers of the system.


SPEAKER_07:
I think that's really helpful for what my question would have been, which would be like, how would, if you're talking about the behavior of a crowd and if there's a certain Markov blanket that can extend over this, this group of individuals, the thing about a crowd is it's not a cell.

It's not bounded by being stuck inside of a body.

They could leave, like they could leave the stadium or leave the protest.

But if we're talking about ergodic or like interacting just enough at just the

right spatial temporal scale, then we can talk about some Markov blanket over some


SPEAKER_01:
whole crowd or subset of a crowd at some event at some time exactly yeah that's precisely what's going on here so it's all about defining the relevant spatial and temporal scales i mean if your relevant spatial and temporal scale is like you know the whole city over several weeks then obviously the the protesters that gather you know and spontaneously form a social group wouldn't count as you know even having a non-equilibrium steady state i mean it just kind of forms and dissipates

But if you're looking over the scale of, you know, minutes to maybe hours, then it does make sense to say, well, locally, you know, there's something robust here.

It has a statistical independence from its environment.

It seems to be, you know, attracted to the same set of states, and then it dissipates.

So it's the same story over and over again, just a different kind of spatial and temporal scale.

So you're totally right, I think, Shannon.

That's right on point.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Let's do Muddy and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I just wanted to speak to some of the, like just to give a little bit of intuition.

So I'm kind of,

not super in active research right now.

So these terms, I like sharing kind of the way I think about them for people who might be listening who might not be familiar with ergodicity in general.

So just generally, and please correct me if I'm wrong about this because I'm looking to have my understanding probed, but I view ergodicity or a system that's ergodic, my intuition is that if I take a sample of a system

that system is ergodic if that sample is representative of the greater dynamics of that system.

So that's what Maxwell was saying about tending to the mean, so it doesn't really matter if I take my data from here, here, here, or here, as long as the sample I'm taking is representative, that is another kind of worms, it should tend to the same mean or

know basically represent the same dynamics of the underlying model and underneath but the way in which you define ergodicity is actually defined by your measurement your sample space it's necessarily defined by your sample space so you have all of these emergence properties which are hard to pin down so you have like dynamic ergodicity which are you know partials with respect to time which

tend towards some stable value for the local and then the actual mean, versus static ergodicity, which is if I take a snapshot of my system at any one given time, so like a cloud of gas, it kind of looks the same, but without any knowledge of my attractor systems, I can't say that my system is ergodic dynamically over time.

And then you can think about continual ergodicity at different levels.

So I think the example Maxwell gave of the flat earth is a really, really beautiful one because if you take a local representative sample, say 100 meters by 100 meters,

um you you could define every single sample by a single function a stable function which either has either a stability maximum point or is linear in its nature so at that level i have a continuous function which defines i've got to see across all scales

but it's nested within a larger system which might have chaotic dynamics actually.

And so it's actually ergodicity.

I think the ambiguity comes in when you're actually trying to define the problem space itself as a concept.

It's just basically saying this sample represents the model I'm trying.

This sample of a larger system represents the larger system at whatever mathematical perspective I happen to be looking at it from, whether it's with respect to time or some other variable.

So I just wanted to add that in.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, just to play devil's advocate, thank you, Buddy, for that.

I agree with everything you said.

Just to make the, you know, put some meat on the bones of criticism in the interest of fairness, one of the reasons that you might resist the idea that biological systems is ergodic is, for example, the pretty plain fact that evolution isn't going anywhere, right?

There doesn't seem to be some kind of evolutionary kind of attractor basin towards which

all of evolution, you know, contra this kind of anthropocentric, you know, religious view of, you know, man's place in nature.

Well, humans aren't all that special.

And we're just like one among, you know,

a series of other, uh, animals.

Um, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
So that one, wait one quick before we go to Steven.

Also, if your body temperature hits a certain very low or very high value, it's not returning to a steady state either.

And so that's like, there's a lot of reasons to think at a certain scale of analysis that there's violations of this kind of behavior.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I mean, very clearly we all die, right?

We all dissipate.

And so at long enough timescales, nothing has this non-equilibrium steady state or is ergodic in that sense.

We all just dissipate.

In some sense, the only real ultimate ergodic endpoint is the heat death of the universe, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's uncanny valley because at a short timescale, you're stable.

Then at the lifelong timescale, you dissipate.

And then again, you're just a flash in the pan.

So very cool and highlights that it's important what scale we're talking about.

Stephen, before we close out the slide.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I also think that, you know, we talk about the system.

Is the system ergodic internally, externally?

But I don't know whether this is right, but I kind of am more from a practice perspective trying to do the sense-making of active inference and that kind of the dynamics of things going backwards and forwards.

So I'm trying to think of the ergodicity as maybe being more about the process of this noisy process

chaotic, like Muddy was saying, data going backwards and forwards or across the Markov blanket.

And within there, there's ergodicity in that.

And that, even if the systems, I don't know whether they are or not ergodic of the organism, but there's something in the data stream that allows you to extract information from the entropy, sort of the noise.

So I was trying to work out if

You know, that might be two questions here.

I think it ends up going to this bigger question about whether the systems are ergodic, but I'm not sure whether it's about the dynamics, the nonlinear dynamics have ergodicity sort of tucked away in there.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just to give an ecological example, let's think about a predator-prey relationship, like a Lotka-Volterra model, you know, the cougars and the rabbits or something like that.

So it's always changing through time.

And there's a winnerless competition where they're always oscillating.

And so from the first pass, the first moment, it's not ergodic.

It's changing at certain timescales.

But it has what Muddy was referring to as this dynamical stationarity or the dynamical ergodicity.

It's kind of like the more things change, the more they stay the same.

Sometimes when we're talking about these higher order relational dynamics,

or rates of change, the partial derivatives that Muddy mentioned, then it's actually through time at the correct timescale of analysis that you see that the predator-prey relationship is in like this higher order ergodicity.

And then at another timescale above that, the predator and the prey species don't even exist.

So of course it can't be an ergodic system.

So again, we see that there's timescales where systems display ergodicity and timescales and spatial scales where they don't, as well as relying on questions about exchangeability and other attributes.

But just in the last couple minutes, this is really awesome discussion.

I want to just run through the figures, give people a little peek into some of the formalisms and the ideas that we'll be talking about further in 7.2.

And this is a quotation about how exactly niche construction enters the picture, and especially in terms of epistemic resources, which relates to the technological niche of humans, as well as the skilled intentionality framework.

here's a good quotation about how in the multi-scale framework, active inference is a group behavior.

That's a group activity.

And so this sort of connects the dots between active inference and collective behavior, because even when we draw the organismal loop with active inference, we're talking about collectives of neurons or of different cell types, and also ties it back to closed causality, circular causality, and synergetics.

This idea of

coordinating slower order parameters, and then rapidly oscillating higher order parameters.

And that's kind of like the dynamics of the gas cloud looks stationary visibly, but if you went down there, it'd be the seething mess.

And you'd say, there's no way this is a stationary state, but it is at a little bit of a higher level.

And then this last quote was just about how at work,

one's behavior acts to justify their sensory states and their prior beliefs about them and then that kind of reminded me of a figure from the paper written with alex and sasha and others where we talked about that a little bit more specifically from a technological level um and just to quickly walk through the figures before we return figure one markov blanket it's got to be figure one it's not it's not a ramstead paper if it isn't

figure two is also unpacked a little bit in the answering schrodinger's question paper and this one there's what you see and there's what you don't see what you see is the potential explanatory scope across spatial and temporal scales that range over many orders of magnitude but what you don't see is that there's nothing that's at the for example one millisecond and one kilometer scale maybe a lightning strike is able to dissipate energy rapidly at that scale but it doesn't coordinate effectively it doesn't have that closed causality


SPEAKER_01:
I should say, I no longer agree with this figure.

Kasper Hesp and I, starting May 2018, I guess.

Kasper was quick to point out that you don't need a separate set of time scales.

The spatial scales that we pointed out are really ontological scales.

The subcellular scale is a spatial scale and a temporal scale simultaneously.

the cellular processes occur over a few milliseconds and they have their specific size.

And these scales, the concomitant associated spatial and temporal scales really increase along this diagonal kind of together.

So, I mean, another thing that kind of breaks this apart is where is culture here, right?

So culture is very fast.

But it's also a very large-scale process.

So this is not a figure that I would recommend learning by heart or anything.

I think it turns out to be wrong now, but...


SPEAKER_00:
Science progresses, right?

So we were wrong.

I still find it interesting, especially with that caveat that it's not like there's small things happening at the tiny scale.

And then there's no relationship with the niche construction, like niche construction for the cultural niche and the communication niche is related to cellular processes.

So there's just what's happening.

But then it's interesting to think about how the functional levels of organization do align along this scale.

Very vague, qualitative diagonal, but not a formal approach for sure here.

Figure three is another recap figure having to do with, I think, something about broccoli and how it's a fractal.

It's about Markov blankets and about nested systems and how Markov blankets at one level can be thought of as engaging in collective behavior at a higher level.

Figure four, again, an example that we've seen before with looking at how morphology can arise as a function of initially equivalent cells acting morphologically to reduce their surprise about their expectations, about the extracellular gradients and where they are and what that means for what the organism is doing.

And then how development and the evolution of development could reflect beliefs and action generative sequences that allow the organism to fulfill functional morphologies.

Figure five, I don't think is one that we've seen yet, but it connects the active inference and affordance side with a free energy minimization side.

And there's some mathematics there that I hope to be actually going into in the coming weeks as we've chosen the paper for eight, which is gonna be scaling active inference.

And we'll be looking to have a lot of discussion on the mathematics because it's definitely one of the areas we wanna dive deeper into.

And then the last figure is a partition of vector states into particles, which are the sets of balls here and the blanket states.

So I'll go into that a lot next week.


SPEAKER_01:
This is probably the key figure for the whole thing.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for noting that.

We'll definitely go into this in the last minute.

Thanks for participating in this short and exciting 7.1.

Next time in 7.2, we're gonna have more time to talk about some of the specific questions that have been arising as well as figure six, as Maxwell pointed out.

Everyone live or in replay is welcome to send us comments or questions that would be cool to unpack live.

Today, I really appreciated just hearing about how these different ecosystem conceptualizations and ways of thinking about the same ecosystem

same way of thinking across different ecosystems how do they all combine and we provide follow-up forms to all live participants so it's in the calendar invite and it'd be great if you could fill it out we also solicit feedback suggestions and questions from our audience and from our other participants who aren't live here and uh all we can say to that is

Thanks for the participation.

Thanks, everyone.

Really an awesome discussion.

And just as always, it's another level of understanding, another coat of paint on the mural to hear from everyone's perspective.

So I deeply appreciate that.

And great times.

Anyone want to give a singular closing thought to cap out the stream?

Long live ergodicity.

Muddy, go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, I was just going to say, no.

Exactly.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I ask a question?


SPEAKER_03:
That nobody wants to share a thought.


SPEAKER_00:
That's my observation.

Perfect.

Thanks, everyone.

Thanks again for listening, for participating, and we will see you next time.

## qf4S9bK5VKQ

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference live stream.

This is Active Inference live stream 7.2.

It is November 3rd, 2020.

Welcome to Team Calm everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active, at email, our public Keybase team, or on YouTube.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And also for video etiquette on live stream, remember to mute if it's noisy, raise your hands so we can hear from everyone in the stack and use respectful speech.

Today in ACT-InfStream 7.2, we are going to go through our introductions and have some warm-up questions, and then we'll get into the discussion of 7.2.

We'll talk about the paper Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems, Ramstad et al., 2019.

And we'll go over the goals and the abstract and the roadmap.

Then we'll talk about some big ideas and questions in ecology.

And then we'll go through the figures.

I remember last time we mentioned figure six, and so we've gone the figures in reverse order.

So we'll start with six and we'll just go down from there.

And also for the rest of 2020, we will be discussing papers eight, nine, 10 and 11, which we'll go through in a second.

And just check out our Twitter or message us if you have any questions.

So what are papers eight, nine, 10 and 11 and the dates?

Paper 8, Scaling Active Inference, on November 10th and 17th.

All discussions are at 7.30 to 9 PST, Pacific Standard Time, in the morning.

Paper 9 is Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood.

Paper 10 is a Variational Approach to Scripts.

And Paper 11 is Sophisticated Active Inference, which, as we were just talking about before the stream, will also have some cool accessory content.

Let's go to our intros and warmups.

So for this part, just introduce yourself and your location.

You can say hello and give a short introduction and then pass to someone who hasn't spoken yet.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm in Davis, California, and I'll pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi guys.

I'm Shannon.

I'm usually in Merced, California, but I'm in South Dakota for the pandemic and I'm going to pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, everyone.

My name is Ivan.

I'm from Moscow, Russia.

And I pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Sasha, and I'm in California.

And I'll pass it to Markus.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Markus.

I am in Linköping, which is a small town in Sweden a couple of hours outside of Stockholm.

um and i'll give a brief introduction to myself because i'm new here so um my i did my phd in medical imaging and my research is mainly focusing on cardiovascular mri so quite different from fap and active inference which has become sort of a hobby for me the last couple of years

And I find these live streams very good to explain these concepts.

And I'm looking forward to the discussion today.

So I'm going to pass over to Cameron.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, I'm Cameron.

I'm in Zurich.

I was here for the first time last week.

I just started a PhD in philosophy in Zurich.

And I pass it on to Alex.


SPEAKER_07:
Hello, everyone.

I'm Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia.

I'm a researcher in System Management School, and I pass it to Maxwell.


SPEAKER_08:
You will use it, Maxwell.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, thank you.

Hello, everyone.

My name is Maxwell Ramstad.

I'm a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University, and I'm zooming in from just outside Montreal in the suburbs.

And I'm a first author on this paper, so very excited to discuss it with you.

Has everyone spoken yet?

I lost track.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, great.

Thanks for all the introductions.

Let's go to the warm-up questions, and here it'd be cool to hear from everyone, and you can just answer as narrowly or as broadly as you like, and go ahead and raise your hand if you'd like to speak here.

The first question is, what is your niche, or what could it be?

So I'll just start with my local niche right now.

I'm looking at the video screens.

I'm trying to balance getting the information from people's face versus the slides.

What's another person's just niche right now around them?

Or a related question is.

what skills help us find affordances in a changing world?

So our niche definitely presents us with uncertainty, multiple scales, perhaps, of uncertainty.

What's behind me in the door?

What happens in the deep future?

So how do we find affordances or how do organisms find affordances in that kind of a context?


SPEAKER_03:
I liked your mention of your niche as the computer screen and looking at people's faces.

I feel like for every different...

communication program, like if it's Zoom or Jitsi, we can organize our digital environment in different ways.

So we can like see different people's faces or see different aspects of the screen to allow for as much nonverbal communication as we want or need to make that particular communication effective.


SPEAKER_06:
Cameron?

For the first question,

Going back to a niche I constructed for myself about a year ago when I was coaching tennis, would often work in the late afternoon to late in the evening.

And I noticed how my diet changed to make sure I had high enough sugar level so that I could give really energetic lessons to the kids in the late afternoon, and then sort of tone it down in terms of an energy level for the adults, and then have a massive kind of slump as soon as I got home so I could sleep properly for the next kind of round of coaching.

So I noticed how my kind of diet set up my energy levels just

for that kind of lifestyle.

And as soon as I stopped coaching tennis, it was away with the biscuits and chocolate.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, that kind of just reminds me of like looking forward to dinner.

You're not exactly sure what it's going to be, but it's going to be a physiological thing.

It's going to reduce your uncertainty about food.

Anyways, what is one thing that you are curious about or you want to explore in today's discussion?

So that could be something that you wanted to figure out from the paper or something that the paper kind of resonated with you or just something from the side from the rest of your life that came into context today.

when thinking about this paper so i'll start one thing that kind of motivated me in the slides was just exploring how the variational ecology is linked to big questions in so-called i guess traditional ecology non

fep non-active inference ecology how do we make that connection because if that connection can be made then the expansion of the theory from just a few equations to something that's in use in a lot of applied situations would be a lot more easy

Any other random thoughts or that's totally chill.

We can just go onto the paper and people can raise their thoughts as they see fit.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I'd be, I'd be curious to hear, uh, like everyone else on this, like, what did you hope to get from this?

Uh, cause as the author, I can respond to some of these questions.


SPEAKER_00:
So let's go Cameron and then Shannon muted.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_06:
At the very end, Maxwell, you write about shared intentionality and I wondered how you think about the debate between shared intentionality and theories of mind and that kind of very mentalistic idea of interactions.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I had that sort of same topic of shared intentionality.

I was also wondering in our

universities like seminar yesterday we were talking about collective memory and I wonder whether this like variational ecology can tell us anything about what we choose to remember or what we end up remembering as a culture or as a society about our culture's past it might not it might be that might be a little abstract for what we're talking about currently but

since it's not necessarily behavior or it's a behavior that we have to verbalize and speak out loud.


SPEAKER_07:
Those are great questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, I agree.

On the part about remembering, it's like there's this multi-level remembering process.

How much data do we retain from yesterday, from two seconds ago, from 200 years ago, from 2 million years ago?

And then there's always different perspectives on just the...

facts or the events of whatever did or didn't occur and all this narrative weaving that occurs.

So how we model and remodel, how we update our models of those multi-scale memory processes, some of them are extended, some are internal, that's everything.

So I think it's really interesting question.

I hope we'll return to that.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's a kind of great point to link it all together that

individuals that are interacting can spur more, I guess, memories or common experiences by revealing more or less about their current niche.

And so, yeah, just really thinking about how individuals should or should not interact when trying to build common ground and how much of their niche they should be sharing in that communication.

A lot of fun things with that in the virtual space that we can reveal to each other.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I think that hopefully sets the stage to talk about some of the specifics of the paper and also big ideas in ecology and also things that are happening all around us.

So the paper is Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems from 2019.

And we reviewed the goal of the paper last week, but the shorthand kind of equation form is that variational neuroethology, VNE, which is about organisms and their neurobiology,

primarily can be kind of jointed together with vanc the variational approach to niche construction and then that summation that continuation of explanation from kind of the neurobiology into the extended niche is called variational ecology and then the non

Active inference phrasing would be something like how do you make a multi scale ecology framework that builds on ecology evolution and development and also adds in insight from physics mathematics and complexity.

We also talked about the roadmap last week and sort of formulaic in that it introduces the two separate ideas in section two and three and then add them together.

to result in a synthesis framework represented here and with a connector added between the active orange connector to the purple.

So to kind of just start the discussion, I wanted to begin with some big questions in ecology and

Some other people may have done ecology in a specific formal or informal way, but there's so much to it.

And it's just interesting to connect it to the questions that motivated that field before this kind of synthesis of even ecology, evolution and development, which is its own pyramid of

you know ideas that connected and people who bridged evolution and ecology and all these kinds of things so let's just look at the big questions in ecology and think about the context that this synthesis is happening in and then think about all the cases where ecology is applied so conservation and policy planning and stuff and then think about how a mapping between fep and active inference broadly and ecology could allow for a lot of translational and applied use

So here's one kind of interesting historical coincidence.

It's a 1983 paper by Richard Lewontin called The Organism as the Subject and Object of Evolution.

So this is kind of before the whole physics in biology approach was becoming mainstreamed, but he was coming from a very integrationist perspective.

And he wrote,

Before Darwin, theories of historical change were all transformational.

That is, systems were seen as undergoing change in time because each element in the system underwent an individual transformation during its life history.

So like the muscle cells became different or something.

Lamarck's theory of evolution was transformational in regarding species as changing because each individual organism underwent the same change.

Through inner will and striving, an organism would change its nature and that change would be transmitted to offspring.

So that's what people often call Lamarckian evolution.

Now here's where the historical coincidence is.

In contrast, Darwin proposed a variational principle.

Now it turns out that this is a different variational principle than the variational principle from physics that we're going to be discussing.

But I thought it was really interesting that Lewontin and Darwin used the same idea.

And so what's the idea?

Individual members of the ensemble differ from each other in some properties and that the system evolves by changes in the proportion of different types.

There's a sorting out process, dot dot dot, and so variation among objects is transformed into temporal variation.

A dynamic process arises in time as the consequence of static variation in space.

There's no historical process other than the evolution of living organisms that has this variational form at least as far as we know.

So that's actually going a long ways towards this sort of what is Schrodinger's question about what is life?

Just an interesting way that variational has interwoven from the history of biology from Darwin, from Lewontin, and now finding itself with a formal definition, ironically, with the same name related to variational principles.

So anyways, sorry for the little bit of a...

uh history size let's get to the ecology questions and if anyone has thoughts on that previous link they can kind of address it here

These are some questions drawn from a 1999 paper by Sir Robert May called Unanswered Questions in Ecology.

So we can figure that they're probably still unanswered.

But let's just look at some of these and if anyone wants to reflect on it, how do they see it playing out or how do they think or wonder that active inference could play into it?

I'll put up the first two.

what determines population density and what determines the spatial structure of population these are actually like the first two that may brings up so what what could an answer to this look like uh or where do you think the fep and ecology could intersect here

I'll just list them all.

Also, how can we study stability and complexity in ecological communities?

And what is the proper scale of analysis for ecological studies in space and time?

So what might be an approach or what might be a mapping that we could draw here?

one thought is the proper scale of analysis for ecological studies is kind of related to our discussion about what time scales ergodic systems or the ergodic hypothesis exists at because there might be some time scales or spatial scales that don't make sense to study like if you're studying the lion hunting the gazelle the centimeter squared time scale or spatial scale in the one second might not capture some important dynamics of the system but then if you study it at too broad a level it might be

not able to be studied for another way, just happening too fast underlying.

So just one thought there.

Anyone want to, yeah, Shannon, go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So I don't study ecology, but I know we've learned some about like predator prey models.

So population density is determined by, you know, the amount of resources in the environment and that's the prey's,

depleted then the predators depleted because they don't have enough food so the prey can come back and you have this structure over time and the same kind of thing happens even with with trees and these beetles that eat trees so you'll see like forests even over a much longer time scale having um like trees that die out and then they grow back eventually and the beetle population will also follow that predator prey structure and die out and come back


SPEAKER_00:
yes so there's these rhythms and some slower ones some are across species some are within a species

They're all related to measurements, so at the very least, we're going to be able to use different mathematical frameworks to analyze our measurement, just like we use different statistical tests.

But the deeper question is whether the FEP or whether the active inference framework describes what these ecological communities are doing or what is actually occurring versus to what extent it's a really convenient model fitting approach.

All right, the second, next slide.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, go ahead.

What would the difference in implication be?

I mean, I think the proper philosophy of science attitude to have with regards to any scientific model whatsoever is that truth has nothing to do with what science is doing.

I mean, this might be slightly controversial, but I think science has to do with model comparison effectively.

I mean, all of science has moved into this kind of,

kind of game, I think, where what we're doing is, so first of all, data is never presented in a naked way, right?

So, you know, your neuroimaging data, for example, will be organized as a kind of a heat map of the brain, for example, like data is always presented as a model of data.

And basically what we're doing is,

confronting different theoretical and formal models to find which explains away the variance in our data the best.

So from that point of view, we needn't read the free energy principle as making any literal claim about anything, just the same way that any other scientific model is just going to be kind of a, it's a useful description

So I'm putting on my Mel Andrews hat today and being an anti-realist.

Or, I mean, a non-realist, right?

Like, it's just...

It's not like Newton's laws became false after they were shown to be a special case of relativistic dynamics.

These are just successively better models that successively and iteratively explain away the variance in our data better.

But I don't know if it's appropriate to ask the question, are these merely models or actually the way that the world works?


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, from what- I mean, that's the quote, right?

All models are wrong, but some are useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

Yep.

And then the what is useful must always be unpacked to whom and who else is influenced by it.

And then what is their value structure and all these types of second order effects.

And I agree that if nothing else, it's a useful multi-scale framework, just like a multi-level regressor model or the Gaussian distribution.

I mean, linear modeling is used for some computational benefits.

So

yeah it's unfortunate when it does constrain the uh phenotypic distributions in the world but perhaps with flexible tools we could actually accommodate for very very high dimensional preference systems or things like that rather than using like a excel spreadsheet that takes an average and then aggregates that into the next level of the aggregator so how could we go and look at variation across multiple levels of the system and yeah good interesting things there

Let's look at a few more just classic ecology questions before we go to the figures.

So this is from a 2013 paper in Journal of Ecology called Identification of 100 Fundamental Ecological Questions.

So those are just the little small ones.

I'm just going to list all 20 of them that I just grabbed the first 20.

Um, so people can, can, uh, think just, you know, pick a random number, spin something, roll, roll three die, whatever it is.

But these were just the questions that this large set of authors basically, uh,

used some polling and discussion methodology to converge on these 100 questions and so they definitely thought about which ones to put at the beginning and they definitely thought about which ones to include so i just think these are kind of what ecologists broadly may find to be some of the biggest questions so that means that if somebody can make a connection where something that was previously modeled in an incomplete or in a really heterogeneous framework

If there's a way to model it in a more unified way, then that's something that addresses a fundamental question in ecology.

And so that's one of the ways that we can apply theory and then think about what are the downstream applications, like look at their number one question.

What are the evolutionary consequences of species becoming less connected through fragmentation or more connected through globalization?

So that's roads being built that break migration corridors.

That's also barnacles being brought around by global fishing fleets.

And so different species and different ecosystems are connected in new ways.

Their Markov blankets, their ergodic levels of analysis, these are all changing.

And so how is that going to shape phenotypic and behavioral and genetic diversity?

That's conservation ecology.

So if that can be re-understood or mapped into active inference framework,

it's again at the very least a super useful way to think about multi-scale systems because it includes that bottom up and top down element which a lot of these questions implicitly include but often through very constrained ways like specific types of partial differential equations or specific types of simulations that aren't really grounded in this type of methodology

and then um yeah i just think that's kind of an interesting thing so i thought it was wise worth taking the time to at least look through some of these and anyone can raise their hand if they want to jump in on one of these one through 20 but like it's just useful to think about these because these are the questions that people want to see answered in ecology shannon i mean number five is exactly what we're addressing if we're asking what can multi-scale uh free energy tell us about


SPEAKER_03:
these different levels of selection and also different levels of behavior or different levels of insert phenomena you're interested in here.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, what are the relative contributions of different levels of selection, gene, individual group, the life history evolution, and the resulting population dynamics?

Yep, definitely something that's super interesting to think about and does a variational principle that links these levels of analysis.

Like if you have a multi-level regression model,

You don't say that one level has causal priority over the other level.

It's just a different way that variance was partitioned.

And that reminds me of Evelyn Fox Keller's metaphor of the two people who are pumping water together.

And that's the nature and nurture so-called.

And that's how you can really do a partitioning of labor only for certain tasks, but not for kind of shared tasks like her water pumping example.

so maybe the partitioning is a statistical post hoc and some traits will partition highly onto heritability or some traits partition highly onto some other uh unidimensional axes but then in a fuller variational framework we would have a more nuanced way to talk about how those parts are related

Yep, and then another question that is definitely related to the whole area is 16.

How do organisms make movement decisions in relation to dispersal, migration, foraging, or mate search?

So definitely a lot of work on everything from the ocular motor epistemic foraging, the movement of the eyes towards informative areas of the visual space to focus on, to search behavior, and that could be in an abstract computational space,

So many of the optimization algorithms we know are named after animals because they're kind of bio-inspired.

Ant colony optimization, cuckoo search, all these kinds of things are related to ecologically observed strategies.

So maybe if we had a way to frame those different strategies in nature, we could do bio-discovery and then we could implement a lot of cool ways to who knows what, you know, optimize things, make swarms of robots that are useful, who knows what could happen.


SPEAKER_02:
Number 11, also, what are the evolutionary and ecological mechanisms that govern species range margins?

That reminds me of this concept in ecology of the fundamental versus realized niche.

And so I think that has a lot of nice parallels to kind of how humans behave, but also thinking about cognition and how we

choose to think about the world and what sort of niches that model is tailored to.


SPEAKER_00:
What is the fundamental versus the realized niche?


SPEAKER_02:
Full disclosure, I also do not study ecology, but I'm teaching an intro to bio class to freshmen.

And so I'm learning about this as I go as well.

It's kind of fun.

But the fundamental is the...

environment, the combination of abiotic factors that allow an organism to survive.

So anywhere where you could live.

And then the realized niche is where you actually do live based on your interactions with other species and other biotic factors that influence your niche.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you know if this overlaps with Carola Stotz's concepts of the developmental versus the selective niche?

So Stotz basically argues that effectively you can think of the niche as the set of selection pressures to which organisms are subject but also as the set of reliably inherited resources that are necessary for the reconstitution of the life cycle in every generation and that in ideally they coincide but they don't necessarily so that you know your developmental niche

ideally prepares you for the pressures that you'll be undergoing in your selective niche.

But for various evolutionary reasons or other, you might be tuned to the wrong environment, for example, and then die off.

But it does seem to overlap with the distinction that you're mentioning here.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow, very interesting.

And the changes in different things can lead to the...

with a realized niche where things actually exist, if the population hits a critical point, then it can just extinct locally or even regionally.

And that's like a non-recoverable state.

And so it can change in a very, like the niche can be modified rapidly.

And so that definitely relates to it.

Let's actually do one more slide on niche and affordances.

And then this is before we just get to the figure.

So if anyone has any more like general thoughts, now we're bridging the gap.

We're seeing how the regular ecology brings over to this new way of thinking about it.

So niche and affordance are linked.

And that's kind of cool that we just were talking about that because there's the niche example here is the different birds.

So Flamingo is digging the deepest into the dirt or under the water to get food.

The birds on the right are going more shallowly.

And so their beaks are different.

Their behavior is different.

Everything is different about their behavior.

biology and they may or may not be able to have a general versus specialty like maybe the flamingo can also get the shallow but not vice versa something like that so that's a sort of physical niche concept but our niche includes objects includes other people and trees and bike paths and digital experiences as well so

what happens now that technology is part of the human informational and ecological niche maybe bringing in what was just being discussed about the fundamental and the realized as well as the selective and the developmental niche concept so how could active inference be used to to understand and model and design in these situations

So I guess start there is for politics or for information systems, especially with digital, there is certainly a vast number of degrees of freedom in the design.

And the realized info niche that we're in is just like literally whichever one we're in, however it ends up, whoever's behind the scenes doing whatever, that's the realized one we're gonna get.

But what is the fundamental info niche?

What is the actual bigger habitable space

And which parts of that habitable space might have some features or some benefits that we don't realize through our current existence in that realization.


SPEAKER_01:
Conceptually, I would want to distinguish between the physical environment and the niche.

So the way that we're defining it, at least the niche is the set of affordances to which organisms are sensitive.

So that doesn't overlap exactly with the physical environment.

So, I mean, two species can share the same physical environment but not occupy the same niche because they're not sensitive to the same things.

So, you know, like something may be like a prey item for one and just be like, you know, part of the background for another species.

So I think that's how you get around that.

I was confronted by Kim Sterling when we gave a talk in Australia, I think in 2017 or 18 about this.

And I think this helps to dissolve that issue.

There isn't like one ecological niche.

There's one physical environment that we all share.

And then relative to essentially the skills and the concerns that we embody, the world will appear very differently.

And so we live in different niches, even if the physical environment overlaps.

Okay, Ivan?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thank you.

If we return that now we share one virtual niche,

We do it by our brain work.

And before the internet, we can speech with each other just physically present near or by telephone.

But now we can do it.

We can choose what type of communication.

We can choose a type of communication.


SPEAKER_00:
we construct different ways to create niches itself yes thanks for sharing that and and it's uh i i hear you maxwell on the niche concept definitely an idea that ecologists have debated over as much as um

species but the idea of the shared informational resource let's go with that certainly there are things that are becoming knowledge resources that are not only non-evenly shared across the globe but also are related to new kinds of informational connections that haven't occurred in any individual sensory niche

hearing languages that one wouldn't have heard access to perspectives and the high throughput nature of media.

So these are all things that I think change our match or mismatch or our fitness between our evolutionary priors on biofeedback or on safety or on the veracity of language.

These kinds of things are being connected and being played out in new ways.

so i would think how can active inference be used to understand and design these situations well we can define the remote team and we can also think of it as almost a reduced case and an unknown mismatch case with our own like quote natural ecology but first our ecology is so flexible and humans have displayed so many lifestyles that this is really one of many there's no reference wild type that's one thing

And then the second thing is when you take an animal into a laboratory, you know that it's not going to be getting the same microbiome or the sun or the temperature variability or the prey or the predator or whatever it is, but you forego that degree of freedom and naturalism for an element of controllability.

And so in ecology, they do a lot of mesoscale experiments

Well, they'll set up like 200 fish tanks and add exactly three salmon and exactly 11 algae and set up these tanks.

And they can demonstrate things like dynamic oscillatory systems or like an instability point with the ratios of different initial conditions of two different species or the role of different nutrients.

And then the critique, just like it is with animal behavior in the laboratory, is like, well, that's not exactly the natural ecosystem.

And so it's just an interesting topic how in ecology there's this continuum from super long scale systems like cosmology that you're never going to be able to intervene in or make experiments about like tectonic plate level understandings of biodiversity ranging to very local understandings that are often very controlled.

But then those are often subject to the same kinds of holistic criticisms that so many other frameworks are.

And so to turn again to active inference, there's a way to build positively on this and just think, great, there's this mismatch between levels, or at least apparently, why don't we kind of think from the top down and set out a really big scaffold for multi-level systems, and then we'll figure out how to map different levels and scales of analysis within this.

Just like people learned how to use multi-level regression, this is going to be like a variational tool at that kind of category or of that kind of type.

All right.

Figure six.

So here, Maxwell, on figure six, I'll let you take a first pass.

But the next slide, if you just you let me know if you want the box to come up.

But let's just focus on this image and maybe start off just like what does it convey or what is it there for?

But go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, just let me pull up the figure myself.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

It's called a particular partition.

It's a pun.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

As a pun.

Yeah, just to explain the pun.


SPEAKER_01:
I know, I just want it in front of me while I explain.

Well, so basically this figure explains how...

Um, you add, I mean, I, I would, I would prefer to explain things in terms of the figure, figure three, um, cause this is the slightly more technically complicated version of the figure three.

Like it, it.

Figure six basically tells you how you effectively take a bunch of states and add them to the superordinate scale.

But I think it's slightly easier to explain using figure three.

So what we basically do is we're going to take a bunch of states that comprise our system and then partition those states into Markov blankets.

And then from there,

reconstruct the system at the superordinate scale on the basis of these Markov blankets.

So basically in new work, especially in the particular physics monograph, we speak of this in terms of two operators that we use, G and R.

G is a grouping operator effectively and it allows us to construct Markov blankets from the base states That we're considering and then our takes these Markov blankets and then reduces their dimensionality So, I mean effectively we're going to be dropping some of the states to construct the states at the scale above so we start with a bunch of states and

And these are all the states that are of interest to us in the system.

So these can be literally any states whatsoever.

These techniques have been used recently to partition fMRI data.

So when you're dealing with fMRI data, each state is a voxel, so a 3D pixel effectively.

And so what we do from there

is you have all of your states and you have this continuous time series data typically and um so what you do is you construct an adjacency matrix um so an adjacency matrix is essentially you're plotting all of your states by all of your states such as the diagonal is basically like you know your degree of self coupling and what you do is you populate this matrix with uh coefficients that express how tightly uh this state and that state are coupled

And then so from this adjacency matrix, what you do is you take the Jacobian and the Hessian of these adjacency matrices.

So the Jacobian and the Hessian are basically the same matrix, but rather than having the coupling coefficient in each entry, what you have is the partial derivatives.

of each entry.

So effectively this is a very technical and complicated way of saying what we're looking at is the relative rates of change of every variable with respect to every other variable.

The reason we're doing this is that a zero in these matrices that contain the partial derivatives means that effectively there is no relative change, meaning that you can vary one of the variables and the other one doesn't change.

So this is a way of testing for conditional independence.

is the short story.

So basically, using these mathematical techniques, what you do is you read off the conditional independencies from this coupling matrix, this adjacency matrix.

And from there, you're able to rebuild the – well, you're able to construct Markov blankets in terms of the states that are independent of each other, conditioned on other states.

I mean, to recap, we started with a bunch of states that just compose the system that we're interested in explaining at one scale.

We put these states through a grouping operator that chunks it into Markov blanketed particles based on the conditional dependencies.

And so this takes us from the bottom of the figure to the top left.

So what we're left with after applying the grouping operator is a bunch of Markov blankets effectively.

Markov blanketed particles So then in order to get to the next scale what we do is we reduce the dimensionality of this partitioned set of states So effectively what we're doing is we're dropping the internal states and the fast stable modes of interaction

every scale in order to construct the states at the level above and this gets us basically from the It's the it's the other half of the image basically moving from these these partitioned states

back to a new set of states at the superordinate scale.

So conceptually what we're saying is that states at a superordinate scale are literally constituted by the slow metastable modes of interaction between states at the level below.

So just conceptually this means that you take say an organ like the heart, well the heart itself is constituted by the slower modes of interaction among heart cells.

So, for example, the main compartments of the heart, for example, are literally constituted by the modes of interaction between the cells that are components of those compartments.

Yeah, so then the reduction operator, we're dropping the internal states because they're effective.

All of the information that you need to know about the internal states is already summarized in the blanket.

So you drop the internal states and you drop the fast stable modes of oscillation and that gets you from the partitioned system back to a set of states at the next scale.

So hopefully that explains what's going on.

But again, that might sound very technical, but the idea, I think, is pretty simple.

And it's just that we're constructing superordinate layers of the system from the slow modes of interaction of components at the subordinate scale.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice explanation, Maxwell.

Really, thanks a lot for that.

Pleasure.

Yeah, super helpful.

So let's go over that because I think it's really critical.

And I think for some people, it's like, wait, weren't they just talking about ecology?

So what just happened there?

How did we go from the big questions in ecology to this grouping operator loop that was just described?

And so the main pivot, I think, has to do with multi-scale systems and how we're going to be modeling across different scales.

And so what the question is, again, thinking about understanding and modeling these dynamics of multi-scale systems.

And there's an unprincipled way, and this is a principled, not the only principled way, but a principled way to do this multi-scale integration.

So an unprincipled way would be, for example, you use method A to go from the fast dynamics to the next level.

So you have a heart cell simulator, proprietary program, heart cell sim four.

And then you make just another software pipeline that connects the outcome of that simulation to a model of the whole heart physiology.

And then you kind of run the results from these two different models back and forth.

So maybe it works, maybe it's functional.

So no one's saying it isn't.

It's just that the way that those two pieces were joined together was a bit a priori.

It was a little bit just chosen.

And it would be better if there was a way that we could, for example, take measurements across levels and use information that they provide to constitute our better understanding of the whole system.

So not just throw away the model that went, information that doesn't fit into each little bottleneck of information, but how can we have this full

variational in the um like constituting variance across multiple time scale as well as variational from that physics side which brings along all these really positive benefits related to computability attractability and relationship with bayesian statistics and 40 factor graphs and all these kind of cool areas it ends on bridging so if there's a hinge with multi-scale systems having a useful description then we're in the category of the physics models like spin graphs and game of life

and then also at higher levels, at the very least the tools for dealing with the kinds of things that those kinds of simulations like the Game of Life were invented to describe.

So that's sort of the main key point.

And so this is what Maxwell has run through and represented here.

is describing just like you could use model selection techniques to figure out which multi-level statistical regression model or which multiple ANOVA was the most appropriate or whether to include an interaction term or not, or a multi-scale model from a Bayesian framework, whichever modeling framework you're working within, hopefully there's a principled way to go about doing model selection and doing model comparison.


SPEAKER_01:
If I can just interject, Carl Friston calls this the particular partition.

There's a play on words here.

There's a double entendre.

By particular partition, he means partitioning the system into particles, which are the internal states of a system plus the Markov blanket.

But he also means it's a particular partition, as in there are other ways of doing this.

There's not necessarily one unique partition.

way of cutting things up.

And so the partition itself is named to reflect that fact.

I thought it was kind of fun to bring up.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Now, let me connect that point right there about one particular choice relating to dimensional reduction techniques and where degrees of freedom come into play for the experimenter.

so in real data sets you can do techniques like principal component analysis and you can do things like linear discriminant analysis which looks basically for group separation as an additive combination of principal components so it tries to explain the most variation with these orthogonal axes through the data that's principal components analysis now there's some data sets where the first principal component explains 80 and the next one explains five percent of the variance and has a long tail

Now, whether you need the first principal component and you're just going to take only the first one, or whether you take 99% of the variance being explained by 500 principal components where the explainability of principal component 74 on your Netflix consumption doesn't really map to like a real world understandable trait.

It still could reduce your uncertainty about a machine learning model, but it doesn't like map onto something that's actual about the group anymore and maybe misaligned with all these other things.

Those kinds of analyses are always up to the experimenter.

to decide how many dimensions they want to reduce to.

Do you want to reduce down to a two-dimensional space just upon the data points in the principal component one, principal component two, just remap onto the two dimensions that explain the most variance linearly?

Or do you want to map into a 500-dimension space?

That's where a lot of the freedom comes into play.

So just like there's a particular principal component analysis is presented in a paper, but principal component analysis is a general technique,

a particular system will have a particular decomposition statistically in this way, and that will also reflect degrees of experimental freedom in modeling it and in the statistics.

But the framework, just like the ANOVA framework, goes a little bit beyond and isn't necessarily about any specific system.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, one thing to point out is that there's a kind of recursivity at play where, I mean,

what you can actually see what is the best way to partition the system just kind of recursively in that

Like what you can do is take your system and then write alternative generative models of how you think the system is actually behaving.

And then you can use free energy as a metric to see which out of these alternative models of the system structure is the one that best explains its behavior.

So there's a meta Bayesian kind of aspect to this where like we're not only just like modeling

the system as if it were an active inference agent, but we can use generative models to assess which out of the possible ways of cutting up the states, of carving up the system, is the most appropriate.

And again, it's using the same metrics, so model evidence.

It's always model evidence.

I had a call with Carl yesterday, and he was saying, well, you know, whatever the question, the answer is always multiple evidence.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me connect that to one more niche idea.

So we talked about the skilled intentionality framework and how that's like part of the niche is the affordances.

And that can reflect a lot of aspects that are learned or that are cultural.

But the niche can also include Mercury.

that's influencing you and you can't taste it or detect it, but it's changing your phenotype or something like that.

So again, maybe some niche concepts are more affordance oriented, like the ecological psychology niche is more oriented towards action, unsurprisingly.

However, for many ecologists, when you talk about the niche, that means like how much light is hitting the ground, what temperature is it at night?

So that is also reflected by the realized versus the fundamental niche, because especially when you're talking about those abiotic factors,

you're sometimes talking about, oh yeah, rocks that you can knock over.

But a lot of times, again, people will just think of rocks as being in the physical niche.

So things can influence and not be reflected by sensory states.

And then all we have is the model.

So you have the model of decision-making.

It doesn't know that it's being slowly influenced

drifting off into a non-adaptive state space because of the cup that has led into it.

All it is experiencing slash reducing its uncertainty is about is its generative model of its niche.

And that's more on the ecological psychology side.

And that can even be extended to like a molecular level, like chemicals that can't be tasted.

They can still influence you.

So it's not only about how the action is enabled in the world, but that is the primacy when you're coming from an organism or a system of interest perspective.

And that's where you make this initial, like, what are the measurements to make?

Like Maxwell started off with, you start with states.

Those are measurements.

You could say, we could measure this.

We could measure this thing over here.

We could do it over here.

But you got to start with at least the idea that measurements are going to be made, or at least that there are certain distributions or types of measurements that could be made.

One other thing was the grouping operator that you mentioned that kind of reminded me of click detection of conditional independencies.

And so the other way of saying that is click detection of the conditional dependencies, because in order to find out which ones are zeros, you got to find out which ones are non-zero.

And then when you think about there's this representation ability to transform between the matrix and the network, like through the adjacency matrix or more advanced related matrices, then you can do click detection on a matrix.

So matrix is going to be able to make a network that has the exact same data in it, whether it's just one zero, like edges or not edges, or whether it's a weighted edge or a different type of edge.

there's such an equivalence between matrices and networks that click detection on a social network or something like that is going to be also detectable on the matrix form.

So that's something to keep in mind when we're talking about like a matrix coming in here, but then there's like maybe a network of interactions coming out another side.

Okay, any thoughts or questions?

That was definitely worth explaining.

Maybe we could now return to six, or we could also go to four.

There's a few questions from previous discussions.


SPEAKER_01:
I really wouldn't necessarily go to six, honestly.

It's like the most technical slide in our papers.

Sounds good.

So, I mean, unless the really nitty-gritty –

Gritty, gritty, gritty detail is of interest.

I would suggest that we not.

And I think figure three captures everything conceptually.

The figure six really just tells you how you add states to every particular thing.

So it's just running through the same thing, but like, okay, we're taking this state and now what do we do with it?

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll do 7.3 late night maybe if we need to.

But for now, I think let's just return to figure four.

which we've actually seen in previous weeks.

And I just wrote down a few questions.

One was, I believe, Alejandro's question from several weeks ago about what are some differences between simulating systems, like those that can at least apparently engage in deep counterfactuals, and morphological systems.

And so the question arose like, okay, but is the cell really doing a counterfactual analysis of alternate cell shapes?

It could be.

in a way that the brain may be doing some type of modeling of what behavioral states could be and then so that's the previous question that we're definitely going to return to hear new perspectives on from anyone who wants to raise their hand and then the second set of questions is cool where does evolution fit into all of this

And so a little bit more broadly, how does this Bayesian perspective play into evolution, ecology, development, and learning?

Because this is a morphogenesis problem.

It's a Devo problem.

And we know that Eco and Evo are going to come into play with Devo.

So how do we think about all these levels and how does Figure 4 make its appearance in this paper?

What is it relevant?

What does it show?

So any...


SPEAKER_01:
Well, figure four is just about how morphogenesis and, in general, higher order pattern formation happens under the variational framework.

So, I mean, we've discussed this in previous episodes, but

The idea is always essentially the same.

So what is it to share a generative model?

Well, in the context of active inference, to share a generative model means that you share the same beliefs about the kinds of sensory consequences that follow the effects of states in the world, and in particular, the effects of my own actions in the world.

So the idea is that if we share a generative model, we expect to perceive the world in the same way as a consequence of the same kinds of things.

pursuing on that idea, if we have the same generative model, then if I just do my thing and you just do your thing, we're eventually going to end up zeroing in on the same overall pattern because we share the same expectations about the kinds of things that we should expect, conditions on the same kinds of states.

So if you have a system that's equipped with state-dependent observation profiles, so for example, if I'm a heart cell, I should expect to sense other heart cells and to register blood flow and whatever.

Whereas if I'm a brain cell, then I really shouldn't be registering blood or other heart cells at all.

So if you have these kinds of state-dependent observation distributions, then you can start to see how sharing a generative model would allow for a bunch of components to zero in on, well, first of all, on a target configuration, and second of all, kind of

settle into a mutually coherent pattern of inference about what is my role in these higher order patterns that I'm part of.

Yeah, and so the idea there, I guess is the, so this is the vertical stack idea that we discussed last week.

The variational ecology is a horizontal and a vertical story, a vertical and a horizontal story.

It's a vertical story in that you have nested systems of systems of systems of systems, which is what I tend to emphasize in a lot of my work, but at every, basically in between every two scales, there's a niche construction story.

where the body at large is a niche for the organs, the organs at large are a niche for the cells, and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

I'm going to address the evolution side and then return to this idea that Maxwell was just talking about, about shared generative models, because that was also very helpful.

So how does evolution play into this?

Well, let's imagine this morphogenesis creature that we're watching.

It turns out that there's a lot of parameters in this model that are detailed in the paper, but it's not like all parameter combinations lead to this solution on the bottom right.

Only specific priors and specific mapping relationships between sensory and action states will result in this exact kind of light bulb shaped creature.

You can imagine there's some arrangement that might result in a circle.

There's some arrangement, the state space is large and it might not fix upon a stable point or it might do it very rapidly.

What cuts through all of these models?

What does model selection?

Evolution.

If it turns out that the wind is blowing from the north to the south in this image and that this shape, it has worked in the past and it left more offspring that believed that that shape was the morphogenesis position to approach, you'll just see that around.

It doesn't mean it's the only solution.

It just means it is what has existed.

So this is sort of an ab initio or a computational simulation of an artificial situation, obviously.

But in the realized world where creatures are evolving, then you find that only the organisms that have the phenotypes that adequately reflect regularities of their niche are going to be left carrying forward.

and so it's kind of like wow how did the ants know to drag back this fly from 30 meters in the desert it's like it's all they do it's all they've been doing if they couldn't do it they'd be doing something else or they wouldn't exist it's not like you'd see an ant just struggling and failing to do it that would be a very short-lived strategy so you there's wacky stuff that happens again when the niche is transiently misaligned with evolutionary

priors or when an evolutionary prior tends towards just like accept everything into the nest you know pull in threads or something like that but i think that's really important to keep in mind that evolution often does model selection for us to actually find the solutions that work bottom right and the expectation action relationships top left that relate in morphogenesis top right through the extracellular target signal being the coordinating mechanism in this morphogenesis example on the bottom that's development

mediated what appears to be by this basically monotonic decrease in free energy representing the utility of modeling this system in converting to or converging towards a developmental attractor using a free energy framework


SPEAKER_01:
Well, notice that it spikes initially, which is interesting.

So all the agents are kind of trying to figure out what their position is, and then they settle into like a mutually consistent group inference.

And you know, this work has been recapitulated across several scales.

Ensor Palacios and colleagues have a cool paper where they do this across three scales.

So they have like a micro, a meso, and a macro scale, all premised on the same free energy functional.

And you get these nice layers of like organelles within organs within an organism.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And let me also go back to one thing you said about the shared generative model.

So you talked about like the neurons sort of being in their niche, you know, wrapped in a specific type of glia or receiving certain types of communication at different developmental time periods from different inputs.

There's almost this, not a complete replacement that you can do of having a shared generative model as you mentioned between the cells, but it's like they're part of a shared generative model at a higher level, like through the neurons own expectations and its own niche.

it subsumes and it becomes a functional part of a larger generative model brains know things that neurons don't and so that is very naturally accommodated in a multi-scale framework because at the level of analyzing just the two cells you'd find that they act as if they had a shared generative model and so it would make sense oh at the level of the social interaction it's like two people are having shared generative models like they both know how the movie is going to play out or they both know whose turn it is to speak

But then at a higher level, and that's all happening at the same time, it's also like being part of a shared generative model that is the higher level, whether that's thought of as collective computation or collective cognition or distributed intelligence, whatever framework it ends up playing out as.

the brain knows things that the neuron doesn't.

And so the social group is having dynamics that constrain and facilitate the individual level in a way that specifically will evade the computation or the understanding of the individual.

So I think that's kind of an interesting consequence of this.

And yeah, good.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, to address a question that was asked initially about shared intentionality, I mean,

So we have this paper now out in entropy where we basically argue that the free energy principle provides a formal semantics.

And by that we mean that

What it is really to act on a generative model is to have an intentional relation with some features of an environment that you're inferring constantly.

That's effectively what having a generative model allows you to do.

It allows you to go from your sensory data and from your architecture of priors and likelihoods to an estimation of what most likely caused

your sensory data and you know intentionality kind of seems to come pre-packaged with that as in like you know if intentionality means being appropriately receptive or to you know features of an environment that stimulate you well then having a generative model just means being intentional in that sense

And sharing a generative model means that you're participating in a form of shared intentionality, so a shared way of systematically relating your observations and embodied priors to patterns of behavior and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

One other thought, and this was something that our friend Blue was talking about at our event a couple weeks ago, was this multi-scale agency concept.

So the individual agency concept, a relational edge agency, then the small group, and then the community.

And so we can't necessarily directly experience, but what can you tell somebody to participate in at the local level that does engender this higher order adaptive process to play out?

And so I think it's this space between

having a shared generative model and being a shared generative model like we're going to have shared norms so that we're going to take cognitive diversity and help that map our search space for the critical problems that influence us all so we'll have the best search and we'll figure out the outcomes that are going to be reflecting this kind of a distribution that we want to converge toward

That's the kind of well specified harnessing of differences within the niche, because you said Maxwell agents that see the world in the same way.

So I know that you didn't mean that from the overlapping because literally no one's, you know, generative visual model is going to be the exact same.

But

there's this question of how much seeing the same way versus basically the variation within the niche in the exact same way of course not but it's a it's a goldilocks situation because if everyone had exactly the same predictive model then we would never see literally differences in opinions or ideas and so when thinking about the heterodox or the novel or the informative the adaptive that space is really about the mapping of the individual you know uh

action perception loops in a sense onto this collective level.

And there's individual states that can be healthy in one context and unhealthy or considered unhealthy in another context.

And so it's just I think it's just the beginning of thinking about multi scale systems from this way.

But then, as we know, people's concept about themselves and their social world changes their behavior and in ways that are really subtle, kind of what is water.

So just very interesting stuff.

cool any other thoughts on this figure so just to go through the figures in reverse order we had six which will again it's a late night spooky special for another time five any thoughts on five also looks like there's a lot of uh equations on there not needing to unpack now


SPEAKER_01:
four, talked about, three, and then two.

I mean, yeah, five and six, for those of you who really want to drill into the, I mean, we could have like a 7.3 or something at some point, ideally with a few of the more like technical people to really unpack that.

Because five and six, like really unpack the math

uh in some detail but i i don't know how useful it is for like a kind of high level conceptual discussion like we're having right now so perfect yep totally agree and sounds good about that


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Well, those were the figures.

Does anyone else want to return to any slide or want to bring up any other thoughts or questions like what was something that was interesting that they heard about or something that they didn't expect for the discussion to introduce or another direction that they would like to see it go towards?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, early on there were some remarks about theory of mind and so on.

Yeah, so we have a whole paper on this that came out.

Actually, it came out in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, so we're very proud of that.

It's called Thinking Through Other Minds, and yeah, it's basically like a – well, it was a Target article, and there were like 27 or 28 peer commentaries, and we wrote a response.

And so if you're interested in how this fits in with theory of mind and, you know, the debates between simulation theory and theory theory and all that, well, we have like a paper length.

treatment of that.

I think the kind of in a nutshell response is that you can have your cake and eat it too using the variational framework.

I mean you might have noticed that this is sort of our argumentative strategy is often to say well there seems to be this split in the literature and actually both sides of the split can be made sense of.

and done justice to by appealing to this active inference framework.

And here as well, I mean, we kind of strike a balance between these kind of explicit theory-theory mind-reading accounts and these more implicit kind of simulation theory embodied resonance kind of approaches.

Again, by appealing to our multi-scale story, right?

So, I mean, you know, you have more explicit and more implicit forms of inference about others.

And the more explicit they become, the more, like, the more properly you're heading into theory of mind territory.

But, I mean, that could also be a topic for discussion in a later podcast.

But there's a whole paper-length treatment, though, was my point, if it's of interest to anyone.

Super cool.

I'll check it out.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yeah, I think that it will be really good for the next two months, last two months of 2020.

That's eight weeks.

So we'll have four papers, the ones that we laid out.

We'll cover a few.

A few old stomping grounds and a few new areas as well.

For eight, we'll be going into math a lot more.

And I think in some other social domains, maybe with the Scripps paper.

And yeah, I'm just like looking forward to these conversations, making our queue of papers for 2021.

having special events if there's anyone who wants to arrange for like a special interview or a session modeling like a mod like a simulation approach these could all be kind of fun types of discussions to have because it's fun to bring in all these different angles on it hear from the medical and hear from the practitioners


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you so much again for the really nice treatment that this podcast gives to our work.

My gratitude is overflowing.

I hope you continue.

Good.


SPEAKER_00:
These really unpack and they help a lot.

And this is what the game is about, just understanding and learning, turning it over, hearing in different ways.

So thanks for participating.

I guess this is 7.2, but next time in 8, 9, 10, 11, for the rest of 2020, we'll finish out strong with more learning and more exploring areas that are new to everyone.

So send us any comments or questions that you have that we could unpack live.

The follow-up form is in the calendar invite.

So if anyone wants to provide any feedback there, that'd be cool.

And just stay in touch.

This has been a great team comp.

So thanks so much, everyone, for participating.


SPEAKER_01:
Very cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Take care.

Yep.

Peace.

Thanks a lot.