## 1z1MHiHiYuM

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome.

I think that we're going now.

This is the Active Inference Livestream.

It's Active Inference Livestream 18 on March 17th, 2021.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied Active Inference.

You can find us at any of these links here.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be using good video etiquette for live streams.

And Steven, thanks so much for joining.

Always awesome to have you on for the conversations and this will be very fun convo.

here looking at the calendar we can see at the shortened length that we're down in the end of march 2021 in number 18 which is going to be about the paper the predictive global neuronal workspace a formal active inference model of visual consciousness by christopher white and ryan smith

and this video in 18.0 is going to be about setting the context for 18.1 and 0.2 whether participating in these discussions with the authors if you're listening to this before those events happen or contextualizing um in sort of a bi-directional way for listening to those later discussions so if you're in the active inference community this might be exposing you to some new questions and perspectives if you're from outside the active inference community or you're not familiar with it then

this will be highlighting how active inference is an integrative framework across a few different other ideas these dot zero videos are just introductions to the ideas because you could take a whole course of learning on any one of them so they're just little uh suggestions and hints related to the ideas and where this paper is going as far as the punchline is that we can build on this uh predictive global neuronal workspace model and think about it in

being implemented by active inference type models and get new insights, predictions, and hopefully explanations and applications.

And in 18, we're gonna pretty much go through a lot of the paper as far as their goals and the questions and many of their copious figures.

And it'll be good to talk to Ryan and Christopher when they join for the stream.

For 18.1 and 18.2, we're going to be discussing this paper, so save and submit your questions and get in touch with us if you want to participate.

Okay, so here is the paper, Predictive Global Neuronal Workspace, A Formal Active Inference Model of Visual Consciousness.

Before we read the goals and claims, Stephen, maybe you could just say hello and introduce yourself and what got you excited in this paper just personally before we dive into the paper itself.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Daniel.

Yeah, well, my background is that I'm doing a practice-based PhD at the Solomons Institute of Applied Psychology.

So I'm interested in how active inference can help understand some of the processes that I've been working on.

for understanding pre-reflective phenomenological awareness and people's sense making.

So that kind of ties in to how I'm also interested in

ryan and christopher's work because they're bringing this into the psychological domain but also bringing that into the phenomenological domain in ways which are practically predictive and so that's really really exciting and i'm i see a lot of opportunities for this modeling work and i've

actually spoken to Ryan about this to try and link in with other ways of people doing sense making etc so and this particular paper I think is really interesting because we've got a lot of

exciting philosophical ideas around global workspace concepts in neuroscience and an area that I've only partly explored but to have this integrated into a predictive model that can be tested at certain scales in certain ways and to have people who've got the sort of rigor and the kind of

the ability to focus down and choose experimental and practical ways to explore this, which Ryan and Christopher have, is really helpful.

So I'm looking at this from a few different ways, and hopefully that will be something that other people will find useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

So this is kind of a big paper and topic.

So we're going to frame it first with just how the authors represented their goals and claims.

And then we're going to kind of pull back to just the bigger questions about the paper.

And then we're going to go through basically the keywords.

So if when reading what the authors are setting out to do, it's like, why would you even want to travel from A to Z?

We're going to go to define them.

So Stephen, do you want to read the first one?

of uh on six oh wait you're muted


SPEAKER_01:
So goals and claims of the paper here, we've got formalizing ideas first introduced by Howie and White and Friston.

So they argue that conscious access or ignition, which is this kind of sudden awareness that things come into our awareness, is a fundamentally inferential process that depends upon a level of processing of sufficient temporal depth

to contextualize and coordinate lower levels of processing so that's actually quite um has a few implications that so and should i carry on is that okay sure um then also to build on the previous conceptual contributions in this area mentioned above um they they will be substantiating arguments with a series of detailed computational simulations

These simulations are based upon the first principles account of perception and action selection offered by active inference.

So that's, again, that's one of the real foundational benefits that this is testable.

And then also they end by examining the relationships between

the predictive global neuronal workspace, which they've introduced as a concept, and alternative models, and briefly address potential concerns about how phenomenal consciousness could plausibly be situated within the model that they're going to present.

However, this paper is chiefly concerned with what Block terms access consciousness.

which is defined as the availability of information for verbal report, voluntary action, and executive processing.

For brevity, they will use conscious access.

They use conscious access and consciousness interchangeably throughout the paper.

So just to really, you know, this gives them a practical starting point to work on.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

ice yep there's a lot in these goals but one of the key pieces is that they're talking about informational availability in terms of report paradigms and then they're going to be connecting big questions in multi-scale systems and cognition to active inference so let's unpack that a little bit in terms of just what are the bigger questions not in the author's words that we identified this paper as relevant for so people who are maybe working in these areas

And the first one is which one of these do you want to just go for first?


SPEAKER_01:
I might just mention the first one and then if you can pick it up after that one.

So, yes, basically, they're just there is a question really that they're exploring, can

simulations using generative models of belief updating give you principled schemes in active inference to extend to other proofs for a predictive global neuronal workspace.

So does this lead to sort of a plausible route doing this sort of simulation to a predictive approach to this whole paradigm?


SPEAKER_00:
nice and it's related to the second question which is what are the unique predictions and explanations of active inference so it's the first question is kind of asking how can we use the simulation the generative model how can that be used to get to unique evidence or unique claims or unique experimental design and then something that's related to active inference's role is how could this reposition the distinctions that people make between access

consciousness and phenomenological consciousness so access consciousness as per the previous slide is the informational accessibility phenomenological consciousness is the awareness or the qualia and an example of something that's in access consciousness but not phenomenological would be like a subliminal sound

because you're not experiencing it it's subliminal but it can influence somebody so that is within their access consciousness because informationally it leads to differential behavior or the planting of an idea but it's not phenomenologically experienced so it's not just one basket with what um is being met with consciousness yes stephen


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and just to clarify a little bit on that as well is that they are using this idea for this access consciousness whereby you can access it in a way that you could report on it, like you're saying, and that may be there, like you say, as a qualia,

and it may be transiently available, but you may not be able to access it from a reporting paradigm.

So the way they frame access consciousness is to really give a temporal depth and a sense of how stuff comes in.

So the idea with access consciousness is it's either accessible or it's not, whereas phenomenological consciousness is

kind of more of that flux, which is when we think of consciousness, it's hard

is not really something you can put in a box.

Whereas access consciousness, you can't put it in a box either, but they're more able to, so they can model it.

So it's useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

They also are setting out to address how the active inference model can integrate different ideas like Bayesian brain and global neuronal workspace in neuroscience and combine that with more psychological applications.

And also they're asking in this paper,

how can they perhaps integrate with other existing active inference models to sort of extend other work like related to the global neuronal workspace and also bringing it into a specific visual modality and experimental task.

So we had a bunch of questions making .zero as well.

So what is just one or a few of the questions that you just wanted to raise and why did you raise it?

You made it.


SPEAKER_01:
Some of the questions that came up for me was, you know, just how does this all fit together into what's potentially in the future?

So I'd be really interested to get Ryan and Christopher's sort of take on some of these distinctions, you know, just like you were talking about that potential for it to go into multisensory integration and beyond.

So how does visual consciousness or awareness of that

differ from general awareness?

And how does the ability of the predictive global neuronal workspace give these detailed simulations and resulting predictions?

So what's the potential for that in other fields and sectors?

So one of them might be to help influence psychological perspectives on people's professional practice.

as with people are starting to make even what it means to take a perspective how much is that access consciousness effectively when i start to bring something to my perspective am i bringing something to my access consciousness when medical understanding of conscious awareness or when people start to understand about self-reporting in general and how people

know and people who are working with knowledge and bring things up because a lot of knowledge workers are using interviews and reporting paradigms and there's a big question about well how do you deal with first person normally it's first person perspectives which is one thing and then there's first person experience and how do you even

get those two resolved in some sort of coherent way.

So I think that's something that would be really interesting to hear more on.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Good thoughts.

And we're just always curious about where Active Inference comes from and where we can apply it and learn it.

Why does it really matter?

Well, there's sort of a theory arm and an applications arm.

The theory arm is that

This paper is exploring some experimentally tractable, unique predictions of an active inference type model and showing how it goes beyond Bayesian brain, global neuronal workspace, predictive processing.

It integrates across and it goes beyond several of these theoretical neuroscience modalities.

And then,

the paper is part of a broader network of research and work by ryan and others that we'll hopefully hear more about just as to how could this shape the kinds of clinical and community psychology practices that people are performing because this is related to all these types of uh

topics.

So any thoughts on this before we go to the abstract roadmap?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I suppose it just comes back to this idea of ways of knowing what does it mean to, to know and be aware and have awareness, um, that, that actually is often sort of implicitly sort of in the background, but this gives a way to make some things more explicit, which I think could be really valuable.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So the abstract, just because I think we'll have enough to actually talk about with a paper, people can pause it to read the full thing.

They're in the first part of the abstract framing the need to move beyond the global neuronal workspace model.

In the second half of the abstract, they report what they did, which is demonstrating their integrative model, which we're going to be able to look at and explain what they actually did.

And they find that that model is able to reproduce a lot of other findings from previously non-unified experiments.

And then they close with a discussion on how they can build upon previous work in this integrative and active inference style.

and where that leads to as far as predictions.

So that's sort of reflected in their roadmap in that they give a basic broad introduction, then specific theoretical backgrounds on active inference and deep temporal modeling.

They then spend the bulk of the work

presenting and many figures presenting the results and recapitulating several specific phenomena that are important to reproduce and also impressive to reproduce in a simple framework and one where we can see all the parts.

And then they close with basically a discussion about where their work is fitting in relative to other work and concluding, summarizing and stating a few next steps.

So how did that strike you or what would you add to that, Steven, if anything?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I think that's a good summary.

I think in some ways we might be that the authors would speak a bit more to how that taxonomy came about.

And there's some nuances in there in terms of how and why they selected what they selected and which would be really interesting to to have them really step through.

But and

But overall, the way they've modelled this out into a very practical, real-world kind of context, I think, shows their potential.

And then what does that mean for this temporal structure then links back to other work around temporal depth, which is, you know, the kind of... Since I think it's 2016 has been what a lot of the active inference...

work has certainly in the modeling has really been yielding is this idea of temporal depth and what it can mean.


SPEAKER_00:
So that'd be great.

Nice, great point.

Earlier models of active inference were sort of like instantaneous.

or one-step models.

And a lot of the ongoing research is about the integration of multiple scales or multiple coarse grainings of temporal dynamics.

So here are the keywords of the paper.

So if someone was listening to it from

any background and was curious about, well, why does it matter to connect some of these things or why is it important or how does that implication arise from integrating or what have previously people done if not with this integration?

That's where the keywords kind of come into play.

And we're gonna go through

Basically a slide for each.

They are computational neuroscience, predictive processing, Bayesian brain hypothesis, active inference, consciousness, visual consciousness, global neuronal workspace, and the predictive global neuronal workspace.

So let's start with computational neuroscience.

A lot you could say about this, a lot of people's department and research, but we can just look at it pretty naively as the intersection of computational approaches and neuroscience research.

So computational could mean using computers, which a lot of things are nowadays.

Using computers could be descriptively modeling statistics, or it could be generatively modeling a system like with a simulation.

But also, the computational approaches might include using computational metaphors to describe systems.

That might be considered computational as well, like computationalist.

On the other hand, neuroscience is about studying brains, but increasingly non-neural cell types in the brain, in the body, in the niche, in the society.

So all these different aspects of behavior in the brain, and it uses all different kinds of approaches, some of which are computational, which brings us to the overlap, which can look like a few different things.

It could look like computational brain metaphors, the brain is a computer, or it does information transfer of this type.

um it could look like doing descriptive or generative modeling on computational uh representations of neurological data it could look like brain computer interfaces so that's sort of computational neuroscience and steve i know that you like kind of saw where that could go beyond where most people would think about computational neuro do you want to mention it here on the next slide um maybe on the next slide and just um


SPEAKER_01:
I suppose in some ways it's just to try and highlight some of the thought practices I had to go through to get my head around what this means and how I could bring it together with the

the active inference process.

So the challenge you slightly have with active inferences and predictive processing that goes with this is that it challenges the computer metaphor that we've kind of got embedded of how the brain works, either the model or the thought that we sort of bring in signals and then we have a computational awareness, we think it and then we do it.

it's this sort of open system so these predictive processes and this cybernetics so it kind of when we're talking about computational neuroscience

in relation to the systems neuroscience the non-linear dynamical systems that active inference is part of um it's it's a bit more of an open um kind of process approach so i suppose that to for someone who's trying to understand this i think it i found it helpful to start to

to think about the computations of dynamic process that develops over time when it's used in this sort of context.

And those sorts of ways that these models are, which is different to kind of system dynamic models, which are much more like flows on something which is defined.

It's this kind of evolving process.

And of course, the free energy principle then ties into that.

because it's all about being able to work with those dynamics.

So I don't know, does that make sense what's there?


SPEAKER_00:
People can let us know if it makes sense or helps them.

I think that the nonlinear dynamical systems is a big topic.

One way that that has been operationalized in neuroscience is the Bayesian brain hypothesis, because Bayesian statistics is often used to model nonlinear dynamical systems.

So if we're thinking about the brain as a nonlinear dynamical system,

it makes sense to think about the brain as a Bayesian device.

And this is from the 2018 interview with Fristin and Martin and myself.

And in this paper, we summarized and characterized the Bayesian brain hypothesis, predictive coding, and the free energy principle.

and asked, how are these different models similar or different from one another?

In fact, he had suggested that these three frameworks are variations of the same basic mechanisms.

So if you're wanting to learn more about the background of the Bayesian brain and how it differs in specific ways from predictive processing, free energy principle, active inference, et cetera,

then read his response here or read the interview because it can help with some people's understanding.

Let's just go through it at an overview level.

Predictive processing is specifically looking at how error is propagated through systems which can be hierarchical or must be hierarchical and therefore are amenable to a Bayesian hierarchical modeling.

So in this sort of diagram on the right,

It shows how at the very bottom level you have muscular output, action, and sensory input.

And then what's happening in this cascade of hierarchically nested systems is that predictions are coming down and prediction errors are moving up.

But it's not a spatial thing.

It could be in or out.

It's just about how it's laid out.

And predictive processing turns out to be a way to get somewhat effective Bayesian-like behavior.

because it's even how we fit some of our algorithms.

We just start with the prior and then we inch it closer depending on the error signal.

So learning based upon the error signal is a really common algorithmic maneuver.

And so predictive processing and the Bayesian brain are sort of like compatible theories because the Bayesian brain is just saying it's gonna be something Bayesian.

Predictive processing

is a theory because it makes predictions that are falsifiable about what is being represented in the communications between levels and namely that you'd have prediction going one way and prediction error heading back the other way anything to say about that before we continue


SPEAKER_01:
No, that makes sense.

The only thing I'd add is that what's going to be mentioned is how there's this temporal depth piece starts to make sense.

You could have like a level of processing goes to another level.

And that's something that the same basic principle is driving it.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So here is a really informative piece from the first in 2018 interview.

Friston wrote, the Bayesian brain hypothesis per se does not trouble itself to commit to a particular process theory other than requiring implicit beliefs to conform to Bayes' rule.

So similar to how free energy principle doesn't have a specific process theory that's downstream, it's a more like a general overarching, does it conform or not to this principle?

The Bayesian brain hypothesis is a corollary of the free energy principle and is realized through processes like predictive coding or abductive inference under prior beliefs.

However, Bayesian brain is not the free energy principle because both Bayesian brain hypothesis and predictive coding are incomplete theories of how we infer states of affairs.

And then here is so interesting where he wrote, it's this inactive, embodied, extended, embedded, and encultured aspect that is lacking from the Bayesian brain and predictive coding theories.

precisely because they do not consider entropy reduction through action as well as through inference.

So it's all well and good to have the inference engine that's driven in this thermodynamic way towards entropy reduction, but it takes on a whole other level and integrates with control theory and action in the niche when you go from saying, well, yes, the brain is a Bayesian statistical inference device for action.

And that's really one of the key pieces of active inference

which is why we went to it here.

And this is the definition of the authors in this paper.

That's what they wrote.

So Stephen, where would you say active inference fits in?

What do you have to say about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I like this.

This is a really helpful slide.

Well, there's a couple of things that come up.

One thing is the fact that it talks about...

abductive inference and it's talking about this idea you know predictive coding and you know Ryan Smith and Christopher they're talking about prospective sometimes ideas of you know we're predicting how things are going to happen well that's really interesting because most research in terms of like social science is mostly

you know retrospective or inductive or deductive um and abductive is um this abductive emergent thing is is actually very um hard to get at but actually is is showing that this predictive uh rather than retroactive knowing is what's driving everything um so i think that that in itself is quite useful to think about um


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, nice.

It's interesting that he mentioned it there and that active inference, how does it implement potentially some of these cool aspects that are lacking from the Bayesian brain?

So where does active inference build on Bayesian brain approaches?

Here's what active inference is.

So the way that the authors, Ryan Smith and Christopher White wrote it in this paper on the first sentence of their primer is active inference, a corollary of the free energy principle is the first principles approach to modeling approximately Bayes optimal behavior.

So you can look at their primer in this paper

which is really awesome, as well as their very extensive tutorial on active inference and model stream number 1.1 through 4.

So we just really appreciate the clarity that Ryan and Christopher bring to this area.

but basically what's happening is active inference is allowing us to formalize the process of the environment giving data through sense to the organism which in the generative modeling of that data which is like bayesian modeling but that's inference and then it connects it to external states again closing the loop

via action as well as internal dynamics or endogenous fluctuations on either side of the interface.

Only by defining the interface do we get this kind of a clean separation.

So that's where Active Inference allows us to say, yes, it's Bayesian in terms of how it recognizes data and it acts in an ecosystem that also has other agents.

That's where Active Inference comes into play.

All right, so now to sort of switch gears to consciousness and visual consciousness.

So let's just start with sort of the obvious, what is consciousness question.

And just, we're just talking about this paper.

So we're not talking about like something that's, you know, some sort of theological question.

Remember that it's access consciousness.

It's self-report paradigms.

And you can read more about their perspective on that in the limitations and multiple other places where they really are clear about the pros and cons of using visual modality.

So it's not olfactory consciousness.

It's not a sound.

It's not multimodal.

They're doing a sense specific task and it's reported awareness.

So what do you think about that, Stephen, or in your thinking or learning about consciousness, where would this sort of a narrow approach figure in?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, well, I think that, you know, when they talk about the pros and cons, you know, the pros are that we are actually able to generate data through reports, and it gives us a way into this whole area.

And by the sort of the detail of

how the design has been done, it negates some of the challenges and makes us get some workable insights.

And one of the cons is that, or one of the downsides that they're facing is you can't genuinely report

being conscious of nothing.

You can't say, I'm no longer conscious of any of that thing, so to speak.

And they acknowledge that.

There's always something in your field of vision when you're being asked to self-report around if something's present or not present.

So they've had to do some workarounds to get the results that are usable.

But that was something they can speak to better than me.


SPEAKER_00:
cool i agree it'll be like um what are the author's big motivations what is their long-term vision for consciousness research why have they chosen vision first what would be the next most tractable sense so definitely there's a lot of uh questions to have for them and also this is a great note from them brief note on phenomenology and the phenomenal consciousness access consciousness distinction

so again i just we kind of hit this point because it's one of the it's one of the keywords of the paper is consciousness and a lot of times when uh we see scientific research on consciousness so-called it's just it's always critical to be clear about what's being discussed and the authors thankfully here really are clear which actually leads some people to be almost disappointed it's like oh but what about the big phenomenology it's like

maybe we'll get there or maybe we won't or you could have any story you want on that but it's almost like if the sales pitch is too much hype then people it's what they expect so then when there's a more narrow focused paper they act like it introduces uh all these critical challenges that are just being glided over by a paper that doesn't define consciousness or doesn't

go so specifically and carefully into the distinctions between access and phenomenal consciousness, because not everyone will.

And yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I like that.

The way they talk about this, they acknowledge this question about this threshold and start to sort of decide on where they're going to fit in with that, I think is really valuable, because this idea of

the question that's sitting in the background with phenomenological uh consciousness there when they talk about this moment-to-moment sensory flux and in a way it ties to the um uh chris field's work that we were doing with quantum contextuality potentially um is you know what's this kind of flux idea that's in the background and when does it get

over to the contextuality of awareness.

So just to show it linking to some of the other papers that have come up.

And then for this, you know, it shows you the importance of the

experimental design and the modeling simulation design and how the way the design ends up evolving itself kind of gives us some insights of how you might structure our understanding of consciousness.

The sort of questions they had to ask and answer to build the model in itself is quite interesting.

Nice.


SPEAKER_00:
yep so they're um really clear about that and we can talk more about it let's go to the neuro side so we kind of talked a little bit about the philosophical question of consciousness and the systems dynamics and control theory question of active inference but then there's this neuroscience side and area that they're in and that's what's also moving towards applications in the clinic for example

And what we can do here is present some of the early and latter citations related to the global neuronal workspace, global workspace theory, GWT, or there's a bunch of related ones.

Sorry if the acronyms are not always consistent, but what the global neuronal workspace, I guess, is probably what we should use and predictive GNW.

are they're integrative models that are on one hand for neuronal function.

So through philosophically neutral frameworks like cascade theory or network theory, you can describe how you get patterns like ignition or cascades through networks or propagation.

then it can be applied and say, ah, what if that ignition is so-called consciousness?

Access consciousness, there's a strong argument.

You can say, look, if the data doesn't get to the other end of the pipeline, it's not going to get there.

So if it does get there, it had to have propagated through a critical system.

So that is the easier way

bar and then the harder bars is that information propagation equivalent to phenomenal consciousness experience qualia and the answer as we know from subliminal stimuli is just no it's not but that's what people often want to get at addressing which is how does the brain quote make consciousness or what brain states are associated with quote consciousness meaning awareness in our first person experience

which even under the most generous vision is just a part of our total system.

What do you think about that, Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think that's a good, you make a good point there.

And this move from the sort of more broader workspace to this neuronal workspace then brings in

the actual understanding which again ryan and christopher have of of neuroscience and the way that the the firing happens so that gives an insight and also the thing that i think is interesting is that they're talking about consciousness as being this um belief um updating or prediction that's

barely on off like it's like things come in they come out of consciousness whereas in other cases that might be more of a gradual flux of awareness there's something going on here which because that flips in and out of consciousness that gives you a way to use belief updating schemes

to model it.

And I'd be interested to hear how they see that.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Good question.

So here's kind of a classic neuroscience diagram from this 2005 early paper.

Left side is the single neuron scale.

You have receptors in a membrane and

different currents that are happening at a very very micro level and meso level with circuits and then more of a macro level with the activation that's propagating across regions of the brain and then another way that was helpful was looking at this i think it could have even been 1998 paper the global neuronal workspace model of conscious access from neuronal architecture to clinical applications so

lest we think that it's a new idea to apply neuroscience in clinical settings or think it's too soon or too late.

It's just always going to be sort of what people are recalibrating to.

And in this figure, it's connecting sort of the multifaceted attributes of the self and consciousness.

So again, used maybe vaguely, maybe detailedly.

like long-term memory of the past, evaluating systems of value, attentional focus, regimes of attention, as we would say, perceptual systems in the moment, and then motor systems in action in the future.

So it's like if all those things are being connected and what connects the sound in the ear to the memory, to the action pattern, like if someone says march, what connects that?

And the answer is something like a system at criticality that propagates from a sensory modality

and if it were quieter it wouldn't have been heard it wouldn't have propagated if it's the wrong language it doesn't propagate so it kind of only catches when it's all aligned with the rhythmic oscillations and the prior state of the network which is equivalent to constituting a bayesian belief network

so that's sort of the global neuronal workspace model is it's going to be integrating all these features that are kind of disparate cybernetic features memory past present future self other thinking through other minds all these features of neuroscience that everyone's trying to understand and model and put that in a network science frame so that maybe it could be

brought into the clinical applications, just like their title is getting at even 20 years ago, or other avenues like how do we discuss neuroscience with the public?

What kind of metaphors will they receive?

Is it like a network that activates or an avalanche that falls or a program that halts?

Different ways that people think about systems neuroscience.

Any thoughts on that before we can continue?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think just generally speaking, this idea of this integration is really useful when people are thinking more broadly about, you know, often people are thinking about us as a system, but you people fall into this trap of I'm a kinesthetic thinker or a visual thinker, you know, some of these kind of folk psychology systems things and NLP and that.

And this approach gives a plausible way to understand what it's,

It's all one integration.

And it's not that you have someone going off and their visual system is in one part of the brain and this piece, you know, and in a way this is permeating how culture kind of thinks the brain works.

And then bringing that in with the free energy is a way that it could actually integrate and it could be part of that.

And now with this prediction dynamic, it is quite...

It is quite possible that this could start to be more understood more generally as a model that is how we sort of work.


SPEAKER_00:
You know, as to the different styles of learning or sensory modalities, it could be that some cognitive diversity is such that the same symbols on the page will ignite something that the audio doesn't.

depending on where they can have their regime of attention, which is a culturally inherited and co-created artifact.

So it allows, instead of just saying, well, it's left brain, right brain, or it's this kind of person, that kind of person, it's about the dynamics of the system and, oh, would it be possible to do some sort of exercise to sensitize you or to allow you to perceive some dimension that,

your brain hadn't seen, just like there's a good music or a good wine or something, but it's something that is encultured and trained.

So let's get a little bit specific into the neuroscience

before we go to the figures.

And that's just to talk about this ERP or event related potential.

And the ERP is a pattern that's kind of like a collective behavior of an electromagnetic field.

It's based upon EEG measurements, which are electroencephalograms.

And those are just like electrical measurements around the scalp usually, but it can be other places too.

And each of the little leads, each of the measuring points on the EEG is a reference channel.

And then what happens is you could be taking these time series of the electrical potential at these different reference points and then using techniques like SPM and other approaches to reconstruct in a generative capacity the electromagnetic field that gave rise to that data distribution of event leads.

references, channels.

Then you can align time series to events.

Like if you clap your hands 10 times separated by 30 seconds, you could take that big time series and then align all the claps and then ask, is there like a coordinated probabilistic?

Not every channel does it, but when you align it, you can see that, yeah, there is a dip.

And so that's the ERP is when there's this spatial temporal pattern that might play out over tens or hundreds of milliseconds as shown here.

And in different brain regions, it's known to have a canonical form and even diagnostic value in certain situations.

there's a lot more to learn about here friston's work buzaki many others but it's a big area but that's kind of what it is it's like a pattern of space and time in an electromagnetic field in response to an event any thoughts on that because it kind of comes into play for the paper


SPEAKER_01:
yeah nice and and i noticed they i am this event related potential so yeah again it's giving you a way to to think about what happens when so they've got a p1 p2 and and p3 they talk about p3 more i noticed in the paper um as this kind of main sort of lag but it gives it gives a sense of this um temporal dynamics that are played there's an idea that there's something happening

which is more cumulative, maybe takes more time to register.

But this model gives a plausible way where that could hint that some of the faster


SPEAKER_00:
processes are actually sort of more closer to this flux and some of the others are closer to this awareness yep it's a lot like the pqrst system on the heart ekg and so you can say oh there's long qt interval it's because there's sort of a normal shape of

with variation and then if something is outside of a certain bound you can say this sort of interval is too long and then you can have a model of heart cells and if you had a model of heart cells with just the channels and you were getting the range of expressivity absorbed observed in the biological system it's pretty meaningful so let's look at figure one the first half of figure one i guess figure one a we could call it but we'll have figure one b two

This is kind of the classic active inference graph.

This is one of our favorite figures and it's good that they put it in all kinds of papers.

What it describes is the relationship between, starting at the bottom, observed measurements in the world that are mapped through matrix A to hidden states of the world.

Like, is it actually light in the room?

Is the hidden state?

And then you get photons on your eye.

And then there's a pretty clear mapping there, but A could be probabilistic as well.

So that's about states that are hidden to observations through time that are observed.

Then this is actually a second level model where at each hidden state, it's evaluating what is gonna be the state outcome mapping under a future time series.

So this is a little bit, not the basic, basic version, but hopefully you'll have listened to a few other, like their model stream where they walk through from really the fundamental, which is just the state outcome mapping.

So go to the model stream if you haven't seen this before at all.

Then,

um d is the prior that plays into these second level state estimates and just like the b matrix at the lower level defines the transition between hidden states the b2 as opposed to b1 second level b matrix describes the transition frequency and patterns of the states at the higher level so this is kind of like that nice nesting you could have the higher level state changing and then lower level states changing

What does influence the higher level state transition matrix?

Pi, policy.

So that's the innovation or one of them of active inference, which is that instead of just estimating how states change, hidden states change through time, we estimate a conditional related to how our policies influence states changing through time.

That's the pi coming into B2.

our policies are selected from our affordances and they're sort of differentially weighted in terms of their instantaneous uh attractability in terms of this g functional which is a expected free free energy minimization of policy down here g of pi not just some abstract g floating out there in space but of a policy and it takes in arguments like c the preferences

and C is the preference vector.

Okay.

So I think that's all the letters on here.

Good.


SPEAKER_01:
Any thoughts on this, Stephen, or we can go to this figure one B. No, I think, well, I think this is a one thing I've noticed is also they've got at the top, the variational free energy, which is kind of the,

the broad kind of dynamic that flows, as you mentioned.

And like you just mentioned, it's the, when you start to got the policies involved, you've got this expected free energy, which is more tied to how that might relate to particular actions for the organism.

So I think that makes, and also I suppose the other point that's there, you mentioned there, you know, the B1 matrices,

it could almost be assumed that that's like the flux.

It keeps churning over and it will work out.

It will come and start to populate its values.

Whereas these higher levels, you have your priors.

It might not be that important where my retina is in its state at this moment.

It will just populate and start to come to some equilibrium.

Whereas what I think I'm seeing, my prior,


SPEAKER_00:
might be at these higher levels a more significant parameter and that's reflected in that model cool very nicely said about how our priors or system priors even to remove the whole awareness consciousness thing system priors are semantic it's like i expect i'm a veterinary scanner or i'm a check scanner at the atm i expect a check

It's like it doesn't expect the pixel to be in this spot and the green and this way to be here.

It expects something semantic.

And part of the challenge with talking about observations and making meaning from data and sense-making from large data and scaling sense-making is that the bottom level data is almost by definition meaningless, especially with respect to the larger level semantic question.

So yeah, there's parts of the check that are sub-meaningful, but the pixel can't be too meaningful.

Otherwise, you need to do a whole other model to really break that down.

So it is interesting that the D prior enters at the second level state, but there's no D1.

So maybe it's not shown, or maybe we can ask where that is coming from.

Let's look at...


SPEAKER_01:
it's not necessarily so important for the modeling and so that that in a way this this is quite useful for showing i mean in some ways they say that's where autism can have challenges because that there's not that ability to know where to put your priors and and to resolve things so um just one other point in here is they don't in the expected free energy for vision

because they're looking at sort of salience of vision or the idea of risk, which is sometimes shown in that expected free energy.

It's not in there, because I suppose for this model, that's not really relevant for the vision system in the type of way that they're exploring consciousness.

So it just shows, again, that the way that the equations or the terms can be constructed

is related to the nature of what's most relevant to the type of dynamic that's being looked at.

And I think that's quite interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

It's not the free energy of the system with a no function in mind.

It's a calculated free energy that is related to policy as implemented by some actor in the space.

so it's not just like we're making one general free energy principle model of some system we're doing task specific specific behavior and i'm sure that ryan and christopher will have a lot to add on that so here's the second half of figure 1b or figure one and it takes some of those letters that we saw in the first part of figure one a b c d and then also adding in e i think down there which is the kind of affordances

uh prior which is not here but it connects to pi as well so there's a few other aspects and then it maps it onto

parts of the brain, human style brain, that are tractable or plausible, or where the architecture of how those brain regions are connected or functionally linked through dynamic causal modeling, SPM.

So if there's a functional or an anatomical connection between these brain regions, with that directionality, it seemed to be

some might think of it as confirmatory or supportive evidence for that biological systems do free energy principle or active inference another way of thinking about it is it's the computational realization of a process that surprisingly or unsurprisingly can be modeled with active inference type models there's a few different ways you can think about it but they're kind of laying out this

probabilistic graphical Bayesian network.

And they're kind of laying that out onto the brain's neuroarchitecture.

And there's a lot more papers that go into detail here.

Any thoughts or ready to continue?

Yeah, I think an interesting question is like, where does the body come into play?

Like this is one level of the nesting, but how far is this model towards just basic group communication models or some other type of modeling?

Anyways, let's return to the sort of

specifics of their experiment.

They included figure one, I think, to be just very clear about active inference, which is great because it helps the paper be accessible to those who are outside the field and also everybody in active inference can always go back to the basics and the terms because it just always helps us.

Here's what they do in the results, the first part, and then we're gonna go look at figure two and the task.

So results, section three.

As a proof of principle, we first simulated 200 trials.

So they're gonna be having a behavioral paradigm where they can have a fully in silico, fully simulated experiment.

So it's gonna be like an experiment that a person could do, but they're gonna totally simulate it.

And some of them are gonna have square presence and some obviously won't.

and then there's going to be model parameters that relate to attention and model parameters that relate to stimulus strength so off the bat you might imagine okay well if the stimulus is stronger like the sound is louder to some point it's going to be easier to say yep i heard that sound

so if it's a bold line versus if it's a tiny faint you know gray on gray situation and then there's also the attention so if it said oh pay no attention to the middle look away and then something flashed in the middle you're less likely to see it than if you were to be looking at the middle so that's the kind of an experimental setup that they're going to be simulating completely in silicon here is what they're going to show in figure two

there's this sort of visual pattern at time point one.

And this is what also allows them to use discrete time models, like as currently shown the active inference model, where it's like T1 is here, T2 is here and T3 is here.

So they can actually get a lot of power out of this sort of like checkpoint type, almost Kairos driven analysis, really.

And then they show an ambiguous stimulus where it replaces these diagonal lines partially with a square.

And then it flips back to the bars.

the agent is then required to either uh say yes I saw a square or no I didn't see a square so that's the sense and here's the action so if anyone has made it this far and was still like wait but they didn't explain you know consciousness of this system or of theology it's it's not this paper this is only about this task paradigm any thoughts on that or continue

Yep.

All right.

So this was just useful in terms of from their thinking, in their discussion, for those who want to read a little more about why the timescales are the way that they are.

Okay, figure three is a Bayesian network description of the generative model with arrows showing dependencies between hidden state factors and outcome modalities.

Okay, so this is kind of like at first I was like, wait, what is this?

It looks like an app or a game or something like a network model, but it is actually.

So at the level one,

Let's look at these are the hidden state factors.

These are the report would be I'm waiting.

I haven't reported yet, which is actually a state seen or unseen.

So this is sort of one of the hidden state S factors that we're going to fit with data.

Then there is the trial phase, which is the time steps of the model.

And then there's going to be the sort of visually differentiating

features of the model so it's sort of like you know round one inning one first out it's kind of like identifying where you are in the model as a state in the model which is something that was really important in this framing of the model so check out the model stream because it matters if you're in trial two row three or trial four row two or something like that

and then at the very bottom level is the square or the lines here there's also this red or black thing so i'm not going into that but it's whether there's the square or the lines being seen

And then words, silent or I see a square didn't see anything, okay?

So it's sort of like the generative models if they saw it or not.

So we need to have some integrated way to combine the trial phases and what is actually being displayed, which we control in the experimental context

with their hidden perception as to for example the sequence of two different things so if it was first the square or the diagonal and then red or black you could have four different combinations and if it is held across trials you had to have like been aware of it

So the thinking would go like, I'm gonna read you a color and then a name, and then you're gonna tell me both in a row.

And so that's a report that they're going to be able to say, and then that's the attentional mask because that allows them to say, not report on the color, but report on just the square being there or not.

So it's kind of like everything in this experiment is like locked down.

Not that everything, the person's shirt color and how they felt about it

not that that is all explained in this model, but it's sort of modeling the input and the output and then leaving the rest actually for context.

So we can hear more about that from the authors.

Anything on figure three?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, no, I think they can speak to that more.

I think one thing that was interesting is they use these different words rather than just like red or just basically saying red when you see red or black when you see black.

They had a rationale there to separate it out so that it helped them have a bigger time window.

But I think they could speak to that better than I can.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Nice.

The level two outcomes are level one hidden state factors.

so the higher level is getting um connected to the lower level in this way and then also if you really follow some of these lines like wait only maps to silent and that only maps to the observable silent scene maps to different things and unseen they both are i see and you know could be uh that's it i see that's where the divergence point is they're both about

a perspective and perception and then a square that's only for this thin dash for seen or i didn't see anything from the unseen condition so it's kind of showing how even the lexical tokens are mapped from probabilistic estimates

of higher order models.

And that also relates to this quantization and this quantum nature of communication.

And it's like, you're forcing them to say, I saw it or not.

It's not a slider.

How sure were you saw it?

You could design that experiment, make that model.

But in this paper, there's a lexical interpretation of their actions because they're only given the option.

Yes, I did see it.

No, I did not see it.

so by constraining the experiment you can uh do things again leave it up to someone to debate whether that is cutting too much away all right so four is a split in half and here's where they sort of are just proof testing their simulation that's the foundational simulation and this is just to

check some of the basis of their model and what we can see on this left one is that when the square is shown so here's the four possible hidden states it's like four horse racing lanes

And we can see that there's this gray.

The red one is never even on the table because they haven't even brought that level into play yet.

But there's this gray competition, 50-50, I'm not sure, that's just reflecting the prior of whether it's going to be the dashes or the squares.

Because did you see it or not?

And not is going to be the dash.

And then the stimulus occurs.

And then there's rapidly a convergence towards, yep, I saw it.

that convergence is associated with a transient period of elevated firing rates of the first level of the model so that's where we're going to get some of the cross experimental modality work because this isn't just a bayesian phenomenological analysis of probability it's actually linked to a mechanistic process model

So if you found a brain region that were firing that way and removing it did the same thing that removing this did, all of a sudden you'd start to be seeing a lot of model reification.

And then they also tie in the probabilistic component and firing rates, the first level firing rates in the self-report.

And then conversely on the square absent condition,

It's the same thing.

It's gray, and then there's no transient period of firing, and then it just converges towards not seeing anything.

So it was like it was waiting, it was waiting, and then it converged upon not seeing anything.

So that's figure four.

That was just sort of like, because they're like, oh yeah, after three, four, five, like I'm waiting, I'm waiting, I'm waiting.

No, just didn't happen.

So that was one.

Now let's look at another little bit more nuanced way to look at that in five.

So here there's two axes.

It's kind of like a Punnett square or Eisenhower matrix, a two by two.

And it's called a four-way taxonomy.

So just like we kind of hinted at earlier,

you can tune model parameters to have low or high endogenous attention and then you can tune model parameters so that the stimulus is like shriek is weak versus strong so that would be like thick versus thin line or it could be rapidly flashed versus not so you can imagine if it's a weak signal and the attention is absent very few are going to see it

if it is a strong signal and attention is being paid, you'd expect a higher amount to see it.

So empirically what you do to make the attention increased or what you do to increase the signal strength, that's a detailed question, but their model is doing quite a few things here.

And so it's a high energy, high density representation because they're showing that basically they do recapitulate that pattern.

with high percent seen self-report and high correctness rates with an archetypal firing rate at the first and the second level that are reminiscent of ERPs.

And the ERP P3 looking like arises at the second level.

So it's not like the data have a structure that give rise to the P3.

It's like the P3 is an emergent behavior

of something that as you're saying is more like forming and unforming at the lower level and the semantics and then the response that we actually observe the system do is this higher level and then it's absent in the other three cases

And in those cases, the accuracy here is almost 100%.

In this, it's 58, 47, 61.

So it's about 50, 50.

And remember, they have to make a forced choice and they're not always sure.

Their confidence isn't 100%.

So that just shows that like you get confidence and experience and firing rate and second, but not first level ERP dynamics in the high attention, high signal strength condition.

very clean finding and then you can disentangle attention and signal strength and then just show that like whether you pull one away or the other you destroy the erp you root you reduce the number of people who the simulation runs that said they saw it and it reduces the accuracy to a large extent so that's like a big finding of the model

Any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks.

That's really good to go through that.

I think because there's a lot in this diagram, it can be a little bit to first see.

And I think just looking at that

you know, first level and noticing how all four quadrants have got this Perry stimulus time, this kind of first level firing is present, like you just mentioned in the, in the black graph.

And then, you know, only on that awesome, right.

Do you have this very strong?

So this, this does indicate that when you have sufficient signal in relation to attention,

bang, you know, it has a certain on-off-ness to it, which is kind of what they're trying to show.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice to connect it to the ignition model of the neuronal workspace, which is like, yeah, if it's loud but you weren't paying attention sufficiently,

then you're not going to, or the other quadrant, it's like, it doesn't ignite.

But when you get both together, when you get somebody looking at the screen and it's the right stimulus, it's not just a little bit different than them not looking at the screen.

It's so different.

It's qualitatively different.

It's a categorical difference.

And so that is something that's reflected categorically in this model, flat versus not flat.

Now it's a simple model.

but it makes me, but yeah, it's a simple model, but this is like a lot for a simple model to show.


SPEAKER_01:
I was just going to make a little anecdote there.

It's something slight as a side, but when my daughter was, I think she was like,

nine months old we had the fire alarm go off and it was literally like ear-breakingly loud she was sleeping through it all um so you know that i know it's not but the same kind of idea is there this idea that because obviously i know it's sleep but it's still an attentional state uh it wasn't and you'd expect someone to always wake up because

of the loudness.


SPEAKER_00:
It is an attentional state, absolutely.

And it's encultured and it's developed and somebody could have phases or, you know, all these things can come into play.

It is like, is the noise hitting the eardrum?

Yes.

Are the neurons firing?

That's where predictive processing has a lot to say.

And that's why it was an important theory because the centralized processing theory would be like, it hits the baby's eardrum.

It goes full force, loud sound incoming.

And then there's the nap time region

And that just says, nope, I'm asleep.

We just don't listen to sound when I'm asleep.

The predictive processing model is that there's a generative capacity, like we're sleeping almost semantically.

And that propagates in a way that dampens the ignition of loud sounds.

So the net effect is loud sounds don't wake the sleeping baby, but it's extremely different if there's like this central commander that's receiving the raw sensory input and processing, it's not what happens.

And it is much more like this generative semantic capacity of systems to have meaningful modes that are distractible or not distractible to different stimuli.

So pretty nice, good baby story.

So here's another phenomena that they're gonna recapitulate.

So let's expand it in six.

So this is the inattentional blindness task.

And it's just another task where basically they're going to differentiate a few different experimental treatments that usually would be used to pull out inattentional blindness.

But sort of just the summary of this is in phase three,

which was the self-report, you can read the caption for what they are, but similarly, depending on which pieces and phases you add in, you get the existence of the simulated ERP and a high fraction of having seen it if there was attention, but then in the case where it wasn't seen, then it just is like a totally flat piece.

So this is just, then from the caption says, in phase two, firing rate plots illustrate how more gradual updates in the second level beliefs do not produce P3 like ERPs.

So it's interesting to think about how they can actually titrate stimuli

and find out, oh, was the system updating all of a sudden or was there more of like continuous updating?

But these are just kind of going into specific examples that are like laid out in a clear way, but it's just, it's a lot of info that might be interesting for some, but there's five more.

So let's just rapidly kind of go through the figures.

Yeah.

Figure seven is another layout of their experimental results.

And again, it's a sort of spread where on the left, you have no attention, absent attention, and the right, there is a regime of attention parameter.

And then similarly, weak strength signal on the top, strong strength signal on the bottom.

and they're looking at the effect of a third dimension so this could have been like a hypercube of statistical results and that's what this model and the markov decision process allows is instead of just making one model and crafting it we could make like a spectrum of 5000 models that are just incrementally different and then report the whole distribution so here within each quadrant the left is inconsistent prior and the right is a consistent prior so

So here, consistent prior, strong signal, high attention.

Now we can kind of imagine that's like the focus, you know, paying only attention to that and blasts right in your face.

And it's like 100% saw it and 100% were correct.

Really salient stimuli, really clear self-report.

No one's really doubting that they perceived it with qualia.

So these are the easy cases.

Okay, everything else is the gray zone.

Because if you have an inconsistent prior, again, it's just a model, we're just experimenting and thinking about it, but it's interesting that 94% saw it, 95% are correct.

So even with high attention and high signal strength, if your priors, I'm not sure about what I'm seeing.

Then one out of 20 people in the simulation, again, just loosely, one out of 20 will still not see it, but it was right there and they were paying attention to it.

So there's a lot of kind of psychology anecdotes about stuff like that.

Like the whole room says that line A is longer than line B. And then the last person just is like,

I guess it's that way, even though they think that they're there to actually speak the truth.

So people can look at the percentages and read more stories.

But this is a very interesting modeling framework, because we can talk about how these different components of certainty and sense and action are related in different people's perspectives.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, this could be interesting as well, where it talks about this inconsistent prior, when you even have a strong, you know, a strong signal, but if you've got an inconsistent prior, you may not be aware of something.

And there's this challenge in a way where people can be tricked, you know, like we've seen with the internet and

Cambridge Analytics, if you feed things through at a level where it's not a strong enough signal, but it has associative qualities, you may be starting to

have that feed into your consciousness at another level but it's not activating your awareness um so i think that some of these questions you know that um you know and people might not notice that happening because when they do pay attention they you know every they they they they think they've seen everything there is to see but there may be some things which are

just inconsistent with their priors as much as they're weak you know they could be and there's a there's a little bit of an interplay potentially there that could be going on which we're not aware of


SPEAKER_00:
nice and then also like even on the other extreme if it's consistent prior but low attention and weak signal you still sometimes report it and you still might be correct even at a higher amount of correctness and so a lot of times um belief and faith are as are as if they're to be ridiculed and that's just so far off from the way that everything is

Figure eight is again, another two by two with attention and signal strength.

And they're just really going into detail now overlaying this prior consistency, inconsistency question and adding a neutral prior as well.

And now overlaying those three.

So it'd be almost like there was three cells here, but now overlaying those as three traces of the ERP.

what they're showing is that you get sort of the prior is like a fine tune it's like a tweak but it remains pretty much to be the case that you see the categorical difference uh amongst each quadrant and interestingly the one that dips down gives like a quasi p3 is the consistent prior strong signal low attention

So that's like, you're not really paying attention, but something loud happens and you're sure that it's possible.

that's actually the one that comes closest to actually inducing, and we can look at here, percent C95, low attention, high signal strength.

So it's pretty interesting that it's easier to have, again, you'd have to calibrate it to real people, but it's easier to notice something when it's a strong signal, even if you weren't paying attention, than it is if you are paying attention, but it's a weak signal.

but maybe there's values for which it's one way or the other, but it really separates those two things.

Like, is this a subtle point in the text or is this person just not paying attention to the sentence?

And those are sort of two questions and you want them both to be clear and so that you can align the regime of attention, but that's why this is such a cool framework.

Okay.

We're not gonna go into too much detail here, but this is a experimental paradigm laid out with sort of classical psychologist style of, quote, independent manipulation of expectation, stimulus, strength, and attention.

So they're able to use repetition and variation in a specific way

so that you can disentangle certain attributes from the sequence of behavior, which is something that we actually heard about from Adam Saffron and Colin DeYoung in the first streams of this year with the way that you could look beyond the personality surveys to the cybernetic big five personality traits.

So this is kind of like similar, it's revealing higher order parametric values

from behavioral sequences that disentangle or just like a gambling paradigm might be high risk low risk high reward low reward so you're disentangling a few different attributes the person's model it's kind of like that but for visual consciousness access attention and then just to go through the a1 and a2 supplements just before we kind of hit some closing thoughts so a1 is their specification of the first level generative model matrices so let's definitely have them

talk about these but if you'll remember from the model stream it's all about specifying the matrices and the calculations are all about matrix multiplication small or big or nested series of matrices or lists of lists of lists and so each of these outcomes at each level when we're looking at figure um

three this kind of colorful connectivity model each one of these are basically reflected by a row or a value in a matrix choose spaces 17 matrices

seeing a theme with the matrices and how they can represent different things like attention or a word so then a certain combination of rows is i didn't see a square or i see a square but there's semantic meaning to the composition of a matrix and then you can do probabilistic inference using that matrix and then the second supplemental figure is the second level matrix structure

It's like, you thought the movie was long.

Wait till you see the higher level matrix.

And here it's similar, except now we're dealing with these hidden joint states.

And that's why that was the second level in the model where these higher level states that also deal with the behavior of the agent.

nice figures by them and they really laid it all out yet still it's kind of a lot to think about so let's have them walk through what they are but i guess with that i'll just kind of bring into the ideas and questions where we can go and see when you just talk for as long as you want just what what do you think or what was like where do we take that or who do you think would find that interesting or important


SPEAKER_01:
yeah i think um well now i think that we've we will find that a lot of people who are trying to um understand how this modeling can be applied into other contexts and i think there's there's probably going to be more and more of a movement for people to offer modeling um approaches

more broadly so there's going to be people who are going to want to make models as people are going to want to work with people doing models people want to look at what the implications of the models are so i suppose that's something that this paper is definitely from what we've been talking about um and um so maybe even asking um

ryan and christopher a little bit there about you know how would someone maybe engage as they're working with those types of matrices and looking at the outputs to sort of

put that into a transdisciplinary team in context you know um that could be quite interesting um because this is this is all um you know it has this potential really but then without without you know asking too much of them but maybe you know and because um that that sort of thing and maybe just how if there's different ways when you start to think about the

A transformation matrix and the B matrix and the D matrix, you know, just how those things can be, you know, are there any good practices for just helping keep your head straight with all of that as people start to, you know, because I know for Ryan and Christopher, it's second nature, you know, they can switch in between, but it does take a little bit of...

It takes a bit of tacit knowledge to start to really embody what's going on in there and how that translates

into this kind of common language and so um but uh you know this paper i think gives a sense of that but it's still um hopefully that's where this live stream might be useful for people is as we go through that um especially when it got into some of the later model scenarios um yeah i got a little bit it was a little bit like

a lot of processing to try and work out what exactly was the paradigm that's going on um and again that might be because this is specific to people working in visual consciousness and some of these types of you know experiments so um so that would be you know that that type of broad question i think might be quite interesting to uh and maybe even it will yield other model streams in the future if they're even interested um that build on that


SPEAKER_00:
But otherwise I think that covers it for me.

Nice.

Yep.

Well, well said.

Yeah.

Thanks for kind of bringing the specifics of the model, but also all the ways in which, especially through teamwork and communication, we can be working on it.

having an impact and that's really an interesting area i can see why you're interested in it but what a fun discussion it is always good to read the work of christopher and ryan it's really just informative at multiple levels

So we'll close with that.

Thanks again, Stephen, for participating here.

And we'll hope that people are interested in coming on live for 18.1 or 0.2.

Or if it's after those dates, then just leave in comments and kind of continuing the discussion that way.

Well, that's it.

## Y8Y4f-SEcsI

SPEAKER_08:
hello and welcome to the active inference lab this is the active inference lab and the active inference live stream today we are in active inference live stream 18.1 on march 23rd 2021 welcome to the active inference lab everyone we're a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at our links here the

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be using good video etiquette for live streams.

Today, we're in live stream 18.1 in our first of two participatory group discussions on the Predictive Global Neuronal Workspace paper, and we're with the authors here, Ryan Smith and Christopher White.

So thanks to both of you for joining today.

Today in 18.1, the goal is just going to be to discuss and learn and ask some questions about this awesome paper.

And we're going to go through some introductions and warmups.

And then I believe Christopher will have some slides to share with us and set some context.

And then we'll just proceed with probably a bunch of questions that we all have about the paper, as well as some questions from the live chat.

To get started, though, let's just go around and introduce ourselves and we can each just give a short introduction or check in and then pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm in California and I will pass it first to Dean Dean.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm up here in Calgary in Canada and I'll pass to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm up in Toronto in Canada, and I'll pass it over to Christopher.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, thanks.

I'm Christopher White.

I'm a PhD student at the University of Cambridge.

And this is, just to give some brief context, this paper is really a work that kind of came out of my master's thesis that I was doing with Ryan, but we've kind of continued on.

working on.

So hopefully we can chat about both this paper and then at some point chat about some things that we've been continuing on.

And so I'll pass to Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Blue Knight.

I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico, and I will pass it to Dave.


SPEAKER_02:
Dave Douglas, I'm in the mountains of the northern Philippines where it's almost the end of spring.

I'm retired from IT, especially from machine translation, working on the semi-technical aspects of our education project.

And then I believe Ryan.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I'm Ryan Smith.

I'm an investigator at the Laureate Institute for Brain Research.

And I, yeah, we're in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

Basically, I run a lab focused on computational neuroscience and computational psychiatry.


SPEAKER_08:
Well, I'm sure we'll talk a lot more about that.

Let's maybe just go right to Christopher's slides and then we can pick up just with conversation or with this slide deck as needed.

But Christopher, go ahead and share your slides and I'll make them the full screen.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, sure.

Okay.

Okay, so I'm assuming you can see my hand.

yeah screen are you seeing we're seeing our jitsi ah okay how about now yep looks good okay well i now i it seems like i can't both look at the even with the dual monitor set up it doesn't seem like it it wants to share the same screen that jitsi is on and that's okay so it means i just can't see anyone um so just give me a shout um so this this is these are slides that

from a talk I gave at UCL about Midway through last year.

And so I may need some reminding of bits of this paper because we did write it quite a while ago, although it did only just get published in December last year.

Okay, so the idea with this paper was really just to kind of formalize some things that had been around in the literature

for a while and namely putting global workspace theory into kind of a predictive processing framework.

And so there'd been, so Carl Friston has a really nice 2012 paper that kind of did this somewhat formally.

Jacob, but it didn't really connect that deeply with the global workspace literature at all really.

Jacob had in chapter 10 of his 2013 book, Jacob Hovey, sorry,

has a really wonderful chapter where he discusses the relationship between phenomenal unity and global workspace theory and how predictive processing framework in general and active inference kind of broadly conceived fit in with global workspace theory and how these ideas can kind of help make sense of some puzzles within global workspace theory and also kind of give predictive processing a theory of consciousness as it were.

And then in terms of, I published a brief paper kind of building on Jakob's work where I kind of said, hey, here's, that's where the predictive global neural workspace comes from, or that term, which is just a term that I kind of want to introduce just to denote basically kind of predictive processing approaches to a global workspace style architecture.

And so when Ryan and I started chatting because of that paper,

Really, our goal was to put some fairly vague conceptual ideas into a more computationally precise framework, and that's what we did here.

And so the idea was really just to use a fairly straightforward, deep, temporal, partially observable Markov decision process, solved via active inference, and show how

by kind of tuning some of the parameters, you can get basically all of the global work, a very large section of the global workspace literature and all of those empirical results kind of just falling straight out of the model.

And what's I think really important to me, so my background is in cognitive science and philosophy.

And so I did my undergrad in cognitive science and did my master's in a computational cognitive neuroscience lab.

And so, although I work on for a long time for a while is really interested in visual awareness and visual consciousness.

I was around a lot of experimentalists.

And it's really important to me that all of these ideas are testable and we actually specify testable predictions.

And so really what we were doing in this paper was trying as best we could to one reproduce a bunch of existing results, but also kind of extend the model and show where it actually gave testable predictions.

And some of those have actually been confirmed recently, which is kind of nice.

So I'll just kind of flip through some things.

There are just a couple of things I want to highlight.

And so the first thing is just to kind of define terms.

So we called it an active inference model of visual consciousness.

And that was really just a kind of, so consciousness is the way I think about it, at least maybe this is somewhat idiosyncratic, but consciousness to me is just a kind of a catch-all term.

It isn't one thing.

There are lots of sub things within consciousness that I think can come apart.

And so Block kind of very famously in 1995 proposed the term access consciousness, where this is just content that can be reported from the first person perspective.

And it is available to kind of cognitive control processes and working memory.

That's not a quote from him.

That's kind of me paraphrasing, but that's roughly speaking the idea.

And so that allows room for there to be other processes or unconscious processes, say in the visual system,

of which you aren't aware and, but can nonetheless influence behavior.

And he then also proposes, say his chief in that paper, his chief kind of worry is distinguished between access consciousness and phenomenal consciousness where phenomenal consciousness is kind of the experiential aspect of this.

And he thinks that they, so this is now, and he thinks that they can come apart and that's what's controversial.

So I don't personally agree that they can come apart, but I think it's a,

a useful distinction nonetheless and so i think in terms of thought experiments i don't remember where it might not be it might be in that paper it might be elsewhere but he's kind of talked about the example that at least to me was really intuitive was if you imagine someone with a jackhammer or if you're doing if you're working at a desk and you can hear a jackhammer in the background you might

At some point, you will become aware of the jackhammer, but it was kind of a part of your experience all along.

You just weren't aware of it, in a way.

And to me, that sounds rather odd, but that's fine.

We can set that aside.

We're just defining terms here.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, obviously, I agree.

I mean, I think there's lots of cases like inattentional blindness and change blindness and things like that where you might think you were aware of something the whole time, but actually you weren't.

But anyway, side thing.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, exactly.

I think like there are people I think I've forgotten who coined this term, but it's like the refrigerator light illusion.

Like you open the refrigerator and the lights on.

Do you think it was always on?

Yeah.

I have a nice analogy.

OK, so just briefly about the global workspace.

So this idea kind of started in the late 80s with Bernard Barr's and was then Stan Hahn's group really just took it and ran with it.

And so the idea is roughly speaking, there's this prefrontal parietal network that connects in like kind of motor processes, attentional processing, perceptual systems, memory, and all of these systems are in some sense competing for access.

And they are otherwise relatively kind of modular and disconnected, but when they, what is access to the global workspace or the content that kind of wins

Gains access to global workspaces broadcast throughout the system.

So it enables kind of otherwise isolated subsystems to share information in a common format.

And he's identified this with a prefrontal-parietal network.

And this, like prima facie, there's quite a bit of evidence for this.

So across meta-analysis in report paradigms,

So actually people kind of like actually report their experience in binocular rivalry and phenomenal masking.

There is a network of frontal parietal regions that is active for conscious, but not unconscious.


SPEAKER_05:
You're cut off.

We can't hear you.


SPEAKER_07:
Oh, really?


SPEAKER_08:
I can actually still hear him.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, maybe it was just me then.


SPEAKER_08:
Oh, good.

Oh, good.

No worries.

Thanks for pointing it out there, Ryan.

And yeah, continue along.

Cool.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, so there's basically, the long and the short of it is that across meta-analyses, there actually does seem to be quite a bit of evidence for the view that there's this fronto-paranal network.

And this story gets more complicated when we get into no-report paradigms.

Maybe we can chat about that at the end or next session, because that's kind of the work that Ryan and I are really kind of concentrating on at the moment.

Okay, I think we can, so I'll just kind of talk briefly about these two and then kind of move on to the model.

Um, so the idea, so basically in a cross event related, um, potential studies.

So this is a kind of meta contrast marketing study on the right, on the left and on the right, there's an attentional blink.

I think goodness.

Yes, it is.

Um, basically what you can see is that there's this red line on the left and there is this little P3 it's literally labeled with a P3 B here.

and there is this late kind of seemingly non-linear all or nothing event-related potential over frontocentral electrodes that seems to characterize reported versus non-reported consciousness content sorry reportable rather not not and what this actually this is actually I should just flag for anyone who's kind of actually in the neuroscience of consciousness who is watching this this is no longer considered a

neural corollary of consciousness.

And I agree with that.

It seems to drive, be driven by task demands.

But nonetheless, it is still a question why it is that when something is conscious and task relevant, you get a P3B.

And that's kind of what we tackle in the paper.

And so really all of the evidence for the global workspace theory, I think it can be summed up quite nicely with this 2006 kind of taxonomy.

And so the idea is that you can orthogonally manipulate stimulus strength and attention.

So stimulus strength, you might just imagine that either might be like time of presentation.

So if you have a classic kind of masking experiment, you'll have, I don't know, it might be a Gabor patch.

Then just after it, there'll be some static noise.

And the static noise kind of masks, is the mask to the Gabor patch.

And depending on the time, kind of the distance between

the mask and stimulus, you can render something unreportable.

So, and nonetheless, it can still in some circumstances influence behavior.

And so you can imagine that stimulus strength might be something like either you can, you could get, it might be contrast.

It might be the distance between the mask.

You could do both.

It doesn't really matter for our very course purposes here.

And then in terms of,

you can also vary attention.

So either have attention to the task or attention to be distracted away.

And the idea is that when there's a weak bottom-up signal and attention is absent, you basically just get very little activity.

It's whatever activity there is, it's confined to very early striate cortex.

When you have attention is present, but the signal is still weak, you get some priming, but it's still unavailable for report.

and so at that level it starts to influence behavior then at kind of the pre-conscious level or what they call pre-conscious borrowing a term from freud um this is where this is this is attention inattentional blindness effectively so you have a very strong stimulus the gorilla can be walking across the room and wave at you it can be in the dead middle of the fovea and yet people still won't report it and the idea is the idea this is kind of activity that's still very strong it's within the visual system but it's kind of gated out of

awareness via a lack of attention at least most of the time and then when in this last quadrant here when you're attending something and there's a strong signal you get this widespread kind of bifurcation in neural activity that characterizes aware versus unaware states and so we kind of had or

Tim Jones- You personally, I had a couple of reasons, those are a couple of reasons to be a bit suspicious about this, and I actually do think web workspace theory has been updated to kind of accommodate these but nonetheless we'll go through them.

Tim Jones- So basically unconscious information can still be decoded from frontal regions so pfc activity is not synonymous with consciousness, so the idea is that you could might have.

The idea that there is just a global workspace and you enter it loosely associated with PFC and entering it is sufficient for consciousness.

This can't be right.

They have a solution to this.

They then basically introduced a Bayesian model of conscious report where consciousness also requires a stimulus representation to be separable from a noise distribution.

I really like this model.

In the beginning of my master's thesis, I spent a lot of time kind of like playing around with the code.

It's really cool.

But it's an ideal Bayesian observer.

It doesn't really give any neural predictions at all.

I don't know.

And that's fine limitation.

It's an ideal Bayesian observer.

That still would be nice if we had something a little bit more neurally detailed.


SPEAKER_08:
Christopher, could you actually just unpack that slide 13?

Just what are the disks representing and how does this relate to Bayesian statistics?


SPEAKER_07:
Oh yeah, sure.

So basically each of these axes is a source of evidence.

So evidence for stimulus Y, evidence for stimulus X, and then basically these two colored lines, the pink colored line or the green colored line correspond to different decision criteria that you're imposing on a space.

So the idea is that two alternative forced choice tasks where you're forced to choose between two things versus report something as present or absent actually employ different decision criteria.

And so you can imagine these as essentially a multivariate, each of these as a Gaussian distribution, each of these circles as kind of a univariate Gaussian distribution, where if you are in the blue, you

that's kind of stimulus to the left.

If you're all the way to the right or on the X axis, that is stimulus on the right.

Um, where, and then this green thing kind of close to the, around the origin is a noise distribution.

So this is just saying there's nothing there.

And basically what conscious audit awareness is on this account is basically these, um,

distributions or either left or right being far enough away from the origin that they don't overlap substantially with the noise distribution.

So when you impose the decision criteria on the space, you are confident that you have seen something.

Does that kind of make sense?


SPEAKER_08:
Nice.

Thank you.

Cool.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

And then seen versus unseen ignores the noise distribution.

It's just separates left versus right.

So really cool model.

I really like it, but yeah, unfortunately not quite as nearly detailed as I would like.

Second problem is the P3B does not equal awareness.

So these are two paradigms.

So it's now being replicated in a no report condition basically

There's really sophisticated experimental techniques that allow you to basically access or gain access to a person, make inferences about what a person saw without having them make explicit reports.

And when that happens, you see that basically the P3B, which was at one point taken to be a signature of awareness, just vanishes.

And that's a bit of a problem.

So I'd like an explanation of that.

And then the last one isn't really a problem so much as just a point of absence.

So there's a really large body of evidence showing that expectation seems to be a pretty crucial factor in determining the content of visual consciousness.

So across paradigms, continuous flash suppression, monocular rivalry, motion-induced blindness, blah, blah, blah.

There's all of these areas where to show that expectations probably along the lines of similar to attention

should be a part of part of any taxonomy or any taxonomy that claims to kind of try to be complete of the factors underlying conscious access and the global neural workspace as it stands doesn't really describe how expectations are implemented um and so our job or what we saw

ourselves is doing really in this paper was just to kind of show how we could account for all of this existing work, namely the taxonomy, and also explain how the P3B doesn't equal awareness or show how that dissociation arises very naturally.

And three, show how expectations could be plausibly be implemented and give kind of a more

give a model that generates predictions about expectations, I should say, and has a story about how they implement it.

Okay.

And I think the real thing is it's okay to revise a model.

Like revising models is, that's just good science.

And I think one of the parts

global workspace theory that made me a little bit suspicious lately is that the revisions of problem one and two, they didn't generate surplus neural predictions, really.

They were just kind of, they abandoned the P3B as a signature of conscious access and they endorsed an ideal Bayesian observer model of subjective reports.

But neither of those things, they were kind of responses

to problems that didn't themselves generate new predictions that go on.

And that's kind of a characteristic of what's been called degenerative research programs by Lakota.

And so, I mean, we can argue about whether this is a fair characterization of global workspace theory, but I think this is kind of at least a nice way of setting up where we were coming from.

Okay.

Would you like to give a primer on active inference of partial observable Markov decision processes?

I'm not sure how much more you want me to talk or whatever.

I mean, this was an hour long.

I have an hour worth of slides, so I could talk forever.

But maybe do you want me to skip to the results or just summarize the model or what?


SPEAKER_08:
Let's actually hear your take here.

This is just a really awesome presentation.

And then everybody here, maybe let's write down a question or two, so then we can have another, however many minutes you want of the slides, have about an hour or a little more for questions, and then we'll have next week for questions.

But it's really great to get this information out there, because the way you're sharing it is awesome.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, cool.

Okay.

Well, I'll try and be a little bit more detailed when I go through the slides, because I've kind of just been clicking through things at the moment.

Okay.

So what, just a brief, this is, this is a little bit of a point of confusion and Ryan may want to kind of come up, describe this as well.

So what is active inference?

Well, it's both a noun and a verb and as a noun, it's kind of, you can use it to describe two things.

It's a, it's just a mathematical framework that allows one to formulate models of kind of behavior using equations that are kind of justified a priori.

from a very general set of assumptions about the nature of self-organizing systems.

It's also that you can attach a process theory to that mathematical framework that allows you to give predictions about various neurophysiological variables, like firing rate of neuronal populations, ERPs, and kind of how neuromodulators like dopamine or noradrenaline affect things like firing rate and ERPs, and also behavior.

also used as a verb and especially in kind of maybe pre-2016 literature that's basically what it was it was basically an extension of predictive coding to motor control and so people often use active inference just as a catch-all for basically the predictive coding version of motor control and there's been all sorts of confusion in the literature where people are taking kind of active inference as

a theory basically of Markov decision processes, right?

And they're conflating that, and because Markov decision processes, being a decision process, is kind of a model of Bayesian decision, Bayes optimal decision making.

And then if that's conflated with a theory of motor control, or you use a motor control account of decision making, you're going to get, say, bizarre things that don't actually track what's going on.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, I would, that's the main point, if anything, that I would, you know, kind of, you know, fully emphasize is that, like, old active inference is a theory of motor control.

I think it's old, right?

I mean, people still do it.

But at the inference where that just means, you know, like, hold a prior constant and make a reflex arc, move the body to, you know, minimize the prediction error with respect to that prior about, say, like, you know, like, proprioceptive position or something like that, right?

That's just a theory about once you've decided what to do, how to get the body to move accordingly.


SPEAKER_06:
That doesn't have anything to do with deciding what to do accordingly.


SPEAKER_05:
you know before trying to implement right so another control thing is just you know how do i move how do i get the body to move how i want to using something predictive coding ish right whereas you know we're talking about kind of like current reference is is again it's a it's a theory of decision making um which is like totally different i really think these these these

There should be two different terms, right, for these things now.

Yeah, exactly.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks.

And Stephen, do you have a quick question?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I'd just be curious.

As you're here, you're doing work in this paper here with the neuronal context of how deductive choices are made, and it taps to the phenomenological context

questions as well do you think that's when these you see these problems happen a lot because when when people are you're trying to move between different aspects of um fields of practice which are sometimes thought about separately you know phenomenology phenomenology is often talked about in the inactivist field and you've got the neuroscience and they're often clean and separate but

when you need to bring them together and try and talk about this bigger picture, the distinction, the distinctions you're making become even more important, if that makes sense, because it seems to be a lot of conflation that happens with that.

So I'll just be interested in your thoughts.


SPEAKER_07:
Um, so I think one thing to say is, so I, I like an activism, um,

especially what's kind of been called computational and activism.

I've forgotten, there was a really awesome paper out in Synthes.

I've forgotten the name of that author, but sorry about that.

But to me, that stuff doesn't really have that much to do with what I would call consciousness or what I think of as consciousness as like a cognitive scientist, I suppose.

When I think of awareness, I think of a very sharp, my explanatory, the thing that I'm trying to explain is very specific.

It is there are these states of which you are unaware, some of which you can become aware of, say, for example, like the inattentional blindness case.

or in phenomenal masking.

In some cases, there is a visual stimulus.

In one case where it's unaware and there's a very small change, physical change to the stimulus, but there's this radical nonlinear change in whether you can report it or not.

I'm interested in that contrast between reportable stimuli and non-reportable stimuli.

Now, along with that comes when stimuli are reportable, generally speaking, there is a, we might also be interested in

in characterizing the content of experience, as it were, not just the availability for report.

So we're going to get to that actually towards the end of the presentation.

We actually do endorse a version of the Phenomenal Access Consciousness Distinction.

But really, I think to answer, to repeat myself somewhat and answer the question,

All that I'm trying to explain with this model is that distinction between content that's accessible and content that's not accessible.

Everything else, I don't really mind.

Like, people can call it whatever they like.

I'm not interested in modeling it.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So, I mean, in general, right, I mean, again, this just speaks to kind of having precise theoretical constructs and having a good kind of taxonomy of these things within a particular area.

And also, you know, if you're going to try to do any kind of interdisciplinary work, right, where you have constructs in one kind of field and you want to find some way to

map them onto, right, or translate them into what you think they ought to be, right, in some other, you know, in some other theoretical language, right, then, I mean, then also specifying that in a precise way and how you kind of recover one from the other in terms of the way they're operationalized empirically, right, I mean, it's also something that you have to do, right, to do this work well, you know, so, I mean, like, you know, Chris already started, right, to kind of describe people

really loosely, at least not in all cases.

Obviously, some people are very precise.

But in some cases, the word consciousness or awareness gets thrown around to mean a ton of different things, which makes it confusing and also makes the term imprecise and therefore not really all that useful.

For instance, there's a distinction that people make between what we're talking about, whether a particular content, particular represented content in the brain, if people report experiencing it versus if people report not experiencing it.

But then there's also some people talk about levels of consciousness, which is a totally different thing.

That's like being in a coma versus being in a minimal coma.

you know, like a vegetative state versus, um, you know, being like awake, but really sleepy, you know, versus being really alert, right.

That kind of thing.

Um, you know, and there's, which is a totally separate thing, right.

I mean, you can kind of think of one as a, as a precondition in some sense for another, right.

Like you have to be in a level of consciousness that corresponds to being awake, right.

To have any, you know, or, or again, or like dreaming, right.

But your brain has to be in a certain general state of consciousness level-wise to be able to have the experience of one particular content over another, right?

So that's just saying being awake is a precondition for studying the thing that we're interested in, which is why you become conscious of one thing versus another given very similar stimulus conditions.

Yeah, exactly.

You know, so there are, I mean, and there's more, right?

Different distinctions, right?

Like, I mean, like Bruce said, there's this, you know, distinction between, or, you know, potential distinction between phenomenal consciousness, right?

Just like the, what it's like to be experiencing something versus this access consciousness thing, which is roughly being aware of the thing you're experiencing.

And like I said, several people think

this kind of thing can come apart.

I also am very skeptical about that, you know, e.g.

the fridge light example that Chris mentioned earlier.

You know, I mean, like I said, at the end of this paper, we do in some sense describe how our model can identify something like

something like two different types of access, where one type of access is kind of what's minimally necessary for empirically verifiable phenomenology, whereas the other is more kind of what determines the actual reporting.

So there is something like a distinction in our model, but it's not the standard kind of phenomenal consciousness versus conscious consciousness distinction.

Um, but anyway, I mean, there's, so my point is there's all these different sorts of things, you know, you mentioned like, uh, so many mentioned like the, like, you know, phenomenal, like the literature where people just kind of describe, you know, the way that phenomenology is or kind of the dynamics and phenomenology and things like that.

And then also is like kind of completely different or kind of descriptive, you know, field, right.

That doesn't have to do with this distinction about what becomes, you know, experience versus not.

So, I mean, the general kind of, I mean, this is already kind of like long-winded answer, but just, I think very precise terms and very precise mappings between terms in different fields are necessary to do this kind of thing well at all.

And that's not always the case.


SPEAKER_07:
I, yeah, just to briefly follow up on that.

really what i'm interested in this is this kind of was put out in bernard bars he called it the goodness i might butcher this i've gone um basically a minimal contrast approach where you have some content of which you're aware some content which you're unaware and up to all of a up to some limit the the physical properties of the stimulus should be almost identical there might best be 10 milliseconds extra between the mask and the stimulus

And that's the only thing that renders it.

So then the idea there is that we can contrast the neuronal kind of consequences of being aware of a stimulus versus unaware, independent of hopefully the physical properties of the stimulus.

And so, so just to give an example and just to make sure that I'm being charitable.

So there was recently a special issue of, I'm fairly sure special issue of the journal of consciousness studies on like

consciousness and plants.

And I guess one thing that I'm not entirely convinced of is that we're really talking about the same thing.

I think that's great.

And people smart, we should let smart people do what they want and study all of these things.

But I'm not convinced, for example, that the process or it will take a lot of convincing to convince me that something like phenomenal conscious, whatever you want to call phenomenal consciousness in a tree or a plant is

really has anything at all to do with this minimal contrast approach in like the neuroscience of consciousness.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

I mean, one, one other, one other thing, again, just like things kind of popping up in my head here.

Um, I mean, it seems like we have a fair amount of time, so I don't think it's problematic.


SPEAKER_06:
Um, and it's going on a bit here, but, um, um, well, okay, wait, I, now I totally, uh,

I totally had a blank on what I was going to say.

Well, I guess we can move forward.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay.

Thanks, Brian.

Also, maybe you could talk like a little closer into your microphone.

It gets a little quiet sometimes.

Okay.

Thank you.

All right.

Continue.

And I'm really curious to see how active inference is going to play into this.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, sorry.

Sorry.

I just remember what I was going to say.

So I think another thing that sometimes gets plated is, is just representing things versus being aware of them.

Um, right.

So, so, you know, like a major, so it's a, for example, right.

I mean, in the, in the act of the inference literature, there are other papers that describe, um, you know, things like Jacobian monism, right.

Is something that like, I'm like one of Carl's recent papers, um, you know, where, where more or less it's a story about how via the free energy principle, you can come to have systems where the internal states of the system

From the parameterize or track in some way the states of the world outside of the system Right.

So so in a really broad sense you have some some some way in which the internal states are Representing or keeping track of right the external states That as a kind of representation Or that kind of seeds of internal representations of what's kind of going on out in the world but the idea of

you know, with this sort of literature is, is that the brain can represent a bunch of stuff at the same time, but only some of the stuff that's being represented becomes conscious at any given moment.

Right.

So like I can flash like a word.

I can flash like, so unlike some studies, for instance, I could flash the word guilt for you really fast.

Um, and you won't report ever having seen the word guilt, but you'll, you'll actually behave in ways that are more consistent with, uh, feeling guilty or something like that.

Right.

Or, or I mean, simpler like perceptual or semantic priming examples where you might flash something really quickly.

Again, a person doesn't, um, you know, say they are aware of having seen anything, but

They'll say complete word stems in one particular way versus another, right?

If I flash an elephant for you really fast, you don't know I see it.

You don't know you see it.

And I give you like a word stem like E-L, you know, and it's like complete the word.

People are more likely to say elephant than they would be if you didn't flash it, right?

Or something like that, right?

So behavior is affected by something that was clearly caught, right, by the brain.

But despite that it was represented, you didn't become aware of it.

Right.

So I just want to make that distinction as well, that being conscious of something is distinct from whether it, whether the brain actually, uh, in some sense knew it was there.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

So, um, just the idea.

So we used a partial observer Markov decision process, um, as our model, a hierarchical one, I should say.

Um, so this is just a single level Markov decision process and just very briefly.

POMDPs, I'm just going to call them MDPs just for brevity.

They describe transitions among kind of hidden, unobservable variables in the sensory data they generate.

So you can have a hidden state of the world and the observations generated by that hidden state.

And the goal of active inference is to infer the states and the sequences or action sequences or policies, pi, from the set of observations.

And so I'll just kind of step through very basically how this would work.

So you could just have a very simple case right here where this is just a graphical representation of Bayesian inference.

We can just have a hidden state, and we have a prior over that state, and we have some likelihood mapping between that hidden state and some state of the world.

I think I'm getting feedback from someone's computer.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, try again.

I think it's yours, Ryan.

I can see if I can... Continue, Christopher.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, thanks.

That's better.

Yeah, it's funny how that messes with you.

We've got predictive models of when our speech timing should be coming in.


SPEAKER_08:
At least we know that you're awake.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_07:
So we've got, yeah, so this, this comes out to basically, if you then invert this model, this is just exact Bayesian inference.

Um, now if we start moving through time, we have to add in transition probabilities.

And so this just imagine this first level of model is just a Markov chain.

It's just, you have some initial state, you transition into your first state, then you have state transitions that govern how you, how those states change over time, but you also.

have variables that you don't ever get to see this Markov chain.

All you get to see is a set of observations.

And so the idea is these observations are generated by these hidden states.

And so the task of inverting these models is to infer the most likely hidden state conditioned on some stimulus.

And so you get this little sigma here is a softmax function, and basically you can derive message passing algorithms, or using message passing algorithms rather, you can derive very simple update rules that allow you to come up with posterior probabilities over states.

And then actions under this framework are then just kind of state transitions that the agent has control over.

So you can imagine in like a psychophysics experiment, the actions, this is a super limited set of action space for the agent.

Basically they can hit left or right and they might be able to move their eyes.

So those would be the policies that they can control.

Everything else, the state, the screen, those are hidden states, but they're just not transitions.

Transitions between those hidden states aren't things that the agent can control.

Okay, so then in a way, so how do we select actions?

Well, we select actions according to the frangifunctional.

So this has two component and you select the action or the policy rather that is kind of,

best minimized expected free energy, where this has two terms.

The first is the expected cost.

So this is kind of the KL divergence or the difference between our predicted outcomes, which is this Q here, and our predicted outcomes under some policy.

So what the outcome I expect, given that I take a certain action.

and the predict and just our um and our preferred observations so these are things like having preferences for winning versus losing um where the agent generally but you can encode the agent wants to win or not to lose or something like that the second term here this is the exploratory component this is the expected ambiguity where this is basically the expected entropy

of the likelihood mapping.

And so the idea here is that you seek out actions or seek out states of the world that have a precise mapping to sensory outcomes.

And so, for example, if you're in a hotel room that you've never been in before, it's really dark, the best way, best actions to take to minimize your uncertainty is just to turn the light on.

Because that will give you a really precise mapping between the hidden states of the world out there

And kind of the observations that you generate, all that they generate.

And so the idea is that expected free energy is minimized when both of these terms are minimized.

And it's actually a little bit more complicated than this, I should say.

So policy selection isn't just the minimization of expected free energy.

It also involves minimization of variational free energy.

But I would just say, what's the model stream to get into that?

For our purposes in this conversation, we can just say policies are selected that best minimize expected free energy and variational free energy, where variational free energy is also basically a stand-in where the optimal posterior here that you infer will also kind of, you infer the optimal posterior by minimizing variational free energy.

Okay.

So what about, I haven't really talked about the brain so far.

One of the beautiful things about active inference is that it comes with a process theory.

And so belief updates, that is changes to your posterior overstates correspond to changes in activation levels in response to input.

And the matrix entries here, D, B, H, C, blah, blah, blah, blah, these are all,

H actually isn't really a matrix.

I guess it's a matrix entry, sure.

What is H?

Entropy.

So you can just... These correspond to synaptic connection strengths.

I mean, this is just like a very standard assumption across neural network literature, really, and just in neuroscience in general, where synaptic changes in weights of synaptic connections...

correspond to some kind of like function approximation.

Okay, and so then you get these kind of somewhat intimidating looking equations.

We can just select the ones that are really relevant.

So this first one here is state prediction error.

And so minimizing state prediction error in perception corresponds to essentially the inference of the posterior probability

q of s. Whoops.

And you can cast this as a gradient descent on variational free energy.

And that's actually where we get our ERPs from.


SPEAKER_08:
Christopher, could you go into a little detail what the variational means independently or as related to the free energy here?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, sure.

So variational free energy is just to distinguish it from something like thermodynamic free energy.

So there are formal relationships between these things.

I would just say, read Carl Friston's work if you want to know about that.

But basically, variational frangie is the KL divergence between a generative model and your approximate posterior distribution.

And what you're trying to do is change the approximate posterior distribution slowly but surely.

So change it bit by bit.

So you nudge it in the direction of steepest descent.

until it basically, this error term here, which is basically the difference between the log difference between your generative model and your approximate posterior, you change S until that difference is at the minimum.

And the rate at which that changes, so this little V dot here is your ERP.

So the idea, um, and I'm going to go into that a little bit more in a moment.

Um, so the idea is that you have our log probability of our posterior is essentially a non-normalized log probability, and it can be positive or negative like a voltage.

Um, and then you have, you can have your ERPs and this is just like your change in membrane potential over neuronal populations.

And that corresponds to roughly speaking like these big potentials we see at the scalp.

And then we have a normalized firing rate where you will basically, we normalize the depolarization variable by branding it through a softmax function.

And the softmax function is just a generalization of a logistic function to more than one input, more than two classes.

And what's nice about using a generalization of a sigmoid function is that everyone who's looked at, like, rate models of population nodes, for example, or what's sometimes called mean field models, these basically, you can have this firing rate versus input curve, where on the x-axis, you have the amount of input that you're driving into the population, and on the y-axis, you'll have the firing rate of the population.

It's a logistic function, so it's going to be bounded, roughly speaking, between zero and one.

So what you'll end up with is this kind of sigmoid-style looking curve that we treat as probability distribution, but can also be interpreted as kind of this lovely biophysically plausible, well, I don't know about plausible, but biophysically sensible, maybe, interpretation as a normalized firing rate.

And that kind of allows us to translate between this kind of normative models, thinking about probability distributions and what the brain is actually doing.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay.


SPEAKER_07:
So everyone kind of happy with that?


SPEAKER_08:
Yes.

Steven, do you have a quick question?


SPEAKER_01:
Just one quick question.

Just is the expected free energy on policies more important at level two and level one

it kind of can soft max itself.

Um, or is it, that's a bit simplifying, but does, does expected free energy go all the way down or is it a bit more higher up?


SPEAKER_07:
It depends how you set up a model.

You can generally have models that, uh,

You can have policy selection at both levels, you can policy selection at just the lower level or just the higher level, depends what you're trying to model really.

Generally speaking in models, so in the model we're going to be using, I'm going to introduce in just a moment, we don't have policy selection at the first level.

We have policy selection at the second level.

But you might, for example, there's work by Thomas Parr and Ryan and I kind of working on some similar work as a part of my thesis where

Basically, the idea is that the higher working memory-ish prefrontal level, you have goal-directed policy selection.

And at the first level, you just have kind of epistemically guided policy selection.

And so the policies that are being selected at the first level might be something like where in the visual field to point your attention or to move your eyes.

And that's just kind of

determined by the salience of various items, which in this framework corresponds to essentially the information gain offered by all the precision of the first level A matrix.

So hopefully that answers your question.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks.


SPEAKER_05:
So as just a little bit of kind of a generalization of that, I mean, really, and Chris will go into this, but

But the way this is modeled officially is just each lower level trial is just a full trial, as in if you were modeling it separately.

The higher level is just putting a prior on whatever the starting prior is for each lower level trial.

So I mean, in a sense, you're modeling these trials.

You could think about each trial either at the lower level or the higher level as being modeled

independently in some sense.

Each one can have a set of policies.

Each can have anything that a single-level model could have.

It's just that the higher level is putting priors of some kind on the lower level.

And then posterior observations at the lower level are then feeding back in as the observations for the higher level.

So just think about them as just separate kind of trials

on different timescales where they're just connected by their priors and posteriors.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, exactly.

And so I guess what we did here was we wanted to have something like to implement something global neural workspace like in a deep active inference architecture.

And what I want to highlight, I have mixed feelings about defining the term the predictive global neural workspace because people lump this model in.

The few people who have been kind enough to cite this work have

lumped us in into like models of this as being kind of just another version of the global neural workspace.

I don't think that's accurate.

We took the global neural workspace kind of and all of the phenomena that it encompasses kind of as something that we want to explain.

Both Ryan and I really like a global neural workspace, like Stan DeHaan, Bernard Barthes, huge heroes of mine.

And aside from kind of like my personal love of the theory, it's also interesting

among kind of neuroscientists and philosophers who work on consciousness about 30, the majority of them, which is about 35% or something like that, uh, in 2018 said that they regarded it as the most promising neuroscientific theory of consciousness.

And so we thought, okay, if we're going to go into this literature, this is what we should be modeling.

Like the phenomena encompassed by this theory is where it should be the starting point.

Um, but with that said, it's, our model is an active inference model through and through.

Um,

And so it really does kind of stand on its own independently of the global neural workspace.

And so I just kind of wanted to flag that.

And so I don't use those words or in the draft of the paper that I'm writing at the moment, kind of following up on this one, I don't use those words and I don't do it.

That's very deliberate.

But anyway, sorry, that was an aside.

That was a very esoteric aside of that.

Anyway, so the idea here is that we implement something global neural workspace like in a deep temporal

deep temporal architecture.

So this second level, we identify, centrally deep level, we identify with the workspace.

And so as Ryan was just talking about, you have these states, the second level, which are really like beliefs about how trials at the first level evolve over time.

And so they provide a prior at each time step of the lower level, they provide a prior over the hidden state.

And then when there's posterior inference at the first level, after that's happened, it then shoots back up to the second level.

And that acts as an observation for the second level.

Okay.

So the idea here is that the functions we typically associate with conscious processing take place at the level of the hierarchy that's kind of deep and temporally deep enough to abstract away from processes that are entrained by the moment-to-moment sensory flux.

And this allows the agent to kind of construct a report of its experience or to do any other kind of quite abstract cognitive task.

And so the idea is that ignition occurs when a first level state is inferred by the second level.

So ignition, sorry, is basically like what Dahan has called this nonlinear bifurcation of this frontoparietal network in the neuronal activity.

So the idea is that ignition for our model occurs when the first level state is inferred by the second level

with a high enough posterior probability to kind of influence policy selection at the second level.

Whoops.

So, okay, onto the task.

So this is a very kind of general task structure, which we borrowed from a really awesome empirical study done by Michael Pitts in 2014 and colleagues.

So the idea was at the first time step, there was a forwards mask presented and so,

Second time step, there's a target stimulus.

So these little lines in the center can rearrange themselves into a square.

And at the second time, there's then a backwards mask at the third time step.

And the agent is then asked to construct a report of its experience, so whether it's say whether it saw something or not.

And the idea, roughly speaking, these little colored circles on the outside, this is how we manipulate attention and how Michael Pitts manipulated attention.

And so they either had people attend to the inside and perform a task, basically click a button whenever the square changed or click a button whenever the circle changed.

And so they manipulated kind of what was task relevant and I'll get into how they manipulated awareness in a moment.

But roughly speaking, the way we implemented the model, this is kind of a Bayes net representation of the model.

And then if we just kind of click through it,

At time one, there is a forward mask presented, and this just corresponds to a black with a square trial.

So that's the full, this is kind of a, at least the second level, there is a full sequence.

This is beliefs about the full sequence over the full trial.

So this is a time step one.

There's a report, hidden state factor here.

It's in weight because we haven't asked it to construct a report yet.

Then at the first level, each of these second level states kind of implies a first level state.

that makes sense.

And each of these first level states kind of implies a observation and attention in our model was basically, we just hard coded in as a, but we didn't have to hard code it.

You can get these things to emerge.

We just, it's just a little bit easier in our case to do it this way.

We basically hard coded in so that attention corresponded to modulations of the mapping of the precision of the mapping between

his first level hidden states, kind of whether there was a square or lines out there in the world and the observations.

So, okay.

So first, first time point forwards mask, we see a sequence type is going to be a square.

There's a trial phase one report.

Okay.

Next one, we see trials moved to, we've now see the target has now rearranged itself into a square.

We did this for two time steps.

And we did the reason we did it for, we present the target stimulus.

The two time steps is to allow recurrent feedback processes from the first level to kind of the first level to second level and recognize what's going on and feed back on to the first level.

Kind of give that, that was kind of our way of modeling this ignition style process.

Then fourth time step, we take away the mask.

We replaced the little square of just the mask again.

And then from five to eight,

that we allow the model to construct a report of its experience.

So basically this scene hidden state here implies a sequence of language processing states at the first level.


SPEAKER_08:
I see a square.

Yeah, just read it.

It says, I see a square.

And then what would it say if it was unseen?


SPEAKER_07:
I didn't see anything.

I mean, and to be fair, just to be clear,

we could have and the model would be exactly the same in all aspects we could just chop off this kind of language processing part of the model and the model would behave exactly the same way and we could still use it to generate reports and all of that stuff what we wanted to do was really just kind of use this as kind of an intuition pump for what having this deep temporal representation

allows models to do.

So holding something at that level allows sequences or a cascade of hidden states to kind of evolve at lower levels.

That might be something like constructing a sentence with a goal in mind, or it might be something like, I don't know, making a cup of coffee, where you have to hold multiple tasks in mind and break things down into subcomponents, blah, blah, blah.


SPEAKER_08:
Yep.

As opposed to mapping to button that says yes or no, if it's just a two button option, then it's a one time step paradigm.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, exactly.

I mean, we, we could do that.

I mean, it'd be completely identical.

Um, this is just kind of a, a nice way of showing what these models can do really.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

I mean, so this was, this was partially for a, for a kind of, to make a theoretical point, right.

That is you could say, right, we're showing a two level model here.

But, you know, the brain probably has, you know, I don't know how many levels, but a very large number of levels, right?

Not just two.

So, you know, you could kind of level the concern or question at us that like, you know, why is it that this second level is the one that corresponds to conscious access, right?

As opposed to just any other level that's above some level, right?

In the brain, since there's a big hierarchy in the brain.

know so the the idea here is is that you know we're appealing to a certain level of deep temporal structure right like um you can you can flash a stimulus at somebody and they can see it over a very short time scale right of like you know half a second or something really fast but actually but the sorts of cognitive processes that um can integrate that together

right and generate you know a set of thoughts right that corresponds to being aware of that right constructing a um constructing a sentence or any of the things that chris mentioned um those are much deeper slower integrative cognitive processes right so the idea is that there is a level in the brain that is integrative enough and that represents things over a deep enough temporal scale

that it has the minimal resources to integrate things together, hold them in mind, generate sequences of the sequences of words that would be necessary to communicate that you saw something or not, right?

So it's that abstract deep temporal structure that is the necessary conditions for what you need to get empirically confirmable awareness.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

Okay.

And just some brief kind of modeling notes about what we did.

So to model attention and stimulus strength, we basically just altered the precision of the first level A matrix mapping by passing it through a softmax function twice where one of the softmax temperature.

So when you pass something through a softmax function, you have a temperature on it and the temperature decides how precise it is.

And we just had a different temperature for each iteration of the softmax function.

And so the idea was then we had an ordering basically of precision.

where the most precise was attention present, stimulus strength high.

The second was attention absent, stimulus strength high.

Third was blah, blah, blah.

You can imagine how that goes on.

And the reason, this sounds pretty abstract and a bit cooked up.

And that's true to an extent.

But I think this does actually really correspond to, so if you look at something like divisive normalization in vision,

where attention basically is a, you will have some tuning curve, neuronal tuning curve, and basically like how precise that tuning curve is, is modulated by both the contrast of the stimulus and then the contrast, the stimulus gets fed into some attentional process where that will together determine kind of the tuning curve.

That was a very kind of rough and ready explanation

tuning curves, but whatever.

And then our threshold for report, we basically just set up the model to have a preference for receiving correct versus incorrect feedback at the final time step.

And 2EF behavior was basically modeled by simply decreasing the preference for being incorrect to encourage guessing.

And so I think this was just kind of our first pass at doing report.

I don't think this is how the brain does report.

We actually, in our follow-up model, we've got a much nicer way of doing this, but I think it worked in the sense that it was able to kind of quite accurately capture a number of empirical findings.

So that's kind of good enough for me at this first model.

Okay, sorry, that was a lot of preamble, but we can get into the results.

So foundational simulation.

This was just like kind of full, like a very high precision,

stimulus was presented to the model kind of with either on a square present or a square absent trial.

And this is just kind of to test it.

So great.

When there was a square present, the model reported seeing it 100% of the time.

You see this nice kind of bump at the second level.

At the first level, where the firing rates for square increase when we present it, it goes down.


SPEAKER_05:
So Chris, let's just make sure that people understand how to interpret these things.

So just so people understand, so time in these plots goes from left to right, and the gray scale from white to black, black corresponds to 100% probability, and white corresponds to zero probability.

And the gray, so it's something like 50-50.

And these are cast in terms of firing rates here, so darker than implies a higher firing rate.

So the top plot on the left that says second-level firing rates, that just means it first sees the black circles on the outside.

So it's confident that it's either going to be the sequence that has black circles and black square, or the second row, the other sequence, which would be black circles and just lines with no square.

Um, so basically once it sees the black circles, then it knows, okay, this could either be a sequence where there's going to be a black square or when there's not going to be a black square.

Um, so then at the, and that, and you can tell what the stimulus was because if you look at the first level firing rates, so again, the next kind of plot down the bottom, um, row there corresponds to seeing the lines and the top one corresponds to seeing the square.

So basically what happens here is it starts out just seeing the lines.

And then at the second time step there, you can see it kind of bumps up and the agent's really confident that it's seeing a square, which at the second level corresponds to becoming fully confident that it's gonna be the sequence of black circle and square.

And then the stimulus goes away at time point four, which you can see at the first level and then stays again, just lines for the rest of it.

And then the bottom two plots show the actual outcomes, where again, black is the agent's sort of confidence in what it did and the cyan dots correspond to the actual ground truth.

So that's just showing that the agent waited for the first three time steps and then reported seen and kept that seen while it generated the sequence of words at the following four time steps.

And then the right one just kind of shows it started out silent for the first four time steps.

And then the words that it observed itself report where I see a square, which is just those dots moving down the diagonal to the right.

So that's just so people know how to interpret what these plots mean.

Yeah, exactly.


SPEAKER_08:
And another clarifying point would just be that the same simulation is leading to all of these behavioral outcomes and neural correlate predictions and a bunch of other things.

So it's like one integrated model and the model stream is kind of where they built it up.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, exactly.

Okay, so we kind of talked through all of that.

Okay, so in terms of the taxonomy here, what we wanted to do was basically recreate that taxonomy that we talked about earlier.

So this was modulating signal strength from high to low and from kind of, and whether attention was present or absent, and then looking at the corresponding firing rates and looking at like the percent scene and percent correct, that kind of thing.

Also, percent scene is report behavior and percent correct, which is forced choice behavior.

Okay, so kind of a couple of things to highlight.

Firing rate first level is enhanced kind of most strongly in the conscious quadrant.

That's nice.

That's again what we see in empirical findings.

High firing rate for kind of square sequence at the second level, even when reports are low.

This is kind of nice, right?

Because I talked about earlier, you can have kind of a firing rate at the set.

You can have kind of activity in prefrontal regions that is generally speaking higher

below the threshold for report, that is nevertheless, oh, sorry.

When I say below the threshold for report, report frequency of reports are relatively low, but you can still have a preference for, you can still have a higher firing rate or the representation of showing that there's a representation of the stimulus basically.

And then the last thing to highlight is this,

the highest firing rate for the kind of the square sequence at the second is at the second level is in the conscious quadrant, which we kind of might think about in terms of ignition.

Okay.

So then ERPs, we see the real thing to highlight here is that we see a large P3 like event related potential in the conscious quadrant.

Again, like a lot of the empirical findings in the report literature.

Whereas first level ERPs seem to be fairly unmodulated by conscious access, essentially, which is, again, what we see.

So now to a very, that was kind of a very abstract kind of taxonomy where we're just manipulating factors.

What we wanted to do here was show, take a concrete empirical result and show how we could basically use literally exactly the same model to reproduce it.

So this is a really clever paradigm by Michael Pitts that I talked about before.

And so the idea is that you will have these kind of three phases to an experiment.

In phase one, the participant is just told to attend to the dots on the outside of the screen and hit a button when they dim.

And what the participant isn't told is that every now and again, these lines in the middle will rearrange themselves into a square pattern.

Then at the end of the first phase, they seek like 300 trials.

And at the end of the first phase, they are then given a debrief and they asked, all right, so how many people saw a square pattern in the middle?

And roughly speaking, it's about 50%.

And this is now actually really well replicated result across kind of different varieties of inattentional blindness.

Roughly speaking, about 50% of people don't report seeing it when it's not task relevant.

So that's nice.

So then they,

Then all of those, so then they have 50% of people who didn't report seeing it.

And then in fact, but are now aware of it.

And then phase two, they do exactly the same tasks.

They're attending to the disks on the outside.

So it's irrelevant.

still task-relevant, but they're now all aware of it.

And in the debrief at the end of the second phase, everyone reports seeing it.

And so now they've got this contrast between aware versus unaware.

So phase one versus phase two, where the only thing that's different between them is whether you're aware of the stimulus.

And the stimulus in the middle is task-relevant.

And what you can see, there's no P3B.

There's no late positive central component in the ERPs.

Then the final phase, aware task, the kind of the aware phase, so all the participants are aware, but they now make a task relevant and have them basically attend to the dot, to the squares in the middle.

And what you see there is this big P3B.

Very noticeable.

Okay.

So just to kind of sum up this slide to summarize what I just said.

Then great.

So basically what we did was we just used a different inverse temperature parameter to modulate, to kind of represent each state.

So phase one, very low temperature parameter for attention, attention, attention, temperature parameter.

That was kind of, and so this is, you can kind of see the precision of the A matrix.

Here we bump up for phase two, we bump up the inverse temperature parameter just very slightly.

This is kind of roughly speaking to correspond to like a diffuse attention parameter.

So you're not particularly attending to one thing, one particular feature of the stimulus.

You're attending just kind of diffusely to the whole screen.

And in the last state, we basically model the attention to make task relevant by making a very high or very precise temperature parameter where you basically get almost something that looks like a likelihood, like an identity mapping.

Okay.

And so these are the ERPs and the firing rates that you get out of it.

And this is my favorite slide in the whole plot.

Oh, in the whole paper.

What you see is basically results that look very, very, like, shockingly similar to the empirical results, especially for a model that is so incredibly simple, like ours is, relatively speaking, at least in terms of biophysical detail.

And so what you see is at the first time step.

So there's basically no ERP.

So first phase, basically no ERPs.

And so we, we give the model feedback on every trial, but what you should see is it's a little bit darker for the square for the, until we give it feedback and tell it, no, you were wrong.

You did, we did actually present squares and the model changes its mind.

It was fairly sure that it had seen lines.

Then the,

The second one, we bump up the tension parameter, and now the model sees things, and it reports seeing the stimulus.

So I should say, in phase one, our model saw the stimulus 49% of the time, basically identical to the empirical result, which is 50%.

Phase two, it saw it 99% of the time, basically the same as the empirical results.

Report phase two is 100%.

And then phase three, it's 100% of the time.

Um, and there there's little, but by the way, I should say what the way I generated these results is basically I ran several hundred truck.

I basically set up, just ran a four loop over the stimulus, over the code and for each condition and had it generate, I think.

So each kind of iteration of the four loop generated 300 trials.

And I then averaged over maybe 10 iterations of that four loop.

So, um, each with a different random seed.

And so what you should see, sorry, that was a quick aside.

The crucial thing is that in this last point, there is this, when there's a very precise stimulus mapping at the first level, there is this abrupt change in firing rates at the second level.

And that abrupt change corresponds to the appearance or the emergence of the P3B, where the P3B, where remember that ERPs are generated, they are the rate of change of posterior beliefs.

And so the model suddenly becomes very confident that it saw a square.

And so you see this big ERP boost in the P3, which corresponds to a very precise input mapping that comes along with something with a stimulus being task relevant.

And so there we've kind of got this really nice explanation of this kind of somewhat counterintuitive result about the dissociation of the P3 and awareness.

Okay.

And then the last thing we're going to touch on is just kind of we then decide to extend the taxonomy.

So basically, this is exactly the same, but we also now manipulated whether a prior was consistent with, i.e., a valid expectation.

So we gave the model kind of we made it, roughly speaking, two times the model thought it was, roughly speaking, two times more likely to see a stimulus than see a square than lines.

And or two times more likely to see lines than squares.

And then we presented it with squares.

And so that's kind of the consistent and inconsistent prior.

And then the key result is that across all of this, expectations boost the effective feedback on firing rate, which is nice.

And in terms of ERPs, what we see is something, this very specific prediction.

when there is so these are kind of like fairly small differences but they are differences um only when attention is present do you really do you see a p3 that's again in line with the empirical literature but crucially when there's a consistent prior of or a valid base to say a valid expectation you should see a reduced p3b in contrast to when there's kind of flat priors

and when there is an inconsistent prior.

And this is actually something that has been empirically, that has been confirmed recently.

Again, this was something Michael Pitts was on this paper.

If anyone's interested, I can kind of post a link to the paper.

And that's really nice.

We didn't plan for that to happen.

Okay.

It is slightly annoying.

I would have liked to cite it in the paper, but the paper actually came out before ours was accepted for publication.

Oh, sorry.

After ours was accepted publication, rather.

That's what I meant to say.

Okay.

And just a very quick summary of the results with really what is a really kind of like surprisingly simple model.

We can reproduce a very wide range of canonical results from minimal contrast paradigms, including kind of fMRI and ERP findings.

So this includes, we can account for unconscious PFC activation.

We can account for the association of the P3 and conscious access.

where the P3, roughly speaking, reflects the velocity of conscious working memory updates.

I kind of like that phrase.

And four, we have an explicit and formally defined role for prior expectations and their implementation of process theory.

And then we've got a number of key predictions that emerge from this.

So P3 is attention dependent and should its amplitude be inversely proportional to expectation.

Feedback from frontal parietal regions.

This is a very specific prediction.

Feedback from frontal parietal regions should be enhanced on conscious trials, and it should disinhibit granular layers in the relevant sensory population sensory cortex.

That's a very specific prediction that falls out of the process theory that can be tested with DCM.

And then consistent expectation, again, consistent expectation should disinhibit granular layers in sensory cortices, while inconsistent priors should inhibit them.

Okay, so any questions at this point?


SPEAKER_08:
Christopher, thanks for this awesome presentation.

Do any of the panelists maybe want to queue up a question?

How about you do this last slide with a bat, leave on that sort of phenomenological note if you want to, otherwise we can return to the panel.

Yeah, perfect.

Yep, sounds good.

So all the panel, prepare a question or a thought and then raise your hand when you're ready and give a last thought here.

Thanks, Christopher.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

So just like a brief aside on phenomenal consciousness.

So we associate that.

So I'll just back up a little bit.

Sorry.

There might be a puzzle in that we associate global broadcast and the availability of information for report with the second temporary deep level.

Our experience, although it's kind of like there is a depth to it in the sense that experience is kind of smeared over time, right?

There is an integration window that's relevant for experience.

It certainly doesn't occur at the level of whole sequences.

And so there's a puzzle here.

So where does experience live, as it were?

Where is the content of experience?

And Brian and I have been chatting about this, and this is a view that's still evolving.

But broadly speaking, I think what's right about this or what we should say is that the first level states that the content that we are conscious of are the first level states that have

a high enough precision either through kind of bottom-up precision or because there's a really precise prior that comes down from the second level A matrix.

So basically the message that's being passed back up to the second level has high enough precision to influence policy selection or to pass the threshold, the posterior belief threshold for conscious access and report.

And so this kind of has the nice consequence that it keeps experience at the relevant level.

So it's updated at each time step when we get new stimuli in, and yet it has a distinct kind of link to report and behavior.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I mean, just to expand on that a little bit, I mean, the kind of idea is just that as opposed to, and again, Chris partially said this, but just to kind of reiterate, the idea is that

what you consciously experience is a consequence of both the posterior overstates at the first level and whatever the second level likelihood is.

So it's a function of both the posterior there, S1, and what the structure is of A2 there.

And a way to think about that is, if you were to rearrange A2 so the mapping was different,

And S1 had the same posterior, then that would update the beliefs at level two in a different way.

Right.

So if I arrange A2 one way, even though S1 there is still sensitive to the same stimulus, then if I rearrange A2 one way, then the posterior at S1 is going to lead to awareness of one thing, whereas if A2 is set up a different way, then the second level will gain awareness of a different thing.

So in some way, the phenomenal content that you become aware of

depends on the nature of this link between what messages the way that the messages at the second level are kind of decoded in a sense right what the second level takes to be the meaning of the messages that get passed off from the first level um so so there's this kind of nice thing like chris mentioned where it's the updates um

that the first level gives to the second level at each time point.

So phenomenology kind of stays at the temporal scale of experience.

But phenomenal content still depends on a certain type of access, right?

It depends on the first level having a specific type of influence on the second level.


SPEAKER_08:
Brian, thanks a lot.

It's really interesting.

So let's return to the guest, the panel mode.

Christopher, awesome presentation.

And the first question is going to be from Dave, and then anyone else can raise their hand.

So Dave, go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
My question is about possible involvement of the Airtos, the reticulothalamic activating system.

either in your data or the data that are drawn on neurological data in the other relevant studies, is there any representation of possible contributions by the ERTAS, by the midbrain?

And is there any accommodation in your model of something, maybe not explicitly the ERTAS, but data that might originate there, say the endogenous attention?


SPEAKER_07:
um so subcortical structure is really interesting and as for the reticular thalamic activating system i'm curious did you did you get that from this book by bernard bars so a cognitive theory of consciousness where he first introduced global workspace theory and he has a whole chapter devoted to the reticular thalamic activating system oh that's great i will definitely have to get that no actually i got that this from uh


SPEAKER_02:
The work that Jaak Panksepp and Mark Solms did, especially the 2013 thesis of the conscious id.

He is, of course, a very close collaborator with Carl Friston.

He just brought out a full-length thesis.


SPEAKER_05:
book on the conscious id especially as um active inference interacts with that so so my my actual main focus of research is on um emotions um you know so applying computational models to emotions and um i'll just say that i um i have very strong disagreements with the um the kind of theory proposed by yach and mark we actually published kind of a joint like

on paper debate where me and, um, a colleague Richard Lane kind of debated back and forth with Yach and Mark about the right way to think of, um, the way consciousness works.

And I'll just say that, you know, their view places this really strong role of affect where they, they more or less say that these midbrain, you know, structures, um, like the PAG, right.

The, um, uh, or equiductal gray.

Um, send these afferent signals up to kind of activate the rest of the brain and that somehow permeates it with this kind of necessary emotion.

Um, and that's kind of primary.

Um, whereas, whereas kind of the way that, um, the way that we've, the kind of structure of the sort of thing that we've defended is just that no, like the global broadcasting ish kind of thing applies to all types of information.

Right.

So if you have a representation of your beliefs about your emotional state, that has to be attended to and sort of sent into the workspace, just like any other stimulus for you to become aware of it.

And so, I mean, these sorts of midbrain structures, they do a lot of really interesting, like, interoceptive and visceral regulation processes.

And, you know, they do have this sort of general, like, upward modulation role while they kind of

you know my view is they kind of keep the cortex in general in a state where it's capable of of representing things being sensitive to simulate holding different states active and other states not so it it essentially it allows things to be represented in general and then to become consciously accessible um but you know with respect to um


SPEAKER_07:
way that kind of emotions feed in and whether the uh the midbrain structures actually contribute content in and of themselves we just have theoretical disagreements about that can i also briefly follow up on that so the contrast the reason i think that frontal parietal regions in cortex are so important is because there are a huge just amount of empirical literature now in neuroimaging

And also very recently, data from kind of invasive neurophysiology in monkeys and most recently in mice showing that, yes, when there is this contrast between conscious versus unconscious, these are the things that are differentially modulated.

Now, there are some very impressive findings very recently coming from Matthew Larkham's group showing basically that

you can wake creatures up from general anesthesia by stimulating the medial dorsal nucleus and the thalamus and there are these crucial connect like reciprocal connections between layer five of the cortex and the medial dot so and the thalamus and when those goes out basically uh general they go out under general anesthesia and when you are awake or when like whiskers are stimulated in bowel cortex

when the mouse kind of reports as in it says its whiskers were stimulated, this circuit goes off essentially.

So I think the thalamus is crucial, but kind of Allah, Dahan and everyone else, I think the reticular thalamic activating system and all those subcortical structures, these are background conditions.

Similar to what Ryan said, it puts the cortex in kind of the state where it could be aware of something, but

The actual contrast between something being broadcast versus not broadcast or being reported versus not reported does not rely on those structures.

And I would just want to see from those authors, I would actually just want to see them engage with something like the visual awareness literature and show that those structures are differentially involved.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks for that.

Steven, go for it, and then Dean, Blue, or actually then Scott, and then Dean or Blue if you want, but Steven with a question, then Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, so thanks.

Just a question, just to be clear, so effectively you tagged the degree in prediction confidence and that mapped against the data that's empirical, if I'm right in understanding.

So as the model showed a difference in confidence, that was showing a correlation to...

how firing happens.

And I'd just be curious to know if you think that this sort of key level or something where this firing or deductive piece can happen, where there's a shift between maybe a more Markovian, gothic process to something more semi-Markovian,


SPEAKER_07:
and less ergodic and you so that an organism can make non-ergodic choices in conscious awareness uh so i mean a couple of things so i'm not sure about the ergodicity comment so i think you can probably have i'm not sure how semi-markovian systems relate to ergodicity i assume that you can have a semi-markovian system in a ergodic system that doesn't like that wouldn't surprise me um yeah so basically when you move from a

I just don't know, actually, just to flag that.

But I'm not particularly up on a lot of the physical physics that relates to how these models work.

But yes, when you move from a first-level model to a second-level model, they are semi-Markovian.


SPEAKER_08:
And can you just maybe define that a little more?

What does that mean to you?

What does that enable?

And maybe that will get at what Stephen was asking, too.


SPEAKER_07:
Basically, the model is no longer just purely dependent upon the previous state at the first level of the model.

There is more information that is determined at the second level than what just goes on at each time step of the first level.

That's basically it.

Yeah, so I think we have a sentence about this somewhere.

Yes, what the temporally deep scale buys you is essentially what we were saying before.

All of those cognitive actions

that allow you to do things like construct reports, make plans, et cetera, et cetera, and kind of abstract away from moment by moment sensory flux.

All of these things depend upon there being a second level.


SPEAKER_01:
And that might be reflected in the brain, from the granular smooth.


SPEAKER_07:
No.

So granular cortex is, generally speaking, like,

So the cortex has six layers, roughly speaking across.

And as you kind of move up or move towards the center of some centrifugal hierarchy, depending on who you talk to and what kind of anatomical maps you believe, that type of thing, layer four of that, the granular cortex, which is essentially the input layer from the thalamus and the feed forward layer that gets smaller and smaller and smaller until when you're at kind of the center of this hierarchy or this centrifuge.

you essentially have no granular cortex at all.

This is kind of ties in Lisa Felden Barrett's done a lot of stuff with this.

I have problems with that view, to be honest.

They kind of say the top of the hierarchy is where they think consciousness lives.

I have a rather vehement disagreement in that I just think there's absolutely no evidence that that's true in terms of neuroimaging evidence.

The areas that are relevant seem to be these frontoparietal regions.

They do have a somewhat well-defined layer four.

It's not completely agranular.

It's not granular.

It's somewhere in between.

Yeah, I don't know.

I think they, one thing to say about, I know Ryan has very specific views about this.

And I should say that I really love Lisa Feldman Barrett's work.

I just think she's wrong about this.

I just want to go with kind of the empirical contrasts right and not speculate too much about very specific implementation details so look they kind of go from a very loose model of kind of predictive coding and then map it to these like.

cellular data kind of details about the structure of neurons.

I am more interested in going from these computational properties to basically what would measure the level of neuroimaging, because I think that's what is most tractable experimentally.

And then if we're, and there's still a lot of debates about that neuroimaging level, right?

If we kind of hammer it out and decide what's going on at the neuroimaging level of analysis, then good.

then we can start having more serious discussions about particular involvement, particular types of cortex.

But I just don't think we're there yet empirically.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, I would say, yeah, just to kind of echo that a little bit, you know, it's important to realize that it's not as though, you know, the particular sets of, you know, little node neurons and synaptic necrins and the kind of like

know hypothetical columns um you know that chris showed earlier in terms of the neural process theory um that's just kind of one example of a way you could set it up there's there's a very very large number of ways that you could connect up neurons together in different structures that would implement basically the same algorithm

And in addition to that, there are different message passing algorithms that you can use to solve the same graphs.

An active inference isn't defined by some particular message passing algorithm, right?

Like Thomas Parr has shown this specifically in a paper where you can have different neural implementations

that require more or less neuronal resources to implement.

It's kind of a trade-off between efficiency and accuracy where, you know, for instance, like really, really accurate methods passing algorithms like belief propagation, they require more neurons to do, but they're a little more accurate.

And the brain could use that, right?

Or the brain could use variational message passing, which is not quite as good of an approximation, but requires less resources to do.

So the point being is that there's not really that strong of commitment to that level of kind of circuit detail in active inference.

It's more just a theory of you can have this pattern of synaptic connections that implement the matrices, and we represent

posterior beliefs over states with these firing rate functions.

And then you take the rate of change in those to put the PRPs.

But so this is kind of the issue with it doesn't really make sense to me anyway at this point.

Again, it's echoing what Chris said.

To start with, hey, let's assume that this one very specific

way of setting up neurons to do this is the right one.

You know, let's just assume that and then figure out what must be true about different areas of cortex based on their layer, based on their cortical column layer structure.

Um, so, so then it's definitely, I mean, it's super interesting and probably has, um, you know, a really meaningful, interesting mapping between the differences between granular and granular and a granular.

Um, with respect to computational function.

Um, but, um, but again, you know, like, I don't think.

until we've really nailed down that there is this one particular circuit implementation, it doesn't really make sense, in my opinion anyway, to kind of infer from that direction the function.


SPEAKER_07:
I should say, just to kind of echo that, I think if you work in your imaging, it doesn't make sense.

If you work in mouse, in a mouse model, and you were literally testing hypotheses at the circuit level, then it would make sense something to do.


SPEAKER_05:
well right but in that case you're literally testing like the predictions of specific message passing algorithms yeah exactly so that was kind of a testing that's testing for message passing algorithms that's not assuming a particular one and inferring from that so anyway I mean but

I mean, if you, I mean, for people who are interested, I mean, we, you know, so I and a couple of previous papers have, you know, kind of built multi-level active inference models similar to this, but specifically about emotional awareness.

You know, the sort of show how you can get, you know, from simple kind of lack of awareness of single emotional states all the way up to being aware of

feeling multiple emotions at the same time and being able to report them and things like that that kind of show how a structure not too different from this one can generalize to emotions or really to any other sort of thing that you could experience and be aware of, whether that's coming from inferring things about your own kind of bodily state and its emotional meaning from interoception or whether it's something like vision.

So, I mean, we haven't covered that stuff in any of these sorts of things before, but that stuff is also out there that might kind of help at least show what kind of the view on our end is about how active inference can account for emotional phenomena and be consistent with the current literature on emotional awareness as well.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks for these awesome answers.

Scott with a question, and then I'll ask one from the chat, and then Dean or Blue or someone else.


SPEAKER_00:
Here we go.

Thanks.

Great and fascinating presentation.

I was wondering, this book, The Intelligent Movement Machine.

Graziano.

Graziano.

Yeah, and it talks generally about the cortical mapping being predicted by the movement repertoire in the motor cortex and kind of that embodiment kind of element.

One of the things I wanted to ask about, and I think it follows from this most immediate prior part of the conversation, is when we have an active inference setting and that model is being employed for multiple things,

perception, and I won't use the phrasing right because my active inference terms aren't all up to snuff, but when the inputs into the individual who's performing the active inference, that system, are from various sensory inputs and various temporal distance, so there's several inputs, and then they're being synthesized into a

an action or an externality, something's going to reach out.

And again, my apologies for not internalizing all the definitionals.

What are some of the cortical mappings or have you found cortical mappings that embody that process of synthesizing multiple inputs into a single action?

What are the core, what are the structural correlates of the process of synthesis of multiple different strands of active inference into a single action potential?


SPEAKER_07:
I'm using the wrong words, but nice question.

Is this a question essentially about multimodal integration?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.


SPEAKER_07:
So, yeah.

Um, so I guess I think active inference is probably, you could, you might be able to build a specific.

So I think there are two parts of this question.

That's an interesting question.

Um,

First part is I'll just kind of answer the active inference end of it.

The way I think about active inference at least is just as a really useful modeling and mathematical framework.

And I think it's possible to build multiple active inference models of any phenomena.

So I would want to hammer out an empirical paradigm and then figure out, okay, what models could I build of this?

So that's kind of the first part.

Second part is just about multimodal integration.

Are there kind of places that hows

I haven't looked at multimodal integration since I was an undergrad.

I'm just trying to remember like my third year Cognuro courses.

I think there are places in like posterior parietal cortex where there is integration between multiple modality, like you might say like vision and one other thing or whatever it is.

And then that gets shot off to motor cortex implemented in actions.

So I don't know.

I think I would just say, look at the motor planning literature.

There's lots of stuff about Bayesian visual writer integration.


SPEAKER_00:
And just to follow up, one of the things that leads to is I was wondering about the situated cognition opportunities for those syntheses.

So for instance, you have hysteresis, or my son used to say stereotypes are a real time saver.

He said it as a joke.

So the idea is you have externalities that facilitate the synthesis.

So they're actually not cortical structures, they're social and linguistic and rhetorical structures.

Where I'm exploring is could those be described with some of the same models as the cortical structures so you're actually able to have a scale-independent description of the processes both in a social and a cortical cognitive context

for the synthesis of multiple multimodal inputs.


SPEAKER_07:
So I'm not sure about the scale independent part.


SPEAKER_08:
yeah yeah i i i hear what you're at no scott it's a beautiful question i see where you're coming from because we've been talking about the scale free formulisms with chris fields and others and then this whole nested markov blankets like you could have the neuron and then the neural you could go within a model and just like you said um your model doesn't presuppose that awareness is actually at a higher level you're just saying there is a structure that's deep temporal structure and that's the state that's the timeline that you are at but there could be another level

And then mechanistically or functionally, how that level plays out is going to come back to a task specific measurement, which is and a plurality of models.

So still good points.


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, part of part of I mean, I think, you know, I mean, to go back to I mean, there's lots of like, nice opportunities, right to build active inference models would be very simple, you know, for like, multiple multimodal or cross modal, right integration tasks, you know, like, for instance, like,

um i haven't seen this done um but maybe i have to look back but things like the double flash illusion or the rubber hand illusion or you know any any of these kinds of yeah multimodal things i mean like like a double flash illusion is really nice right because i mean more or less for people aren't familiar um you either play one or two tones and they are coincident with a single flash of light

And it just turns out that when you play two tones really quick, then people perceive two flashes of light when there was really only one.

And the reason for that is, so there's just this kind of like prior in the mix, presumably, that coincident, you know, things that are coincident temporally have the same hidden cause.

But also at the same time, the temporal resolution of audition is just better.

um this is more trustable than the temporal resolution of vision um so so you can just say look like the system just trusts right it has beliefs that the auditory system has higher precision and that there's a high probability of common causes of coincident input therefore there must have been two flashes um given that there was two cones um you know i mean that's just one example of like a really simple well-known empirical task um of cross-modal integration

that would be pretty easy.

I mean, probably without a lot of without even a ton of tweaks to

that the kind of structure of the model that we're using here, you could do.

And all you'd really have to do probably is just assign the right precision to the auditory and visual input, where those are jointly generated by the same hidden cause or hidden state in the model.

And so basically, it's either you're just inferring one cause or two causes, and that either generates receiving one flash or two flashes.

I mean, anyway, it would be simple to do.

Um, and, uh, like I said, I don't know if I don't not aware of that having been done in a kind of formal active inference and DP literature, but, um, you know, I mean, there are known, right.

Like neural correlates of this stuff and, you know, they're in part where you'd expect them to be right there at like the borders, right.

Of like auditory and visual processing and like association cortex, um, like posterior association cortex, um,

and uh you know so it'd be really really really cool project right to try to build a model of something like that and then uh just see right whether the predicted uh neural time courses um actually better kind of single out right the the areas the association areas where the kind of borders of vision are different it seems like it's it's almost like a situated synesthesia


SPEAKER_00:
where you have the Gabor Square, where you have the frequency and time variance, but one of the variants is being hijacked by another perception in the visual field.


SPEAKER_08:
right you know so the you're you're it that you it's crossing over to that other sense is very interesting thank you thanks um i'm going to ask a question from the chat and then if anyone wants to give probably a short final note but then we'll end around the hour so that we can have a whole second discussion next week the question in the chat is um to the authors what would you say the main limitations of the model are or where are some next things you're building on but what are the main limitations of the current model and then how are you going to be building


SPEAKER_07:
So, I mean, there's lots, right?

So I'll just list them.

I think we list this in the paper somewhere too.

For starters, it's a discrete model.

We treat the whole visual system as basically like one discrete hidden state to be inferred by the high level.

That's obviously like not true, but it's a good enough approximation to actually think reproduce a bunch of findings.

It would be nice to have a multi-level model

Now, with that multi-level model, I think there are some empirical cases.

There's this thing called the partial awareness hypothesis by Sid Kuder, where they talk about having partial access, or the global workspace having partial access to different parts of the hierarchy, and that giving rise to kind of odd experiences.

So you might have something like, you might have really good access to the fact that the color of Ryan's shirt, but not to the fact that it's a shirt, or vice versa.

So that would be nice.

I'm not sure quite how to do that in a hidden Markov model situation, but that would be nice.

Second thing is we really just model kind of report paradigms here.

So where we're going with this is we're trying to extend this explicitly to model some no report paradigms and actually casting kind of thinking about that in a more precise way.

And so we've actually built another model and we're kind of writing it up at the moment.

I mean, it's not...

It's kind of a side project because it's not a part of my PhD thesis, but the idea is roughly speaking to actually have a model that is able to explain a lot of the weird findings in the no report literature.

And also I think we have a much more principled, we now have a much more principled account of report that I'm really quite excited about.

Then just like, I guess on a last limitation would just be,

And this isn't really a limitation because Ryan has got a lot of work in emotion and interoception on this.

And I know that's somewhere that his lab is like really pushing.

But it would just be nice if we could use these very similar architectures and apply them to something like interoceptive awareness.

And I would find it personally very compelling if you had one, I think it's too demanding to have one model, but one very general model structure that generalizes across

visual consciousness to interoceptive awareness, to like auditory awareness, to smatter sensory awareness.

That would be really nice.


SPEAKER_08:
Awesome answer.

Ryan, do you want to add anything?

And then we'll have any final comments.


SPEAKER_05:
You know, I mean, I think, I think Chris covered most of the kinds of limitations or, I mean, I don't know.

I mean, I would just say like, like, yes, I mean, it would be, it would definitely be nice to do something like have a,

So there are what are called mixed models where you have kind of a discrete model like ours on the top, but then the kind of posteriors, some predictions downward that essentially set set points for a continuous level below it.

So then you can have a continuous state space where, for instance, it's a lot more plausible, right, to think that

the sorts of inferences that are being made in kind of like early visual processing or on a, you know, on a continuous, a continuous state space, right?

It doesn't have to be like motion speed one, motion speed two, right?

It can be, it can be continuous values, um, for, for things like that.

Um, but, um, like another thing that I, you know, I mean, you know, Chris mentioned interception and emotion.

I mean, that's something, like I said, I mean, we have empirical paradigms that we've been setting up to test just this kind of thing in interoception.

And we have a paper under review right now where we applied a computational model to interoceptive perception and like a gastrointestinal interoception task.

That's not a multi-level model at the moment.

And that paradigm doesn't have, probably doesn't have enough trials to do contrast between

um conscious versus unconscious um stimulations but we're kind of working on that um so that would be nice um another thing

that Chris kind of mentioned the example of being aware that the shirt is red but not a shirt.

That kind of thing also is really important for modeling emotional awareness because a lot of times people might feel some kind of bodily sensations, kind of like a pit in their stomach or a fast heart rate or something like that.

They might be conscious of that but not infer one step above and be conscious of the fact that that's associated, say, with feeling fear.

Right.

Like like people with like panic disorder, for example.

Right.

They might feel like a strong heartbeat, but they might instead infer, oh, that means I'm having a panic attack or something like that.

Or they might infer, oh, I'm having a heart attack.

Right.

So there are different kind of conceptualizations that you can you can infer from.

Right.

Patterns in lower level interseptive experience, some of which are emotional and some of which are not.

But and this is where it becomes interesting is that

You might also prime an emotion category.

Like I mentioned with the guilt example, I could prime guilt so that higher level concept representation is activated, but does not enter into awareness.

So you can kind of have multiple levels in a hierarchy where each level can independently or compete for broadcasting.

You know, I've been thinking about ways to do this model-wise, and the best thing we've come up with right now, just in terms of the practical implementations we have, would be to, for instance, like have an interoceptive level and then have the emotional level above that, but have the interoception representations also get kind of like duplicated and passed up to the second level.

So then they can also kind of equally compute, right, for access to like a third level that would be like the workspace level.

Um, but anyways, I mean, these are all things that are kind of in progress, but just by way of saying, um, this additional limitation is you can only be in our model.

You could only be conscious of conscious or unconscious of one type of processing or love one level of abstraction.

Um, which is not, you know, the case in the, which is not the case in the, it's not the true case.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks a lot for these awesome answers.

Always a great time with the two of you on the stream.

So just thank all the participants who joined us live.

And in the calendar event, there's a form.

So it'd be helpful if you want to add feedback on the form.

And then we're going to be having 18.2 next week.

At the same time, it's going to be the same paper.

So hopefully we'll all get another chance to reread the paper, listen to this stream because Christopher, what you said was really deep.

So again, much appreciated to all and we'll see everyone next week.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks guys.

## 3iQBiClVHuo

UNKNOWN:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_08:
Hello and welcome to the Active Inference Livestream.

This is the Active Inference Lab and we are here in Active Inference Livestream 18.2 on March 30th, 2021.

Welcome everyone to the Active Inference Lab.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

Sorry, the video just changed a little bit.

There we go.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll all be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Today we're here in session 18.2 on March 30th having the follow-up discussion with the authors and other participants on this Predictive Global Neuronal Workspace paper.

And today the goal is really to follow up on the last week's discussion, continue discussing and learning about this very cool paper and

why the authors did what they did and what are the implications for different areas so today we're just going to go through some introductions and warm-up questions and then we'll be able to walk through the paper and the slides and ask a few questions to the authors and get a few different perspectives

So for the introductions, we'll just go around and introduce ourselves and then pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken yet.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc in California, and I'll pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Hi, everyone.

I'm Alex Vyatkin.

I'm a researcher in Systems Management School in Moscow, Russia.

Also, I'm a co-organizer for Active Inference Lab.

And I pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

And I do a lot of work with social topographies and landscapes for social drama.

And I will pass it over to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I am retired.

I'm hanging out in the loft of my cabin, which is not very well lit.

I'll pass it to Ryan.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So I'm Ryan Smith.

I'm a investigator at the Laureate Institute for Brain Research in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

Yeah, I mainly work on computational modeling of

empirical behavior in different psychiatric disorders, as well as some theoretical work on emotions and emotional awareness and interception.

I guess I'll send it to Chris.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, I'm Christopher White.

I'm a PhD student at the University of Cambridge in England, and I mostly work on active inference or computation using active inference with computational models of cognitive control.

But a lot of my previous work is kind of focused on visual awareness.

So I'll pass it to Adam.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, I'm Adam.

I'm a postdoc at

Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research.

I'm also a research fellow at the Kinsey Institute, and I'm interested in consciousness.

If you will, too.


SPEAKER_08:
Is that everyone?

Cool.

Does anyone want to raise their hand and give a thought on one of these warm-up questions, which are just what are something they're excited or curious about today?

something that they liked or remembered about the paper or last week's discussion to sort of jump start where we we were at um or maybe really quickly at the beginning christopher wanted to clear up something and then we'll kind of go into questions so maybe everyone could write down a question and then christopher go for it yeah show us i said two things that like


SPEAKER_07:
just false um last time why i just made mistakes i kind of want to correct them so the first one i was specifically referenced someone asked a question about the thalamus and its involvement in consciousness and i kind of referenced a whole body of work from matthew larkham's group um and i think i said the medial dorsal nucleus and it's not it's central lateral nucleus and thalamus um i think like 99 people wouldn't care but anyone who knows anything about the thalamus would be like pained by that um

And the second thing was I was talking about King and DeHaan's Bayesian model of conscious access.

I think I described the model as univariate Gaussian.

That's also not correct.

It's a multivariate Gaussian, although you can extend the same model to a univariate case.

Anyway, it doesn't matter.

But I just wanted to kind of correct those two things.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks for the correction.

So if everyone could raise their hand and first, um, we'll go with Adam and then Steven.


SPEAKER_06:
Um, I was, uh, curious about, uh, what Chris just said.

So like medial dorsal, that would be, um, what Thelma is for interior cingulate in the frontal lobes.

Kind of like the gateway to, um, like amygdala at all.

Would that be right?

And then what, so the central lateral, like who's that looping with?

I forget.


SPEAKER_07:
I think central lateral would be looping.

I was specifically thinking about like a loop between layer five pyramidal neurons and central lateral thalamus.


SPEAKER_08:
So if I could ask a question there, just why are we identifying brain regions or what would it mean to be identifying brain regions one way or the other in humans or some other species?


SPEAKER_07:
So this particular body of work, not to go too far on a tangent, but there's this really impressive body of work that basically has identified both level of consciousness and content of consciousness with burst mode firing in layer five of cortex.

I think most of this evidence is from a mouse model, so interpret that as you will.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, Adam, or you can use the actual Jitsi.

Raise your hand.


SPEAKER_06:
But yeah, go on.

I mean, for me, it would partially be what systems might contribute to wakefulness or different aspects of consciousness, depending on how we want to carve the joints on it in different respects.

So let's say...

stimulating the medial dorsal was more important.

Well, then that might implicate the specific relays, its ability to form phalamocortical loops or phalamostriatocortical, like the whole what it helps to bind together functionally and other functions.

It would tell you what processes might be involved.

So maybe action or salience, that might be important.

Or maybe it's like

frontal lobes as hub, but like which part of the frontal lobes?

Is it the parts that are like a general topologically central hub?

Or does it look kind of like a motor bits?

Or does it look like something else?

And so it'd be trying to look for like fish around for clues about what's important in what ways, but it might mean, but it's easy to tell stories.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, cool.

So Steven, and then anyone else who has a question?


SPEAKER_01:
So yeah, I'm just really excited about the... When I listened last week, you talked about temperature being used in the models, and you had different places where you used different amounts of temperature.

I think it's in the SoftMac function to show...

different types of model scenarios so i'll just be curious i'm just excited about maybe um just the general way that you um use your thinking to build the models to inform how you start to look at consciousness and the way the brain works as much as the way that you find the results from the models so that i'd be interested in that those sort of two sides


SPEAKER_04:
So, so I mean, one, one thing I just want to make sure this is clear is that, you know, like computational neuroscience borrows or has been historically ended up borrowing a lot from terminology and physics and engineering and things like that.

You know, so there's some of these sorts of terms that can be a little funny, right?

So like temperature, like a temperature parameter or typically an inverse temperature parameter is something that's borrowed from physics that just kind of has to do within the physics sense, kind of how much, you know, with how much energy particles are kind of bouncing around against each other.

Um, and, um, you know, in a very oversimplified way of putting it, um, but, but so it just means essentially there's more kind of randomness right in the, in the system.

So in the context of, um, of this, um, you're just applying that same equation to describe essentially the amount of noise in decision-making.

So, uh, uh, higher temperature in this case, just is just a parameter in an equation that.

controls how deterministic versus stochastic decision-making processes are.

So I just want to make sure that it has... I just want to make sure it's clear to anyone listening that it has nothing to do with actual physical temperature, like being hot or cold.

It's just a parameter that kind of modulates how random decision-making is.

So I just wanted to make that clear.

So in this case, it's just controlling... So for example, if

if the temperature parameter is really low or the inverse temperature has a really high value, then that just means that say, even if the model was only like 51% versus 49% confident in one thing over another, it would always choose the action associated with the 51%.

Um, whereas if the temperature value temperature parameter value was high or as low, um, or as high, or the inverse temperature parameter is low.

then um that means that the like for instance that with 51 of the time it would choose the um the action associated with 51 proper with 0.51 probability it would choose that one less often than it would if the probability was a 0.7 um you know and less probability than that than if it was if the probability was 0.9

So essentially just having a low inverse temperature parameter value just allows the actual frequency of choice to kind of scale in some sense with the actual probabilistic beliefs over the different states in the model.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you, Ryan.

We'll have Christopher, then Adam, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_07:
So just to kind of contextualize that a little bit.

So a softmax function is exactly the same function as a Boltzmann distribution from statistical physics.

So often if you have a, you'll just use the same terminology because it has, and in the physics case, it has like a literal physical interpretation.

In this case, it doesn't.

So that's kind of why there's that overlapping terminology.

In terms of deciding why or on those parameters or actually building them in, it was really just kind of came from thinking about what attention does.

So what we're trying to modulate there was attention and signal strength.

And both of those things

in some way modulate the strength of feed forward input.

So when you think about that, you then kind of think, okay, what part of the model corresponds to that?

Well, it's the likelihood matrix that maps, that decides the precision of the mapping between external observations and first level hidden states.

And so both the idea is that both

attention and kind of external signal strength, or it might be something like contrast, whatever, will jointly determine the precision of that mapping.

And then there's lots of different ways where you can kind of cash that out if you actually want to get into kind of the neurobiology of it, like the normalization model of attention or bias competition or something like that.

But kind of extracting away from that detail,

Basically, it just modulates the A matrix, the computational level of analysis.

So that was kind of the thinking that went into it.


SPEAKER_08:
Very interesting.

Adam, then Stephen, then anyone else.

Okay, Adam, can you be ready to speak?

But go for it.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, sorry about that.

Oh, it's kind of off the current topic, but from before.

So some quick Googling turned out the central lateral seems to be looping largely with parietal and temporal association areas.

So that's potentially interesting in ways that indirectly could like speak to debates on the physical substrates of consciousness, like the brouhaha between IIT and GMWT said more like the front of the brain or the back of the brain.

And in which senses do they mean consciousness?

But it's interesting.

I actually am having trouble finding an image of like a diagram of the thalamus actually shows the central lateral nucleus.

It's all just like, I see central medial, but not central lateral.

It seems like they might be kind of like tucking it in with the pulvinar, whatever that means.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I just say thanks for that feedback.

That was really useful.

And I think also, because I've got a background in chemistry, I keep thinking about the Gibbs free energy where it talks about temperature times change in entropy in that term.

So it's like that the temperature is multiplied into the amount of entropy change there is to make it more significant.

So that would...

kind of mirror why it's a bit like you're putting in noise or entropy.

So that's quite useful.

So yeah, thanks.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, welcome, Blue.

You or anyone else can raise their hand, but one chemistry metaphor.

And again, Ryan, as you brought up, it's not always like a literal meaning, but thermodynamic versus the kinetic alternative for a reaction.

So like the thermodynamic...

outcome for the candle is to burn because it has all this pent up energy but it doesn't spontaneously combust because the kinetic barrier the activation barrier is too high and then when there's like an enzyme or a spark of energy then in the right situation the product can go all the way down

the big delta G to the kind of ultimate thermodynamic least energy versus the more kinetically accessible.

And so that's kind of like information foraging.

There's sort of the perfect citation you would find if you had the right surge and it was that low temperature or something analogous.

But then if it's too kinetically constrained, then the attention is drawn away.

I'm not sure if that will map directly in this whole active inference scenario.

mode, but it's just kind of another chemical informational distinction.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I mean, it depends.

I mean, it depends how you're using it.

Like in this, in this case, there's not really much of a connection because we're just essentially, we're just using a temperature parameter and a softmax function to control the precision of a mapping.

Well, in a few different places for attention and for stimulus strength, we're just.

using it to change the precision of the mapping between states and observations at the first level.

So it just controls essentially how strong a sensory signal ends up updating beliefs, posterior reserve states at the first level, and then modulated by a second temperature parameter that does the same thing, but that accounts for attention.

So these sorts of things jointly control

essentially how much evidence sensory input provides for posterior giver states at the first level.

You know, so we're using it for that kind of thing.

And then we also use it for controlling deterministicness or choice at the second level of the model in terms of action selection.

So in all those cases, I don't personally see a direct relationship between that and the kind of thermodynamic

thermodynamic aspect of temperature of getting over, you know, energy barriers and things like that.

But I mean, I could be, I could be, I could be just not thinking through it all the way.


SPEAKER_08:
Stephen, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think that makes a lot of sense, what you're saying.

And I suppose the nice thing with the modeling is that you've got this potential to, I know you're using it, like you say, as this way to bring in noise or softmax, but it gives you that way to increase and decrease it, which in real life, when you do empirical work, it's hard to do that.

So it's one of the strengths of the modeling that you can change that parameter and see, it seems to be one way that you really get insights into the dynamics of the system.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, in terms of just being able to modulate, or mimic the influences of attention on modulating the background perception of the signal.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes, Steven, or Dean, and then Steven.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just had a quick question here.

And maybe this is far too oversimplified, but when you guys were doing this work, I started also looking at the,

the effect paper that I think the two together gave me a better sense of some of the work that I was doing around helping people walk into these novel situations pre-reflectively.

And there is a tendency to want to commit, to want to pay attention, to want to give over whatever you have in terms of processing power to figuring out what's going on.

But we had to spend quite a bit of time on helping people

get the idea that there's this channel there's this kind of sweet spot and when you were talking about degrees it brought it up for me again the idea of how to help a person know when they're over committing when they're over correcting and when they're over compensating so when they're trying to do this estimation how do they know that they're not seeing the moon walking bare because they're so committed to counting up the number of

basketball passes.

I wonder if you guys had spent a little bit of time looking at the other end of the of the channel when people actually readjust back in.

And I know that's that's probably where the degrees part comes in.

But I was just wondering about that.


SPEAKER_04:
So I mean, are you imagining are you imagining in some kind of like clinical scenario where a person like biased attention away from something that could be, say, aversive if they were to focus on it?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, exactly.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so I mean, there's probably a mechanistic relation in a sense, just in the broad sense of how we think attention is implemented, right?

So for example, if you think that a person is avoiding paying attention to something because it would be aversive,

then you can end up with this kind of implicit reinforcement of attentional policy selection, which we don't directly have in this model.

The agent is choosing what the precision is associated with attention in this model, but that's something that can be added and it's something that we have actually added in some more recent work that we're doing right now.

But the idea there, or one way to think about that would be that whenever a person essentially starts

to pay attention to the thing that would be aversive, then it starts to feel aversive, right?

So then if they pay attention away again, then the choice of paying attention away actually ends up being negatively reinforcing because the bad feeling goes away, right?

So then what that ends up doing, at least according to this kind of reinforcement learning account, is that that ends up assigning higher value to the policy of attending away.

Over time, the probability of attending away just ends up getting higher and higher because it makes you feel better every time you do.

Then this avoidant attention can become really habitized.

That's one way of thinking about it.

In the clinical setting, you want to help people potentially start to

you know, gradually, you know, expose themselves to, to, you know, pay attention to this thing that's aversive in hopes that if they're able to kind of do that in a sustained way, then over the long run, the aversiveness will go down as they kind of learn to better deal with the thing that they've been avoiding attentionally.

You know, so, so that's, that's, you know, fairly tangential to, right, the kind of thing we're trying to do here.

But, you know, but there's a,

there's a connection in this very kind of broad sense in that if you can control attention and choices of what to pay attention to can be reinforced, then that's one way you can kind of end up with this, this kind of thing where a person might not even know, right.

That they've developed this strong habit, you know, not to pay attention to something.

It just becomes very automated.

Um, you know, the same way, the same way any other behavior can be habitized via repeated reinforcement.

Um,

but here just it would be a kind of a cognitive action as opposed to a more overt behavioral action.

Okay.


SPEAKER_08:
Very interesting.

Thanks for that question and response.

Adam, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_06:
I guess to come out of left field, in what you were just describing, it seems like that could have some relation to maybe

grounding like psychodynamic like concepts in terms of if these patterns of attentional approach and avoidance can move from your C matrix to your E matrix you can end up finding yourself in these sort of like garden paths of attending and coming to inferences for reasons that you might not even understand just on the way your policy selections of attention have been shaped for conditions that are might be too numerous and varied for you to track and so


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Yeah.

I mean, there's, I mean, we've written, you know, we've written a few papers on this, right.

Like, or I have with some colleagues, I mean, again, you know, my focus, um, you know, is, is largely in, you know, in terms of emotion and psychiatric conditions.

Right.

And I wouldn't, um, I would say it's a way of, of, um, recasting the sorts of behaviors that psychodynamic approaches are trying to capture.

but to do it in a way that doesn't actually posit the existence of these sorts of repressive, right?

Like, you know, like unconscious, like there's no unconscious agent, right?

There's no id, right?

That's being posited, that's sitting there keeping these things out of awareness, but somehow they're still present unconsciously, right?

There's nothing like that, right?

It's just a very simple story of having reinforced patterns of attention that, you know, so it,

It's a way of capturing the phenomena that I think psychodynamic approaches are often trying to capture, but it doesn't posit a lot of the ontological, a lot of the entities that are posited in psychodynamic approaches.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

Stephen, then anyone else?

Adam, go for it.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Not saying you're Freudian, but you're actually finding the baby in the bathwater, rescuing it, cleaning it up, contextualizing it.

Why did people have these intuitions to begin with?

What was the grains of truth?

I'm wondering if through this, this could lead to this kind of patterns of attending, some of which you're not tracking.

This could be an account of what would lead to potentially mismatch or discrepancies between things like stated and revealed preferences.

or a thing like your actual affective disposition with respect to thing and then what you think is going on and then those could potentially go across purposes in ways that could be difficult to explicitly model and potentially have like problematic sequelae or not.

But I'm wondering if like this could lead to like a mismatch or across purposes of attracting states at different levels.


SPEAKER_04:
Um, I mean, I'd probably need more concrete examples to try to figure that out.

I mean, that's probably something I'd have to think about more.


SPEAKER_06:
I guess one quickly would be like, um, implicit affect tests or something like that.

Like you say, like, um, uh, I'm not racist, but then it turns out, no, no, you are.

And like, if you actually look at the reaction or something like that, or I am really happy in this relationship, but then like I measure your heart rate variability and it's crap or things like that.

Um,

Just this, your actual affective state might end up being different than what you think it is.

And there can be like a lack of self-awareness, like a difficulty coming to coherent modeling of yourself because of these like shaped paths of attention.

Like you might like miss the mark about you.

Cause it was like difficult to see something like that.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I would, I would think that, you know, I mean,

perhaps there are sort of some instances of the sort of thing you're talking about that could be captured by the kind of mechanisms that, you know, we're talking about here or the kind of tangential extension of them that we're talking about here.

But I'm not confident that all of them could.

I imagine there's a number of mechanisms that you might appeal to to describe some of those things like, you know, implicit, yeah, like, I mean, if you're talking about like implicit associations on like an IAT,

right or something or something like that that's probably my intuition is that's probably different from you know it's more kind of like a like a like a right which i know chris has actually been working on models of true tasks um but um right which is which is probably pretty different from um um some of the other examples that you were giving but but yeah i mean like i said i'd have to

Taking a particular example, I'd probably have to think it through a little more to think about what kind of generative model would be able to reproduce the kind of behavior you're talking about.

Or most likely, there would be multiple generative models that could reproduce it, and then you'd have to do some kind of experiment to do model comparison and see which one actually best accounts for it.

But again, I wouldn't feel really confident saying what that might look like just in the very kind of

abstract general description we're talking about right now.


SPEAKER_08:
Nice.

Nice.

Thank you for the response.

Steven?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just bringing this point with this model that's now maybe getting into the modeling part is I think that's interesting with the awareness base.

There's a lot of work with awareness-based systems change and looking at awareness.

And I'd be interested in your thoughts on how we can move beyond being trapped in a psychology of the individual

and you know pathology of the individual and it moves into the intersubjective multi-scale so like you talk about tasks but you it also could be used in taskscapes you know organizational contexts or groups of people so i just think that there's um because the the it's not nailed down to like a psychological model of the person's thoughts and feelings but more a general model of the attentional structure

And it has an ability to move between scales and context.

So I just think I've put that out there as something that seems quite interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, there's more to you.

Oh, go ahead, Scott.


SPEAKER_07:
So I think the utility of models like these is to identify a very specific phenomenon.

and that namely having conscious access to some content and not others um so i have conscious access to what's in front of me my visual field at the moment if i direct my attention around my body i can bring up all sorts of like i can suddenly become aware of different kind of smarter sensory um bits of information and all of these have very specific kind of neural signatures as it were

What we're trying to do is really propose a model at a computational level of analysis and algorithmic level of analysis that explains these.

And outside of that, I'm not sure to what extent actually talking about awareness, intersubjective awareness, is it all the same thing?

as talking about awareness as someone who works in neuroscience of consciousness, for example.

They might be, but I don't see any evidence that they are.


SPEAKER_08:
Pretty interesting, because it's in the title of the paper.

So many people might think of it differently.

I mean, it's just an interesting question, right?

Sorry, what's in the title of the paper?

Just the idea that the visual consciousness is involved.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, but I mean, but again, I mean, this is a model of a particular visual consciousness past, right?

I mean, so it's meant to account for things that are seen in the visual consciousness literature.

um you know there is the structure is abstract enough that you know we would and we say this in the discussion that it ought to apply to cases of having access to one bit of information versus another um in other domains right like in the auditory domain or you know something that i've been working on you know with a bunch of colleagues at um you know at library where i am um you know is trying to see if the same sort of thing

It looks like it's present in the interoceptive domain, for example.

So I think it's right to say that we would hope anyway that it's abstract enough that it can account for any piece of information that you either gain access to or not when it's being represented somewhere.

whether it's, you know, right now, as I'm talking to you, I'm not necessarily aware of what my heart's doing, but now I choose to pay attention to it.

And all of a sudden, okay, I can kind of feel that it's beating at a certain rate.

I believe, I believe, I believe that I, that I feel, I wasn't conscious of that before, despite the fact that my brain was unconsciously tracking, you know, what my heart was doing that whole time.

Right.

So it could apply to being aware or not aware of any stimulus.

So, I mean, to the, so only to the extent that when we say something about inner subjective awareness, only to the extent that that means something about a piece of information that.

know before i was attending to it i didn't know you know was there but now that i'm paying attention to it that i do so for example like if i happen to um notice that a person's smiling or something like that um even though they were smiling at me the whole time you know maybe my brain had picked up on the fact that they were smiling but um i wasn't aware of it until i focused my attention on it or something like that right or even maybe more abstract than that

know when my brain sort of had unconsciously detected the smile there might even have been some further inference that that means something about them being happy right so so there might even be a case where um i either do or do not gain access to this unconscious inference or this posterior belief that the person is more likely happy than unhappy or something like that right but uh but i mean these are sorts of cases they would have to be

tested in their own right.

My broad point is just that it's an abstract structure where all it is meant to account for is when your brain is representing something and you either become aware of it or not.


SPEAKER_07:
I mean, if I could just kind of build on that slightly.

So I think

One, it's very tempting when we've got computational models that are relative, when we've got lots of equations sitting in front of us to kind of think that, I think it's easy to get an illusion of rigor where there is none.

The thing that makes these models meaningful is that we can, we're tracking some real world phenomenon.

In terms of the abstract model structure, it may be the case that say you have group dynamics where there's some group, some aspect of that, maybe the individual behavior of individuals within a group evolves at a really quick time scale.

And then the group decision-making evolves at a slower time scale.

You may be able, you could, in principle, fit a two level partial observer Markov decision process to this as a model of that behaviour.

But that would be very, very difficult.

I think even in that case, even though we're fitting the same model, I don't think that those are at all the same phenomenon, although there may be similarities across them.

I would be extremely resistant to calling one visual awareness or that a group has visual awareness.


SPEAKER_08:
Interesting.

And of course, a parallel debate in the ant world.

Is there a colony awareness or a single six-legged ant awareness?

Or how should we think about distributed systems?

And aren't we all kind of just distributed systems all the way down?

So Adam, and then Steven.


SPEAKER_06:
So this would be related to, I guess, different types of interest subjective or

intrasubjective awareness that you might believe is a model for.

I recently uploaded a preprint after some conversations with people from the Brain Institute at Chapman University, basically trying to do the beginnings of an active inference account of LeBay phenomena and readiness potentials that are a little bit less deflationary with respect to volition and conscious causation.

And so in essence, I was

thinking of the actual moving your hand being an accumulation of model evidence with respect to appropriate receptive pose.

And it might be some sort of conjunction of also whether or not your will or feeling of urge was part of it.

You could think of that as inference over your affective state.

And that if these things are in what kind of alignments could help to explain whether you're like aware of readiness potential activity or whether this awareness is actually feeding back and contributing to it.

And so I feel like your model could potentially like provide like a very precise contextualization of this really subtle what's going on and I would like to collaborate.


SPEAKER_04:
So, I mean, just again, Brad, just to make it really,

maybe that could be the case.

I have no idea, but it could only potentially be the case if what you're talking about, right?

Like what you're, you know, motivated to do or what you're, you know, in the process of about, you know, being about to do or, you know, whatever aspect of, um, you know, action or action tendency or, you know, anything like that.

Um, the only way this could apply is if you think that that information about what your,

you know, what you're motivated to do or something like that, you know, whatever it is.

Only if it's the case that you think that is a represented piece of information that you can attend to or not.

And then you could sort of gate into the higher kind of deeper temporal level of the model that would inform verbal reporting and sort of other goal directed uses.

So it would only be the case, I guess my point is this, is if the representation associated with action that you're talking about is, in some sense, formally equivalent to a representation of something visual that you can attend to.


SPEAKER_06:
That makes sense.

So it's, so the preprint is like, it's like a three, I think like a three page, more of a promissory note.

But if I could like pick your brain later about like,

if you think there's like a way we could actually get some like empirical traction and like nailing down the specifics along the lines you're saying.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, if you have a, I mean, if you have a task and that task involves people paying attention to the aspect of action that you're talking about, then in principle, you could have people, you could have people, you know, in some sense cue them or prime them or something like that, that engages that sort of action bias or action motivation.


SPEAKER_06:
and again they can either attend to it or not or report on it or not in that case yes but otherwise probably not it's a little tricky I think in terms of like the action that would be attended to would be of a couple varieties but none of them few of them would be directly observable so it's like you could say like it's the action of the neural activity in terms of like the ramping activity like do they have access to that but the I was thinking it could also be like the action of like mental acts and like

rehearsing like imagining in a kind of sophisticated affective inference sense like am i going to move my hand or not what would that be like and then that being contributing to that signal um but and where like actual awareness of this like fictive meant this fictive action could be part of what would contribute to

whether or not you feel ownership of it.

It's interesting.

Some people don't show readiness potentials.

They just act.

Other people do.

Like schizophrenic patients, they tend not to show readiness potentials before they spontaneously raise their hand.

But it would be hard to get this... The action is internal.

And so I don't know what you can do with that.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, it just seems like you have to have some kind of behavioral readout that can be fit to...

to a model of this to be able to say that this explains the ability to consciously report on it or not, right?


SPEAKER_06:
So I guess could you use, like, right before leading to, like, the action, there tends to be, like, it starts out, like, more bilateral, and then the ramp activity tends to go lateral, and then the hand moves.

Could you use, like, that sort of signal as the readout?


SPEAKER_04:
Like the ensemble activity?

So in principle, you can fit models to neural activity.

I mean, you can fit models to anything that the generative model generates.

But I'm not necessarily all that confident that you'd be able to justify the claim that because the model in one case generates a readiness potential signal,

that that has anything to do with having conscious access to something.


SPEAKER_06:
And you have the other problem, like if you're using like the ensemble activity, it's still the interpretation, like awareness of what, what are we even talking about with the awareness of the whole point is to try to like contextualize what those signals mean.

And so, yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

I mean, the point is, I mean, in the majority of cases, you know, either directly or indirectly, you know, like verbal report, right.

It's still,

kind of gold standard for whether someone has access to something, right?

Even in no report paradigms, you're still later, right?

Asking them to report what they were experiencing at the time.

Um, um, so it's, I mean, in the, yeah, the issue is that in some sense, all kind of supportable or accepted sort of evidence for being consciously aware of something, um,

is, is always ultimately, and Chris, you can correct me if you think this is wrong, but, but I mean, I think that it always ultimately comes down to verbal report or some reliable correlate of verbal report, whether at the time or later.


SPEAKER_07:
I agree with that.

So I think I'm not an expert in no report paradigms, but to my knowledge, all of them, the reason we trust no report paradigms is because our measure, whether that is a particular mode of eye tracking or it is just like incidental memory afterwards, all of those things correlate really, really well with report.

And that's the thing that kind of like makes us trust them as measures of conscious access independent of report.

Yeah, I think it's always reporter foundational, unless we have really, really good evidence.

Otherwise, I think we have to take them kind of at face value.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

We'll return to the stack.

So Blue, and then Stephen, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_03:
So Adam always brings me into this metaphysical thought space whenever he talks.

And I just was wondering, in terms of this visual model, you hear the expression that people see what they want to see.

And so have you thought about maybe testing

like there's the the idea of paying attention to something and so we thought about testing like whether you know people can deceive themselves in this visual process right like some self-deception or even like the you hear like the power of manifestation like can people bring into their awareness something because they simply want it to be there i mean have you thought about this or testing the model in this way yeah i mean if you go to a figure um maybe scroll down is it


SPEAKER_07:
which one so we have a we have a actually I'm not sure uh so that's the erps yeah that attacks the extended taxonomy so we start with this kind of four-way taxonomy between which to Han proposed um along with some other of his colleagues of the kind of factors underlying whether you'll have conscious access to a stimulus and you kind of broke it down into whether

attention was weak or absent, present or absent, or whether kind of this how strong the signal strength was weak or strong.

And then we extended this by adding in prior expectations.

So the extent to which you expect a stimulus to appear.

And there is now like one of the big motivations this work is that there is an enormous body of work now.

showing that expectation does play a fairly fundamental role, I think, in determining the contents of visual awareness.

So as for whether you can voluntarily bring something into awareness, the answer is I think that's more to do with attention, I suspect.

But say, for example, if you are looking at a bistable image,

you can attend to one part of that image and then have the, if it's a, I think it's called a NECA cube, you can have the cube flip versus if you attend to another part, it'll flip back.

And you can do kind of similar deliberate moves of attention with a lot of bi-stable images.

So also I think there's some really cool, there is some interesting kind of back to the,

of expectation thing and expecting seeing what you expect to see a lot of that depends upon how strong your bottom-up evidence is if you are much more likely so there are paradigms that kind of distract people but basically condition them into expecting a stimulus to appear um and

you can get kind of accidental hallucinate, or you can basically like induce people to blur what is essentially a hallucination in those cases, or mistakenly report something that we know as a fact, the experimentalists as experimentalists, they weren't there.

I think there are two examples that what I have in mind at the moment is a really clever set of studies by Jean Arou, but I know Ryan, and maybe you can talk about this.

There's also a lot of work on conditioned hallucinations from a group at Yale who I know you collaborate with.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah so yeah and that was that was yeah something i was actually going to bring up is and this is this is not yeah because i mean i agree with you chris in most cases i think it's going to have to do with some kind of like motivated selective attention um that kind of like biases say different possible uh interpretations that you have posteriors over states for the posteriors into the first level

um but um but yeah definitely you can have these expectation effects although i don't necessarily think of those as being um voluntary right i'm not sure that um like like selective attention is definitely a kind of controllable cognitive action whereas shifting uh prior expectations i'm less confident that that can be cast that way um but but um priors definitely have a

and influence right on what your posteriors of our states are given some stimulus, especially like Chris said, when the stimulus strength is fairly low or noisy.

Um, you know, so, so some of the work that, um, yeah, Al Powers and his group at Yale, and then, um, that I've been, we've been collaborating to build active inference models for this stuff, um, is, uh, yeah, these sorts of conditioned hallucination paradigms in people with psychosis.

So the way these paradigms work is that you start out always showing people a light and that is always coincident with a tone that appears in some white noise.

And so on the first several trials, there's a fairly strong tone that plays in the white noise every time they hear a light or every time they see a light.

Um, and it's thresholded so that they would perceive that tone, uh, 75% of the time.

Um, and then, and then after several of those trials, um, there starts to be cases where, um, the, the tone is still present, but it's weaker.

So they only would detect it 50 or 25% of the time.

And then there are trials where the light comes on, but no tone is played and there's just white noise.

Um, and what, um, what they have found.

is that people with psychosis have a higher probability of reporting hearing tones when the light shows up, even when there was no tone.

So they build up this expectation to hear a tone whenever they see the light, and somehow those prior expectations that the tone will be there have a stronger influence over whether they hallucinate the tone or not.

That influence is stronger in people that have hallucinations.

than in people that don't have hallucinations, which has kind of led to this idea that what's going, you know, part of the computational issue in people with psychosis that are more likely to have hallucinations,

is that prior expectations are in some way really precise and therefore gonna dominate perception.

And that could be either because the prior expectations themselves are really precise or because beliefs about the actual sensory signal are

Those are believed to be very imprecise.

But in either case, the relative precisions are supposed to, are thoughts that kind of favor prior expectations in psychosis to a greater degree than people without psychosis.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Can I just follow up really quick?


SPEAKER_08:
Yep.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
So it's interesting that you brought the auditory thing into this, but the auditory hallucinations.

And I wonder if it's a visual cortex thing or if it's involved more with the auditory cortex, because even when Chris was talking, you know, you think about like,

people have seen like when you have two things played simultaneously auditory tracks that like it's like listen for the phone number and then you hear the phone number but then if you're not listening for the phone number you're you're hearing something else so it's interesting that that the auditory system like the the selective attention

in the auditory track really is is much more apparent like where you see the blue dress versus the white dress or the gold dress or whatever color it was like the two dresses is not so selective it's like look for the blue dress or look for the white dress if you set up that expectation in the visual system it's not as um prevalent i think yeah i mean i will agree that yeah it's definitely harder to switch the uh interpretation from the blue to the yellow when i've tried that


SPEAKER_04:
I can, I can get myself to do it, but it's way more effort for you.

Right.

Um, and, uh, yeah, I mean, I don't know, Chris, if you have any ideas about why exactly that would, that would be, I mean, I know cases of like, you know, attention and binocular rivalry and things like that.

In those cases, I think there are cases where I think selective attention can play a bigger role, like the Necker cube, for example, um, that's maybe a little more analogous to the kind of like, uh, multi, uh, channel auditory input.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
I think it just depends on how you set the task up.

I'm not sure if the comparison is really a fair one, I suppose.

I think you definitely can set up a lot of... Expectations play a huge role in the visual system, I think is one thing to say.

Whether you have voluntary control, whether those things come under the purview of voluntary attention is another thing.

i still think there are lots of cases depending on how you set up the problems i think binocular rivalry is a good one or even something like actually literally like where you move your eyes i know that sounds trivial but um whether your eyes are moving around a page or not kind of determine determines uh some different types of visual illusions so if you think about um maybe illusion isn't even the right word

But what's the, sorry, we're working on a project about this right now.

What's it called again?

Thomas Parr's paper on this, Ryan.

Do you remember?

It was Troxel fading.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
If you Google Troxel fading, I think that's a really powerful example of where just kind of selective attention has a really major role on whether you perceive something as present or absent.


SPEAKER_08:
Yep.

Very interesting.

It's almost like there's ambiguous and non-ambiguous stimuli in different domains and maybe even interpersonal variation.

One person being really good at picking up on something subtle in one domain or not.

So we'll do Steven, then Dean, then Adam.


SPEAKER_01:
I think this ties in actually to what I was mentioning earlier about when you scale things up.

And I agree with what you're saying.

When you scale things up, it may be useful to think about how someone facilitates the attention of people in a group and how you take them and how you think about taking their attention.

But it doesn't mean that whatever they consciously have intersubjectively together

is now read by the model.

So its usefulness may be in how people's attention is taken.

And I think it ties to this hypnosis thing as well, because I think your model speaks to top-down and bottom-up happen at different scales.

Because often we think top-down, we think executive function.

And executive function is telling me what I think.

But like you say, you can have a subconscious level

of trying to think what something is, even if it's in the subconscious.

And hypnosis is doing that.

Hypnosis is playing the game with someone.

Or with these optical illusions, you say to someone, you're looking at this cube from above or below, and it flips.

But it's not that you're being told it's this type of cube.

and your executive functions pushing it it's it's still top down but it's it's happening at a um a more subconscious what we might call a subconscious level and i think that's quite interesting so if i could just speak to that i think there are a couple of things going on there so i would talk about executive function well i mean i think it


SPEAKER_07:
one thing that this is a bit of a tri-point but top-down is a very ambiguous term um i think what where so you can mean kind of that can mean anything from basically like recurrent loops from higher quarters from cortices that are higher up the cortical hierarchy um to something like top-down intent like a voluntary control of attention via executive like frontal parietal networks or something like that um so those are just different different phenomena um

I think in our model control of attention would presumably be at, if, if we were to build a model of this would be at this, you, you would put the dorsal attention network at the second slower time scale for model.

I think maybe Ryan, you can, we can speak to this as well.

I haven't really thought about this much.


SPEAKER_04:
Um, I would have been a little more, uh, like executive control network.

sort of thing I guess would have done a little bit more what I would have thought about just kind of off the top but yeah you're probably right about that I mean visual attention right I mean obviously right the dorsal attention network is you know kind of defined or originally yeah like went specifically to yeah like visual attention and things like that or kind of quote unquote top down visual attention but in terms of the kind of directing

right, visual attention in a goal-directed way, then I think that would be more executive control network.

That's how I would thought of it.


SPEAKER_07:
I mean, on the hallucination point, I did my undergrad at Macquarie University and they have a whole hallucination group there within the cognitive science department.

And so I just feel like acutely aware of the fact that I don't know anything about it.

and it's also an extremely complicated phenomenon you can use hallucination to like as a model of various delusions like you can uh induce is it called like mirror basically like mirror agnosia where you don't no longer recognize yourself mirror self-agnosia or something where you no longer recognize yourself in a mirror like it's a really powerful tool but i have absolutely no idea how it works and so i'd be very kind of i think it's very tempting as kind of

modelers and theorists to kind of go into various experimentalist domains.

Like, hey, here's how my overarching framework explains your thing.

And I kind of want to resist that.

I know a little bit about visual consciousness and how expectation, all that stuff works there, but hallucination is such a hairy topic.

I just don't know.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, I would also say, I mean, in the comments, there's a few different things that have been brought up here, right?

But, I mean, in terms of

It's not clear, for example, but the kind of auditory hallucination story that I was talking about earlier in terms of having relatively more precise prior expectations, creating a stronger tendency for auditory hallucinations.

it's not it's not clear at all that that kind of story mechanistically is generalizes to other domains so i mean actually in the individual domain there's this whole other body of work where it looks like people that have delusions um again as part of the sort of as part of psychosis right um actually um show the opposite weighting in the visual system right so where they actually um assign um

too much precision to low-level bottom-up visual signals.

So they end up, there's these interesting cases where they end up, if you look at eye tracking, they end up doing, people with delusions end up actually, or psychosis, schizophrenia, end up doing better at certain tasks than healthy people, but worse at others.

So like one example of this is,

if you have people just kind of try to follow, just visual tracking, follow a kind of moving target, then if that target switches directions really quickly, then the people with psychosis end up actually following it better than healthy people.

Because healthy people kind of continue to follow it for a little bit after the turn in the kind of predicted direction.

um right so prior expectations are kind of playing a stronger role um so they actually do a little better whereas if instead you have something where the um where the target temporarily kind of moves behind some kind of barrier um then healthy people do better whereas people with schizophrenia kind of you know lose it because prior expectations don't do enough um to keep them kind of following what the trajectory would have been right as it goes behind the visual occlusion and there's there's lots of other cases

um for instance in like the proprioceptive domain where people have talked about the same kind of thing where people with um schizophrenia actually do um better like things like force matching illusions um and stuff or yeah um force matching tasks um um and i mean there's more to the the story there um but but um but people have tried to link that to like um delusions about agency um and things like that so but so just general point being that um

that the way that a computational mechanism looks like it happens in one, say, sensory domain can still operate very differently in the other sensory domain, even in the same disorder, in the context of the same psychosis.

So these things don't necessarily, they shouldn't be expected to generalize across domains.

is um is one one point um the other the other point was um you know in relation to you know things like hypnosis which um i don't know a lot about um as part of a textbook chapter um i was uh asked to write a paragraph or two on hypnosis so i kind of looked into that literature a little bit um and it's actually pretty messy they're very different there are multiple different theories about hypnosis work

Um, and I mean, one of them, you know, can relate to this idea that, um, that, um, you know, if, if the hypnotist repeatedly like give suggestions that are set up such that, um, they will be confirmed.

Right.

So it's like, hold out your, the hypnotist says, hold out your arms.

And then he says, um, your arms are going to start to feel heavy.

And then they'll start to fall.

Right.

Obviously anybody who holds out their arms, they'll eventually start to feel heavy and they're heavier and they'll start to drop just as a result of your muscles, your shoulder muscles getting tired.

Right.

So if you do a number of those things and the kind of, uh, Things the hypnotist, the predictions made by the hypnotist are confirmed, then, you know, it could be that you're just coming to assign a really high reliability.

to whatever the hypnotist says, right?

So in that case, if the hypnotist just comes to be assigned really high precision, then you can just adjust prior expectations in a way that just kind of dominate or can end up having a much stronger influence on what you do.

And that's kind of one idea.

But again, there's several other theories of hypnosis that just have to do with kind of conforming

um kind of social roles and things like that that you're told to um that you're kind of told to do and i mean anyway so i wouldn't necessarily feel that confident um saying much about about how this relates to hypnosis other than that in a broad sense it can involve manipulating um sort of tricky ways of manipulating prior expectations and other in other people but again i mean even that is pretty speculative


SPEAKER_07:
mean so if i could just quickly throw something in another complicating factor so even within visual the visual system having a strong prior in one domain or doesn't generalize to others there's this really great paper that just came that came out i think last year in cognition where they looked at representational momentum mooney images and um goodness i think there was one other i think it was illusory contours and they had one other

top-down expectation kind of paradigm.

And there were large individual differences between all of them.

And there were also large individual differences in kind of the effect of prior expectation across those different tasks.

So I think there's just kind of a lot of complicating facts, like moving parts and a lot of this stuff that we have to deal with when we talk about these things.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, we're going to return to the stack and go to Dean, and then a question from the chat, and then Adam.


SPEAKER_02:
so i'll go back and be ambiguous um so when i was looking at your diagrams and one of the things that really i wanted to ask this question but we ran out of time last week um do you think we can say that if a person says i see this or i do not see that see this the or yes or no um can we can we apply an idea that there's a certain amount of acceptance

and a certain amount of letting go.

And I, I kind of bundled that under we reconcile, or is it something completely different?

I mean, how do you, how do you look at this now when a person's actually looking at something and going, okay, I do not see the box.

Is it just, is it that simple?

That's a simple yes, no.

Or do you think there's something more built into it?


SPEAKER_07:
Um, so,

There is a whole cottage industry.

I feel like cottage industry might even be an understatement on how to collect verbal reports and the proper ways of doing it.

So there's like a perceptual awareness scale where you in some sense have a description of the content.

So you have, I didn't see anything.

I maybe saw something, but there was no specific content.

Like you have a vague feeling.

You saw something, but it was a bit blurry.

And then you had like a full vivid experience.

That's one way.

You can have people place bets.

Um, that's another way you can have people do confidence ratings.

Um, lately there's been some incredibly clever work basically looking at, so just give a shout out to people who I, whose work I really admire, like Hakuan Lau and, um, Megan Peters have a really great paper in eLife where they basically look, show that people seem to have optimal in the sense of like Bayes optimal introspective access to their own performance.

So basically when they are

they will, people never behave correctly without kind of knowing that they behaved correctly as it were.

If you do these like very tightly controlled experimental situations.

So yeah, I think maybe I was a bit flippant before when I said you have to take reports as foundational.

I stand by that statement, but there is like years and years and years of like careful psychophysics have gone into being like, yeah, these things are reliable.

And basically it comes down to, I wouldn't believe if someone said, yeah, I see something, but they were getting like 50% on a forced choice task about the orientation of a Gabor patch, but they were claiming they would see it, I just wouldn't believe them.

Generally speaking, you would expect if you see something, your performance should also go up.

That is not to say, however, that you can't have

Um, for increased performance without awareness, there is some convincing evidence showing that those two things dissociate and that's kind of what we were trying to show here.

Right.

Right.

So hopefully that answers the question.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, it does.

Nice.

Yeah, I noticed on this extended taxonomy, the bottom right, it's like consistent prior, high attention, strong signal.

It's the perfect storm.

And then it's 100% seen, 100% correct.

And then again, kind of taking it loosely mapping to our experiences with other attention phenomena.

Like if you're sure about seeing, and of course, the way that you tuned prior or inconsistent prior, these are variables that are in the model.

So people can play around.

This isn't like a specific yes, no, but just examples of how rich the phase space is in terms of what the model can do and what it can capture.

So here's the question from the chat, and then it will go to Adam.

So the question from the chat is,

any thought about the possibility of using this model to investigate lucid dreaming related phenomena like the failure of implicit metacognition while dreaming thank you so how about dreaming or lucid dreaming so that stuff is super interesting i mean i don't think this model captures that at all except in like a very in like a computational sense like i don't know what task would be modeling specifically but like we can if we're being a bit metaphorical about it um


SPEAKER_07:
So presumably, I don't know anything about lucid dreaming.

I presume it's a case where basically you are dreaming, so you have kind of, you're not just asleep, you have kind of a experience that goes along with it, and also you are aware of the fact that you are dreaming.

That's really interesting.

I think it would have to come back to the

don't know how we one would capture metacognition in this framework i think that's one thing to say i don't know what it would be maybe ryan you have some thoughts on this but it would relate to basically how how one thinks about metacognition in these deep temporal models yeah i mean i mean i mean metacognition in and of itself comes in a bunch of different flavors right i mean so there's kind of you know beliefs about


SPEAKER_04:
how good your memory is, for example, right?

It can be kind of metacognition.

It's, you know, it's like beliefs about your beliefs or beliefs about patterns in your attention or, you know, there's a bunch of, bunch of different types of,

metacognition, right?

It's just sort of beliefs or operations over representations of your own cognitive processes.

So I mean, the tricky part is that you kind of have to have a higher level that's treating what you chose to do in terms of a voluntary cognitive process that observes that and then infers something about it.

And the way that that ends up influencing the cognitive operation level below, the way that that higher metacognitive level ends up setting priors on the lower level, I'm not sure the right way to think about that.

I mean, you'd have to look at literature on the way metacognition affects performance on cognitive tasks, which I'm definitely not an expert on.


SPEAKER_07:
One thing to say just very briefly would just be in the discussion section of our paper, we discussed alternative models.

I think probably the model that's closest to ours in the literature would be Steve Fleming's higher-order state space model.

And I think...

There he explicitly discusses ignition-related phenomena and kind of metacognitive inferences about the presence or absence of stimuli.

So I would say if you're interested in that kind of stuff and how to think about it in a Bayesian framework, look there.

It's a really great paper.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, another one, I mean, that comes to mind, I know, is that there's a paper by where the first author is Klaus Stefan from 2016.

where he talks about the way you can apply active inference models to model homeostatic and allostatic control processes.

So basically like anticipating, for example, that your temperature is going to drop and therefore increasing temperature, body temperature a little in advance so that when it subsequently drops, you stay within a kind of survivable homeostatic range.

I'm just using temperature here as an arbitrary example of any kind of variable, internal bodily variable, like glucose levels or hormone levels or anything like that.

But they do talk about this level, a metacognitive level that you can add above the allostatic regulation level that more or less tracks the efficacy or the kind of success of the allostatic level.

and how if the allostatic level repeatedly fails to keep homeostatic variables or keep bodily variables within homeostatic ranges, then the higher level can basically infer that allostasis will fail.

And they show how that can plausibly lead to certain sorts of symptoms of depression when you have low beliefs about the efficacy of your own allostatic processes.

So, I mean, that's a paper that I'd recommend looking at for one example of the way that you might apply one type of medical condition on top of the Bayesian.


SPEAKER_07:
I also just remembered a paper came out yesterday.

I shared it.

Sorry, I forgot about this.

I just shared it.

I shared it on Twitter yesterday, if you want to look.

It came out of Mike Allen's group.

I've forgotten the first author's name.

I'm really sorry about that.

But...

uh, they explicitly discuss like predictive processing and active inference theories of consciousness in relation to interoception and metacognition.

And they have a whole discussion of this type of thing.

So if you're interested, maybe just like check my Twitter page or at Mike Allen's Twitter page.


SPEAKER_08:
Sounds good.

Um, we'll go to Adam and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi.

Um,

perhaps tying a few of these things together.

I was wondering, with respect to hallucinations and psychosis and forms of delusions, if maybe some of it, you could potentially model it in terms of not having access to mental acts, which might have associated efforts copies that could potentially be adjusting precision

and are also having, uh, different components of the associated mental act, which you may or may not attribute to you.

Like some, so like aspects of interoceptive inference that could lead to senses of like willing or ownership, but then by not having access to this potentially where, where the access itself, uh, of the action generation could, um, basically adjust what you're, how you're attributing, um,

what sense you're making of the associated perceptual uh events so it's like um how do i say this so it's like if you're uh talking to yourself in thought or something like like thought is in your speech like ragotsky uh let's talk about like well if you don't have access to like the generation part on for some reason i don't know how much it can be separated but then like the voice might just like appear to you in a way where you don't have a sense of ownership if there's not like the right type of like

maybe interoceptive coupling to the generation process, or just like a lack of metacognition to contextualize it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I really like this idea.

I mean, one thing to keep in mind here is that, you know, the sort of thing that you're talking about when people have

sort of different experiences of, or where there are different contents and experience.

I mean, basically that's what you're talking about, right?

Different contents that can be an experience.

Those, those are just in a model like this going to amount to different sorts of state spaces that you can infer posteriors over, right?

So, you know, you can have beliefs about how much ownership you have over your body, or you can have beliefs about something going on in your body interoceptively.

And all of those things are just going to be, you're going to have some sort of afferent signal and you're going to have some prior expectations, obviously.

And then you're going to infer some posterior over whatever the contents are of the thing in question.

Right?

So, so anything along the lines of what is the, what is the content of one thing versus another is just going to amount to a particular level in a model that infers posteriors over particular contents.

So none of that is going to have to do directly with our model, other than the fact that given posteriors over any content, if our model were applicable to that, you could just treat those contents as the lower level.

So you'd have inference over some content, and then our model would say something about the processes that make that content conscious or not.

or consciously accessible or not.

So the only thing that our model might be able to say is if you swap out the squares versus lines in our model, whatever the beliefs are at the lower level, if you swap that out with representations of some other content, whatever it is you're interested in, something about the body or something about what sequence of speech

that you're hearing or anything like that.

What word you just heard.

Swap that out as the content of the lower level and our model might be able to say something about the processes that determine whether those contents become accessible or not.

But beyond that, our model doesn't have much to say.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I mean, if I could say something on that as well.

I really like the idea, I think, just along similar lines to Ryan, because it just casts decisions about ownership as just having access to some content or another.

And so for me, the essence of any type of conscious access or awareness process is basically whether it's integrated into this temporally deep representation, and in doing so, available to all of these sub-processes a la global workspace theory.

And so I think this kind of relating this to kind of the metacognitive point, I think this is actually a spot where maybe this is a difference between our theory versus an active inference theory that gave an explicit role for metacognition.

So for me, it's just the fact that you can be aware that it is, you're aware of it because it's integrated into this representation, right?

Whereas maybe a higher order person would be, no, you have to also infer that you are seeing it or that I am seeing it or something like that.

And so I think there's actually like really interesting empirical questions.

That's all I can say.

But I hope that we can kind of, I don't know, maybe it would be nice to see a discussion of kind of

active inference theories of visual awareness of metacognition versus active inference theories of like visual awareness in general.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
I don't know if you, I know you've written a lot about kind of different theories of consciousness, Adam.

So I don't know if you have any thoughts about that.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I know that, um, you know, there's this preprint, um, by, um, the first, the first author is, um, is Smith Lars.

Um, well, I can't remember, uh, uh, his first, the rest of his first name, but,

but his last name is Smith, that does propose a type of model of metacognition.

In theirs, attention works a little differently than in ours, but essentially you do have a second level that controls a precision parameter on the first level.

And then there's a third level in there that confers things about control of,

the control of the temperature parameter at the first level, if I'm remembering right.

And they use it as a way of, the way they talk about it as a way to think of meditation and mindfulness and things like that.

I don't remember it in enough detail to say a lot about my specific feelings on that, but that is an example that I'm aware of.

Again, it's just a preprint at this point, but of another attempt to try to model

something like metacognition.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

Interesting questions.

Adam, did you want to say something else?

Yep, go ahead.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so I basically want to throw your model at everything.

But in terms of metacognition and what I've worked on in the past, mostly I've been focusing on trying to cross-reference various theories to see the points of overlap and non-overlap, mostly considering

accounts of dynamic modularity that might apply to a global neural workspace architecture or like integrate information theory where you can think of their complexes of integration those modules as themselves being like do an iit handling of those and seeing like where's the overlap basically trying to give semantic content to iit um via like gnwt is like an architecture for bayesian model selection and the whole thing kind of being adjudicated by free energy principle and

mostly an active inference, not nearly in the technical depth that you have.

I'm only beginning to move into things like metacognition and, uh, like higher order forms of consciousness.

And the ideas are like really, uh, speculative.

Like, so like one idea is that like, as you're like, um, let's say, um, imagining like enacting something, you might start out from like,

generating like experience from an egocentric perspective.

But then this enactment would auto associatively also have third person allocentric representations, like from like the ventral visual stream or something like this, where like you've seen people or yourself doing similar things.

And so you might then like be able to get access to in the mind's eye, this like third person point of view on you with some unfolding, like some sort of like moving back and forth between

In the models I'm working with, phenomenal consciousness and accessible consciousness, there's a sense in a Rudroff projective geometric modeling, it's always from this first-person, egocentric point of view.

But then the idea is you then are looking at an objectified you, and this would be part of metacognitive awareness and contextualizing you.

in terms of like you doing actions and then this third person little homunculus doing actions that you're seeing in your mind's eye and moving back and forth.

That's like the basic space I'm moving into.

I don't know how much of that's going to work or how you would model that.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, like one thing, just kind of... Kind of, I mean, again, just to, I mean, when you think about this kind of in formal terms, right, then if you're in some sense, if you're

the content you're describing as a belief that you are doing something right um so that's just the content in the space space right so same kind of thing right swap out our lower level with a state space that is beliefs about what i am doing right then it's just the same thing right you have a representation about what you are doing and in our model you would either um

you would either gain access to the representation of that content or not via its integration with this deeper temporal level.

Granted, beliefs about what I am doing or not is already

right pretty pretty temporally deep um but were those sorts of contents to apply to our model and that's what it would say it would say that those contents need to be integrated with this deeper temporal uh model that is able to form posteriors over something that incorporates that um and uh

So again, I mean, at the end of the day, it really just comes down to this distinction about the content being represented and whether or not the posteriors associated with that content get integrated with the higher level, the sorts of things that the higher level described here can do.

So, so it's just a question about whether something like that is the content that you want to be, uh, using in a goal-directed way or reporting, um, or, or, or whether just, uh, just representations of the, of the lower level kind of visual content.

Right.

And that being integrated with this level is, is what's, is what's involved.

So to me, again, this just has to do with different levels of representation and what the contents are that you're becoming conscious of.

Um, so.

Oh, and by the way, just to mention, I looked up the paper I was mentioning.

So it's called Towards the Formal Neurophenomenology of Metacognition, and the first author is Lars Sandberg-Smith, just to do justice to remembering who the first author's full name was in the name of the paper I was talking about.

Sorry, I think you started saying something at the same time, Chris.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, Christopher, then Adam.


SPEAKER_07:
I was going to change the topic very slightly, but I was wondering, so how you think about phenomenology or phenomenal consciousness?

Because to me, it comes down to the nature of the representation that you're gaining access to.

So to talk about, like, you talked about the projective consciousness model, which is really cool work.

There, this perspectival nature of consciousness comes from

the structure of the generative model and the fact that they're using this projective geometry and that's built into the structure of the generative model.

I'm just curious about how you think about this and how that kind of maps on to IIT, because at least as I understand IIT, like phenomenal consciousness is kind of a... It's never really been clear how the content of consciousness fits into IIT for me.

Like it's all...

Anyway, yeah, I'm just interested to hear your thoughts on how it all fits together with global workspace theory.


SPEAKER_06:
I would say there's some kind of giant bag questions in IET.

I think, though, it's not nothing that they start from axioms of what they think should be part of phenomenology and then work their way to this sort of way of handling systems.

In terms of, I think it's a decent prior for like what we should look for in like physical substrates.

I wouldn't like completely like throw it off, but they then would say, if you have these axioms that characterize experience, intrinsic existence, composition, information, integration, exclusion, if you have these different properties, then it is sufficient to bring about phenomenality because they started from phenomenality.

Oh no, I don't think that follows at all.

That being said, I think it does potentially like give us some priors in trying to think about physical and computational substrates of consciousness.

So that would be like the cross-referencing.

And then the other part would be like, how do you think, so if you're thinking of global neuronal workspace as like potentially like a trading off of modularity as being part of the physical implementation, well then the question is like, so when do you have like larger big modules functioning as like

dynamic cores or workspaces?

And when do you have more fragmented local processing?

In theory, you could get Bayesian model selection with discrete updating with a bunch of small beta complexes close to the modalities.

Or it could be this big sprawling alpha complex that's multimodal in all these different ways.

But then you're moving back and forth between these degrees of synchrony.

It seems like IIT could potentially be useful there for

describing that.

So that was one of the ideas of that interrelation.

In terms of bringing it to Rudroff, for me, the object I would want that would be potentially a minimal condition for phenomenality would be some sort of joint distribution over your body pose and visuospatial awareness.

as like the minimal thing for me, at least for human like consciousness and like a series of, um, basically roughly at alpha frequencies, a series of estimates of that.

And, and, and then, and thinking of this as iterative Bayesian model selection via a global workspace architecture, but not necessarily one where there's like access.

That's like a more sophisticated kind of consciousness in terms of you wouldn't necessarily, I would call it like it's pretty darn global.

You have something like spanning all the posterior cortex, but it's not the kind of workspace you're dealing with where you're actually having knowledge and access.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks, Adam.

So if anyone else wants to, they can raise their hand.

Otherwise, I think there was a very good request.

You did just ask one, so let's mix it up.

But there was a very good request, actually, if Ryan or Christopher, you could just...

look at this part of the figure which i know is a structure we walk through in the model stream as well and just kind of map some of these bigger ideas that we've been talking about to some of the letters just in a way where people can now look at this

outline, say, okay, the experiment, I'm kind of on the page, we talked about a bunch of visual and interoceptive kinds of experiments, just where did it map in this paper, so that people will always be able to go back to this paper, look at the code, and then kind of map some of these bigger metaphors to the experiment that you did here.


SPEAKER_07:
Do you want to take this Ryan?


SPEAKER_04:
Either way, it doesn't matter to me.


SPEAKER_07:
So how detailed would you like me to go?

Would you like me to explain what the little square, what the D's and A's and B's and S's are and all that stuff?


SPEAKER_08:
Let's go for all the letters on the right side and maybe even some on the left.


SPEAKER_07:
All right.

So this is a partially observable Markov decision process and it's a hierarchical one.

So let's just focus on essentially, let's start at the bottom.

O's are observations and S's are hidden or latent states.

And what the A matrix does is it provides a mapping between those two things.

So the circles are random variables and the squares are essentially functions, in this case, probability distributions that map between those two things.

The A and little arrow going down just says that that's essentially A with that little A superimposed on arrow is basically saying that's expressing a conditional probability distribution saying that O, observations, depends upon the hidden state.

Now, as we start to evolve through time, we need transitions between discrete hidden latent states in the world.

And those are what's described by B. So this is something like, what is the probability that at time one, what's the probability of each hidden state at the next time step?

And it will describe kind of S at T conditioned on S at T minus one.

Now, then what's special about the hierarchical models is that you have another layer on top of that.

where hidden states at the first level are now being treated as observations by the second level.

so the posterior probability at the first level is basically acts as an observation um for the second level a matrix um and then kind of at the second level there should be a d at the first level too but that's fine um basically what this prior what this second level hidden state does is it provides a prior over that first level

And then at the first level, you can then have, basically, we just have one time step at the first level, but you can have any amount of time steps as you want.

So if you imagine the metaphor that's often used is like the minute versus the hour clock on the hand, they're evolving at different time scales.

So you could, in this diagram, we show that the second level evolves at two time steps for every one time step at the first level, at the second level, sorry.

At the second level, there are again transitions between these latent states, and that's also where we have policy selections.

That's why we put it up there.

So policy selection is essentially, if you imagine a whole series of hidden Markov models, this is my favorite way of describing policy selection.

So these hidden Markov models are basically just a partially observable Markov decision process without the decision aspect.

If you imagine a whole series of basically these graphs,

and you are deciding what graph kind of is gonna be my future.

You are trying to find the graph with the highest model evidence.

That is what computing, doing policy selection does.

So you are choosing the transitions that will take you to basically the graphs with the highest model evidence.

I know that, Ryan, you wanna kind of clean up some of that explanation?


SPEAKER_08:
We're at the shoulders.

Let's go to the last few variables.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So, I mean, you didn't do G and C and E, right?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Okay.

So, pi, just like Chris said, right, is just your distribution over policies.

G is the expected free energy.

So, that's essentially the

the function that decides what the value is.

You can think about it about each policy.

And that is with respect to C, which is your preference distribution, which is essentially the thing that specifies which observations you want and which observations you don't.

Now, somehow I see that an E has been placed with an arrow down to G, and that's not correct.

Um, he should be, he should be going, you should be going straight to pie.

Um, um, if you're going to include E, um, I don't think we did anything with E in our model, so I don't think he needs to be there.

Um, but, um, but E if it's used is just a kind of separate prior over policies that can encode something like habits.

Um, so it competes with the expected free energy G over policies, um, to infer what, uh, when you're inferring what the posterior over policies is.

Um, so, uh, so yeah, I mean, otherwise I feel like Chris, uh, I feel like Chris described it.

Well, I mean, you know, it'd be a little.

It's always a little easier if you have like a, you know, if you're in control of the pointers, you can actually point to the things that you're talking about.


SPEAKER_07:
I think you also asked us to relate this to an experimental paradigm.

So if we maybe briefly click down to figure two, what you've labeled as figure two there.

So we can just look at that.

So the idea here is that there was a forwards mask.

Um, at the beginning of the paradigm, this was just a series of lines and there were these kind of stimuli on the outside.

At the second time step in the task that, or in our like simulated task, they, on some trials, the square kind of was self organized, some of the lines kind of self organized into a square.

So I either in our discrete state space model, a square was present or it wasn't.

And in the third time step, it was just replaced by more lines.

And then afterwards we ask the agent to construct a report of that.

So basically at, you can think of the first level of the model as being all of the features of the stimulus and also the location of attention.

So this might be something like saliency maps in posterior parietal cortex, which are directing wherever attention's being pointed to.

And then you might have the features of the stimulus, which are represented in various places.

At the second level, we now have our, this is basically our frontoparietal cortices.

This is tracking the evolution of states at the first level.

So it's tracking that at the first time step, there was lines presented.

At the second time step, there was a square presented.

Maybe it, maybe it wasn't, maybe it was presented, maybe it wasn't.

And at the third time step, there was more lines.

And you can imagine in like a real task, all of that unfolds in a space of about a second.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so you can think about it, I mean, like, yeah, the second level is really the content in question that it's inferring is the sequence, right?

It's not whether it's square, it's whether it was lines, square lines, or just lines, lines, lines.

And so... Sorry, go ahead.


SPEAKER_07:
Oh, and so if you're thinking about where experience lives, obviously we don't experience a sequence, right?

I think, and I think Ryan and I have been chatting about this a lot lately because it relates to work we're currently doing.

But I think what's going on is that what we experience are essentially like the updates to our second level beliefs.

And that's really crucial.

So the reason why it's crucial is because we know empirically that kind of what could be, we might describe as brain processes that are at the first level of the model.

These can be either conscious or not.

And contents that are conscious, when you are conscious of something, it has all these really important functional consequences.

So here it might be kind of being able to see it for report, maintain it for report.

But also if I see something, I can then voluntarily maintain it in memory for as long as I want, as long as I don't get distracted.

Like there are limits on like human psychology.

But that's kind of a really important function that's enabled by being conscious of something.

And that allows us to do things like construct reports of our experience.

Or even, I think by report, I just mean something very general.

It could be in this model, we kind of have the toy thing of being able to put a sentence together, but it could also be more empirically real.

In terms of empirical paradigm, it'll just be like hitting a button or doing a confidence interval or something like that.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

Thank you for that.

Interesting answer.

We'll have Steven and then Adam and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand and also any last questions from the live chat as we kind of slowly land the plane.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I was just going to ask, in relation to those lines and the way that the square appears, like you said, so this is actually like a graphic representation, but when someone looks at it, there's probably some special device that you've got that represents this.

Is it like...

that the lines rotate and at some point it just happens they rotate such that they line up and then they un-rotate or and just one other question is why didn't you use negative space like you like say they line up to make you know like a negative space square i just wondered whether that relates to the choice of how it pops in and out of perceptual con sorry phenomenological awareness phenomenological consciousness or access consciousness


SPEAKER_07:
So basically this is just a very, in our model, we have discrete hidden states, which are categorical distributions, which are lines or squares and external states, which are red.

And so this is kind of just a graphical representation of a way to think about that, but it's really nothing to do with how it works mathematically.

Then in terms of actually the empirical task,

Like this is a task that we basically like borrowed from Michael Pitts, who's a really done a lot, he's a cognitive neuroscientist, done a lot of really important work in the area of visual consciousness.

And as to why they chose to kind of have these, I guess the, I think from memory, there are videos attached to this paper.

From memory, I think the lines is kind of, they jitter around and then occasionally a subset of them will all line up into a square and then go back to like jittering.

As to why they did that versus other methods, I don't know, really.

There definitely are subtle things you can do to a stimulus which have major impacts on whether you have conscious access to it or not.

But the phenomenon of inattentional blindness is super general.

You can have people... So the really famous example is...

that everyone gets shown in undergrad psych is you're tracking whether a group of people playing basketball.

And you ask, how many times does someone with a white shirt get past a ball or something like that?

And your attention is distracted and so consumed with that that a bear or a gorilla can walk into the middle of the screen, be in the dead center of your phobia, wave at you, and then walk away.

And then about 50% of people don't see it at all.

And that's really well replicated across a bunch of, or they don't report seeing it, I think I should say.

I think there's some debate about whether this is a memory phenomenon or any of that.

There's lots of subtleties there.

So hopefully that answers the question.


SPEAKER_08:
Also one advantage and one rationale for these pure modeling papers that we're discussing today is the space of the possible human experiments or even any other kind of real world experiments is very limited.

It's very limited what you can actually have a real set of humans do.

And so it's great to have tools that help us explore some of the patterns that we're looking for and understand how variability and

do statistical calculations like how many participants might we need of a given variability range if we want to capture such and such an effect without distorting it this way.

That's critical information.

And if you don't have the model, then the experimental design phase is totally blind and it's very shot in the dark.

And so this helps inform structures for even thinking about how to design human experiments, for example,

as we're talking about here with visual awareness, but it could be for other kinds of experiments.

So, Adam, and then anyone else who wants to make a comment.

See you later, Alex.

Bye.

Adam?


SPEAKER_06:
Hi.

I'd be curious in knowing more of your thoughts on the potential, I guess, richness or lack thereof of experience.

So, at one point, could consciousness be phenomenal or access

more experienced as a series of snapshots that are like static sequential but we don't know it like a flip book or is it more like a continuous stream like if you're getting this discrete updating are these updates over like like the agent in like motion like if you take like a camera sometimes in your phone there's like a little brief like forward ahead like look ahead and back but like what would be the nature of these uh discrete updates i yeah i i


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I know the, like, I'm trying to remember, I know, and I remember reading Stan DeHaan's book a few years ago.

And there is, there is some work, I think, showing, you know, there are kind of, there's like a minimal time for like, essentially updates to the, to the content of consciousness that have some kind of discrete character to them.

I don't, I don't remember what the-

yeah do you know what that do you remember the actual like milliseconds i can't remember like 50 milliseconds or something like that yeah i don't i don't remember offhand but there is there is something you know like that that maybe might be you know like similar to like a refresh rate or something like that um but i yeah i don't remember too much about that offhand um but but i mean one thing you know one thing to say is that um you know because

there are these sorts of discrete updates in our model, but I mean, it's also good to remember that

the higher level representation is specifically about this sequence, right?

Which is integrated in a sense that the hypothesis is about a whole sequence that doesn't necessarily need to be thought about as having sort of discrete chunks to it, right?

It's just a single hypothesis about what the whole sequence was.

And so you might think about that, right?

As having a more kind of continuous

character to it despite the fact that it's it is updated in some ultimately discreet fashion you know and kind of just really fast bins um you can think about it that way um but uh but in terms of richness i mean to me i mean i just think of i i just tend to think of rich as meaning there are more precise features right there's more features and they're more precise

um at the at the lower level right so instead of just you know a lines or a square right at our you know in our example um there could be a ton of different lower level representations about color and shape and size and you know all these sorts of things um but

are represented in some sort of joint way, right, and become accessible.

And so, I mean, that's one way to think about richness is just what are all the things being represented that become accessible together.

But I don't know, do you have something else to say?


SPEAKER_08:
Can I ask a question actually there about the continuous modeling?

Is it possible that active inference could have a continuous mode?

Um, I know that it would get rid of a lot of the discrete benefits and the sequential message passing or maybe other heuristics, but could there be a continuous format, continuous time or space?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

There are continuous state space models and there are also mixed models.

Um, you know, mixed, mixed models are kind of especially nice and probably a lot more realistic here.

Um, you know, because visual, visual input, a lot of the things that are represented by the visual system are continuous, right?

Like, uh,

motion for example is continuous brightness um you know all these all these sorts of things um and so those can be those can be um perceived and represented in a continuous scale at the lower level but still get passed up to discrete representations at the higher level um we didn't do that here for simplicity but you could


SPEAKER_08:
So... Just to clarify, in Scaling Active Inference, we did talk about the continuous state space.

I was just wondering if it's possible to have a continuous time


SPEAKER_07:
active inference model rather than a discrete time model of t123 just just bringing it up okay but then christopher and then blue so yeah three things so just quickly to answer your question daniel um so hidden markov models are just like a super general thing it's basically just when you have a markov chain and but you have but each state of the markov chain links to some outcome those outcomes can then both

the outcomes and the latent states can be continuous.

When you have a discrete latent state continuous outcome, you end up with basically what ends up being a mixture of Gaussians model.

And if you have continuous states, you basically end up with a Kalman filter.

And you can stack those on top of each other and do all the same things.

Yeah, for all the reasons you say, things get really complicated when you start to move to continuous time.

But I completely agree with Ryan.

I actually, I think there are computational, there are functional reasons to think that decision-making is discrete.

And so at the level of decision-making, computationally speaking, we should use discrete state-based models.

I also think that at a certain level,

We need continuous state spaces.

Obviously, we represent continuous quantities.

And I think Thomas Parr, we've chatted about this before in the model stream, but Thomas Parr has a really nice paper on kind of the discrete continuous interface.

And that's something I'm actually really interested in.

I'm not sure.

I don't know to what extent we should take these things as idealizations or as general kind of neurophysiological predictions.

I think that's a really, I'm super interested in that.


SPEAKER_04:
In other words, but I don't know.

Another thing to say though, is, is that it's not as though only, um, only action, you know, only action selection has to do with, um, discreet spaces.

There, there are plausibly a lot of higher level, um, representational things that are also discreet.

So for instance, like concepts, right?

Like I can, I can have a bunch of continuously represented lower level of visual features.

but I can use those to infer something discreet as well.

Like for instance, that those features forced onto my concept of a dog, right?

Or my concept of a banana, you know, whatever, right?

Cause we do have these discreet categories that we map on patterns of continuous features too.

And I mean, that's a, that's a kind of whole nother discussion.

I think we talked about it briefly last time, right?

Gaining conscious access to the visual features versus gaining conscious access to the fact that it is a dog.

So those are different levels of representation that can be attended to and may be able to independently or semi-independently be accessible separately.

So I just want to point out that not everything is going to be continuous in perception when sort of cast broadly.


SPEAKER_08:
And that's where I was going to say that's where a lot of category theory discussion comes into play.

Let's do blue, then Christopher for final thoughts.


SPEAKER_03:
So I know like we operate under the assumption that the visual, like we perceive things continuously in visual space, but I mean, really the input is like 60 Hertz, right?

So, I mean, theoretically, like this thing, this object is consistently a dog, but if it's like flashing back and forth to a cat at sub-perceptible levels, like we wouldn't know, right?

So, I mean, I think anything can be modeled in discrete chunks if you break the chunks into small enough pieces.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, yeah.

I've sometimes seen people be a bit smarmy about this when someone says like, oh, discrete state space is unrealistic and the comeback is always like, mate, you can always discretize things up to some arbitrary level and then discrete state spaces work fine.

I don't know.

I actually think that's a bit of a dodge, to be honest, because the way we're using these discrete state space models is in an ultra-discrete kind of way, right?

So I think that if we had a hidden Markov model

where we had 60 hertz equivalent or something.

That would just be ridiculous.

You should just work in continuous state spaces at that point.

The computational and conceptual advantages of working in a discrete state space are gone.

It would be so difficult.


SPEAKER_08:
It's a really nice question though.

And it's like, if you do make it a finer and finer granularity, you keep some of the really big benefits of splitting.

And sometimes it's actually easier to even do like a protein folding.

They'll do a time step of the tiniest, tiniest amount and do millions of time steps are tiny because it's still easier to fit that ultra rich,

discrete time model with actual time steps that can be clustered on different computers, rather than rewrite the whole base to do continuous modeling.

So I agree, it's not like continuous is simply better.

And it really relates deeply to how we think about the continuum and the infinitesimal.

And so it's really interesting area for active.

So Steven, and then any other closing comments?


SPEAKER_01:
You know, I suppose if we also were to go back into the physics of it, you know, with active inference as a way of like if vision is feeling the surfaces out there rather than it being an input signal, even if we have these brainwaves, some of that might be an artifact of cognitive science, which has got like the input process output.

at some level it's it's extracting like alex constant talks about extracting you know information from quantum noise noise you know random fluctuations and all this sort of stuff so you know there's it could be it could be that discrete state space is kind of you know sort of also because the

there is quite choppy what's coming in.

And at some point, inferences have to be made that makes it more like a signal, if that makes sense.

Now, I'm just putting that out there as another layer at the lower levels of the retina and stuff like that.


SPEAKER_08:
Sounds good.

Any last comments?

Otherwise this was super interesting.

I guess a closing question for the authors would just be when, when's the next episode in this paper saga or what's the next, what's the next thing you're excited about here?


SPEAKER_04:
We have another paper that's kind of, I don't know, maybe like three quarters done or something like that.

That's kind of the next step.

Yeah.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_07:
We've run all the simulations.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so they're done.

It's an expanded model that does a lot more with... So it allows for a no-report paradigm, and selective attention and working memory maintenance are explicit policies in the updated one, and there's a number of other advantages, but it's coming soon.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I think it's a matter of me writing it, really.

So...


SPEAKER_08:
wow too real but thanks everyone for joining this is really fun for 18 overall and we look forward to probably seeing you again for 19 and beyond thanks to all the participants you can fill out the survey for feedback in your events calendar uh invitation otherwise we'll uh be talking through other channels so thanks everyone see you later thanks