## chpbMBgDR84

SPEAKER_01:
all right it's january 28 2022 and we're here in active lab live stream number 37.0 discussing the paper free energy a user's guide welcome to the active lab we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at the links here this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good etiquette on livestream.

Go to ActiveInference.org if you want to learn more about anything happening in Act and Flap.

All right, so today in 37.0, we are going to learn and discuss and introduce and provide some background for this paper, Free Energy, A User's Guide, by Stephen Francis Mann, Ross Payne, and Michael Kirchhoff.

And just like all the dot zeros and discussions, we're just going to introduce some ideas, give a little tip of the iceberg and kind of warm up to talk about this paper in the coming two weeks.

And so today we'll be going through a lot of the background and some of the key formalisms in the paper.

And the coming two weeks we'll be discussing the paper.

So let us know if you want to join.

So first there's this comment in red.

Is this yours, Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you want to go over here?


SPEAKER_02:
Pardon me?


SPEAKER_01:
Do you want to describe it here or in your intro?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, in the intro.


UNKNOWN:
Great.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Well, we'll each just go around and say hello.

And then I think we can just say one reason why we're excited to discuss it.

I'm Daniel.

I'm in California and was just...

enticed by the title, short and direct.

And I think it has some great solidifications and perspectives and implications on multiple levels.

So how about Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

Yeah, I was interested by

Another sort of way to surmise the free energy principle and active inference type approaches in relation to the philosophy of biology and cognitive science.

I thought that was interesting to see how that pitch was being made.

Over to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm in Calgary.

And anytime I see the word guide, I'm always curious because of my background in setting up programming where people were going into novel situations.

So the authors kind of had me at that word, and then I wanted to sort of learn more about what they had to say.


SPEAKER_01:
What are some key features of guides or things that guides should keep in mind before we head off on this journey?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, well, for me, I've sort of adopted the term wayfinding kind of as a blanket, not just a Markov blanket, as a way of maybe describing what that path could turn out to be without necessarily constraining people.

So I'm sure there are other descriptions and definitions of the word guide, but that's the one I tend to gravitate towards.

All right.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

Yeah, and there's also what kind of guide we end up inhabiting.

So this biological grounding, it feels like there's a desire to get into our feet and into the soil somehow, as well as the cognitive science.

So I feel it's a bit like I've been stretched up and pushed down into the ground.

So there's something there.


SPEAKER_01:
OK.

So one big question, probably not the only big question that could be raised, but just the question that approached us to this paper in some way is how can we learn and apply active inference?

And then Dean, do you want to talk about what you wrote here?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I just like to kind of read it out.

I don't.

Yes.

Okay, so assuming that making moves, which we could describe as behavior now, has effects on what happens next, and that those moves are at least loosely based or inferred on evident, and the authors use the terms probabilities, predictions, and fitness, so that's in the paper, then how might we begin to look at energy applied?

And calculating out our best guess is measurable as or of what we think or believe will happen next.

Step on that road to prediction matter expertise.

Now, prediction matter expertise is a term I coined and brought up with Dr. Friston.

But I think it might, if we're guiding, we might think about that in the background.

The other part was they talk about models.

And in our last live stream set, that's all we were doing was talking about modeling ourselves.

So it seems like a natural extension now to talk about models, models as inference and action models, as selection models, as extenders, i.e.

tools.

And then how does a model curated, run down, help us get outside the guide,

when using energy in ways beyond guide explication and interpretation.

Do we need a user's guide for the user's guide?

Which was something that I used to ask all the time, the kids that were participating in the program and that I was setting up.

Because they were going out with their background and they had sponsors who had

a different background and we often wondered whether or not they would have to give a user's guide to somebody who is necessarily more experienced with the field but not necessarily experienced with bringing a young person along.

So that's why I think that when we're talking about how can we learn and apply active inference in this guide theme, those are things we might want to keep sort of at least partially in our thinking.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks a lot for sharing that, Dean.

A lot to say, but that's what the .1 and the .2 and beyond are for.

So the paper is Free Energy, A User's Guide by Stephen Francis Mann, Ross Payne, and Michael Kirchhoff.

It's from the last days of 21, I believe, and it is on the PhilSci archive.

Okay, so here are some of the aims and the claims of the paper.

Over the past 15 years, a novel explanatory framework spearheaded by Carl Fristen has inspired both excitement and confusion of philosophy of biology and cognitive science.

Active inference, whose most famous tenant is the free energy principle, purports to unify explanations in biology and cognitive science under a single class of mathematical models.

So not math under biology, but biology under math.

There are broadly three reasons why the active inference framework is difficult to understand.

In the author's words, first, the mathematics are unfamiliar to many philosophers and even to biologists and cognitive scientists and mathematicians and all other kinds of peoples.

Second, the framework was developed rapidly by a small but dedicated group of researchers, limiting its accessibility while expanding its scope.

Hashtag recent history.

Third, the framework makes claims across both mathematical and empirical domains, and the dialectical relationships between these are unclear.

So what is the math bio dialectic?

Who's nested within who?

Yes, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this, the way these three kind of points are made is useful for seeing the rationale for this paper.

I think there's

seen as a desire to come at these questions as if it was coming from people less steeped in all the math.

Because previous papers might have come out which had an awful lot of particular information that comes from this dedicated group of researchers.

And I think by trying to speak about it

from the perspective of people arriving, it gives those core researchers, which I know for sure Michael Kirchhoff has been part of, a chance to clarify the sort of framings or misconceptions that might end up

been placed in other papers by philosophers.

And I think has become a little bit of a vicious cycle of distraction at times.

And I think they may be trying to reclaim that ground.

So that's just my own strategic guess, but it looks likely that might be why this paper's been put together.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, great and helpful feedback.

Thank you.

Then the last parts are, here we attempt to redress this situation by targeting each source of potential confusion.

So they're going to identify three frequently asked questions, frequently raised concerns, underpinning frictions, and then redress them.

And their aim is overall, we aim to increase philosophical understanding of active inference so that it may be more readily evaluated.

And maybe we could even add applied and developed.

Okay, so would either of you like to just read the abstract?


SPEAKER_02:
Over the past 15 years, an ambitious explanatory framework has been proposed to unify the explanations across biology and cognitive science.

Active inference, whose most famous tenet is the free energy principle, has inspired excitement and confusion in equal measure.

Yes, it has.

Here we lay the groundwork for proper critical analysis of active inference in three ways.

First, we give simplified versions of its core mathematical models.

Second, we outline the historical development of active inference and its relationship to other theoretical approaches.

And third, we describe three different kinds of claim labeled mathematical, empirical, and general routinely made by proponents of the framework

and suggest dialectical links between them overall way to increase philosophical understanding of active inferences so that it may be more readily evaluated all right cool so nice and funny abstract we all laughed


SPEAKER_01:
So the roadmap, how do they structure this guide?

Is it meant to be read linearly or do you flip to a different page?

I don't know, but we have added the page numbers on this slide.

It's on the bottom right, but it'll be on the bottom left.

And that's what page we are in the guide, as if it were in paper in our hands.

And it starts with an overview, and then there's a discussion on first the inference of perception or observations and hidden states, and then action comes into the loop.

section three gives a brief history of the free energy principle and section four discusses the aforementioned dialectic of free energy and its rhetorical ecosystem we could say that's the part we're not going to focus on in this dot zero but hopefully we're going to be able to go into each of these really important troikas in the dot one and two then there are some concluding remarks

Okay, so first, how is the word model being used here?

It's really good that the authors included this warning because we hear about modeling all the time, not just the photography kind, the mathematical kind.

So they write, let us begin with a warning.

The word model takes on two distinct senses throughout our discussion.

The sense more familiar to philosophers is what we call a scientific model, a representation of some possible or actual system which a scientist uses to reason about or discovers features of that system and related systems.

By contrast, in the active inference literature, a narrower sense is typically meant, what we will call a generative model.

That's what we're going to be specifically talking about.

This is a mathematical object with applications in statistics and various sciences.

Our simplified models of the free energy principle are scientific models.

So models is a big category, but we're going to be talking about kind of a narrow sense of statistical models like linear regression models.

But instead of a linear regression, it's a different kind of model, not at the exact same elevation of the linear model or taxonomy, but like in that category.

category.

And then note further that some scholars opt for a deflationary stance on generative models, using them only to describe the dynamics of agents, so descriptive modeling.

It is an open question whether this kind of model building precludes any form of scientific realism about the relation between the model and the target system.

These issues are discussed in Section 4 and also have come up several times, including with, most recently, Majid Beni, but model-based science and what does it mean to use and make models and maps and territories and all of that.

So...

Any thoughts on models?

Because that's going to be one of the key terms going forward.


SPEAKER_02:
What would either of you say would be the best way in layman's terms to show the difference between what they mean when they talk about an empirical model and what they talk about in terms of a generative model?

What sort of real physical material things could we use to make clear the difference?

Because in the last question, we did a good job of taking columns and showing how they were discreet.

How would you guys describe this?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
I think one of the ways this distinction comes about is the difference between most systems-type approaches and nonlinear dynamical systems.

Generative models are tend to be coming from a sort of a swarming.

It's like a swarm of bees creating and evolving as compared to something which is being given a perspective.

and drawn out somehow in our environment as in a scientific model now the fact that generative models are being applied in the kind of scientific way inverted commas or are they or they've been are they being used in a more instrumental stroke philosophical way and they can never be fully science is another question but i think that the difference there between this kind of biological

generative sort of process and something which can be given a perspective on and drawn out as a defined type of model is where there's a kind of a clear difference.

I don't know how others see that, but I think that that also might be useful.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, Dean, here would be my answer would be two that are on the extreme end of the yellow type scientific model would be like the standard model in physics or a working model of renal function, like kidney function.

So it's like very transdisciplinary and includes a huge number of domains and kind of like

logical motifs and has axioms and a specific history and software toolkits and all of that.

And then we're going to be talking about like a kind of model that's basically a parametric statistical model.

So like a Gaussian model takes two parameters, the mean and the variance, and that can be written analytically like with equations or can be done computationally.

But it's only ever going to take those two parameters and it only ever outputs a certain family of distributions.

And so it's like parameters in, distributions out, and the parameters can reflect like the connectedness of a graphical model too.

But you get parameters in, which can include model structure, and then some type of output, but it's close-ended within that paradigm versus the model of renal function is like this open-ended question.


SPEAKER_02:
And I think you hit on something really critical there.

It's distributions out, right?

So something falls out when we're talking about a generative model.

Whereas when we're talking about something empirical, we tend to keep the focus

stabilized, right?

So the process is fundamentally different.

And so, again, when we're talking about in sort of layman's terms, what the difference would be, I think you hit the key word out of that, which is something that's in and stays in versus something that may start in one place and fall out in a completely different place.

Is that an expectation we should have as a difference between these two?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just one thought then Steven would be both modes are so important.

It's like yin and yang or left and right hand or convex and concave.

And our discussions do move regime of attention from like the generative model to the bigger question.

And in some ways it maps onto instrumentalism and realism too.

but we really need to know when the pendulum is swung one way and when it's swung the other way and so we can keep an open mind and they're all happening all the time that's both eyes open like you're always saying dean but we also um can't um go too hard on just one side so stephen


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think, I love what you said there, Daniel, about the axioms.

I think generally in science, you try and have reproducibility and you have tolerances and you say how much accuracy and what's those tolerances on something, but there's a general recapitulation of similar types of results again and again and again.

And the same sort of thing comes up

It has been there in psychiatry and psychology, and that's where the idea of syndromes being classified as opposed to symptoms, which must be much more fluctuating, more variable.

So you could run a generative model, and it can come up with different results with the same input.

Now, there will be some kind of...

characteristic patterns that generative models do reveal, but that there is a point where it's quite different.

And I suppose when when that difference, I think there's almost paradigm based difference, but maybe there is some point where they blur.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, Dean, and then we'll go on to the paper.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So at the end of the last live stream, one of the comments that one of our colleagues, Blue, made was that we have to be able to hold two things up at once, which sang to me because I think that's what you're saying, both of you are saying right now.

I think if we look at, whether we're looking at a starling and or a murmuration, whether we're looking at an ant or a colony, we can keep something in

inbound or we can have something fall out from that because it's basic research like we weren't expecting something repeatable that's that's how i would distinguish it but again i just let's get on to the paper but i think that's important that we get that established first if we're talking about guides that was the big epistemic disclaimer and that's what they put in their paper so we allocate our attention as well okay so on to the details of the paper


SPEAKER_01:
So in 2.2, they introduce this simple model of inference with W and X. So this is figure one.

There's W for world.

That's the hidden world state.

And then there's X, the observed data, like X marks the data.

And you can think about like, where do you estimate where the sun is in the sky?

That's actually unobserved, but then there's going to be all kinds of observed data coming in or

We'll talk more about the coming in versus the generative model later, but the observed data are what are being modeled as being observed in that sort of sensory way.

So figure one is the basic model of inference.

The inference problem addressed by the active inference framework.

What other kinds of inference problems exist?

What problems do or don't have this form?

happens if there's no line with w and x so of course it can get more elaborate but within this exact format like w might output x and y and that would be like getting two numbers back in the computer program instead of or generating two numbers in the computer program rather than just returning one

or you can imagine X is like a vector, but we're within that specific model framework.

We're not in the realism of agent environment.

We're just in the statistical framework of hidden latent variable, observable variable X. The unobservable state is assumed to cause observable data.

And so this is a little bit of a...

connection with dynamic causal modeling, because statistically we call that causing, just like the proportion of variance explained by a PCA.

It's like given very active terms, but it's actually not causal in the mechanistic sense.

And that of course has been to no end of confusion with how statistical conclusions are interpreted as mechanistic.

conclusions about the world and so is it cause in the sense that we mean it in one sense or is it associated in a causal model and that's kind of the causal in dynamic causal modeling that's functional connectivity so that's the realm that we're talking about not within the world environment um interaction steven


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is actually interesting.

They've gone back to a pre-Markov blanket kind of formulaism, and it raises that question then of what does it mean to infer

And it can be that we infer things because that's what we get data on.

So it talks about, well, what is it that we can even use to understand?

And what are the assumptions about what's actually important to read?

And those two things, I think, this leaves both those things open.

And that actually is a bit of a bridge between the scientific and the generative processes.


SPEAKER_01:
So if we were modeling like height is not measured, but we observed weight, and we're going to do some regression of like the unobserved and the observed, that is the type of model that we're going to be talking about loosely.

And someone could say, oh, but this other factor influences too.

Yes, that's the realism claim.

This actually matters in the real world, and it very well may.

But we're talking about measured, modeled relationships.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this is also really helpful to be able to look at paradigms because there's a difference between, say, the paradigm of psychology from the perspective of looking at classification and problem identification and treatment.

and coaching psychology, which is about not so much trying to diagnose what's there, but what sort of actions someone's trying to take and how you might help them with those actions to reach outcomes, which may vary moment to moment.

And I think in some ways, this is maybe the level you have to go back to, because otherwise the noise just swamps the discussion.


SPEAKER_01:
goes deep on both ends that action orientation the pragmatic turn ecological psychology is going to connect deep and this is going to be deep but in a sense narrow because we're just talking about statistics here so take statistics courses and learn it because this is kind of where it comes from here okay on to the example of active cat friends that's that's not actually what they called it but that's the cat example that we're going to be discussing

We're going to imagine that you have a cat, animal, that spends its time in either the kitchen or the bedroom.

When it's in the kitchen, it often meows for food.

When it's in the bedroom, it often purrs loudly.

Suppose you tally the proportions of the times your cat is in each place and making each noise.

The results might look something like.

Okay.

But the cat also goes somewhere else.

Okay.

Not in the model.

Or this other factor or this other sound.

Okay.

change the model, add another column.

It's totally fine.

It's a fork on the GitHub or the discussion, but that's the difference between kind of modifying the model structurally and using it parametrically within the narrowest sense of model.

And then keeping the discussion alive about that broader sense, like what Steven is talking about, like a model of psychology or a model of complex adaptive systems.

So one thing to note is that this idea of setting the prior in a Bayesian sense from observed data is called parametric empirical Bayes.

So parameter parametric, we're setting parameters like frequencies of things happening and it's empirical, which means observed.

It doesn't mean like,

the only truth it just means the measured values and then it's bayesian as we'll talk about so let's just say 10 or 100 or 10 000 measurements were made and they come out to these numbers 60 of the time they're in the kitchen and 40 the cat is in the bedroom and so that's like summing across that's called the marginal probability because it was in the margins of papers

And marginals have to sum to 100% because something has to happen in the model.

Oh, but the cat can be in the roost.

Yes, but within the model, it has to be this way.

Then that's what makes a probability.

Then 50% of the time, there's meowing and purring.

But as the numbers show, the location and the sounds

they have a statistical association.

There's some divergence that could be tested for statistical significance depending on the number of observations, but that is what the numbers in this table are reflecting.

And both columns and rows sum up to a probability.

So they're all like proper probabilities.

then how do you infer about this?

Like if you were to observe the room, how could you reduce your uncertainty about what sounds you'd hear?

And then if you'd hear sounds, how could you reduce your uncertainty about the room?

Many philosophers will be familiar with one famous method for solving this problem, Bayesian conditionalization.

This method can be stated as a principle saying how an agent using a model P of W and X, W, world state, hidden, X, observe data, ought to choose their beliefs Q of W, Q, that's the one we control, upon observing data X. What to believe now?

conditioned on incoming data.

Okay, any points on that?


SPEAKER_02:
Just they did a really good job of explaining it.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm waiting for the next slide.

Okay, please continue here.


SPEAKER_02:
So from the actual paper, the table describes a joint probability distribution, which we've just explained, where W ranges over possible cat locations, either the kitchen bedroom and X ranges over the possible cat sounds.

Again, very clear, straightforward.

From the next side, usually the scientist, not the person who is trying to build a generative model, aims to improve the accuracy.

of a generative model of some real world phenomenon which would mean improving the accuracy of PWX, this learning task is relatively difficult.

So I wanted to kind of parse what relatively difficult meant and I'm not going to read all of that stuff there in red, but essentially what I want to kind of state is

The authors here said, this is simple.

Don't go to that place of high complexity quite yet.

Let's just see this for what it is so that what Daniel said 90 seconds ago, which was go take a bunch of statistics courses, doesn't have a bunch of people running off and screaming into the night.

There is a complexity to this, but it's not the kind that will swamp you.

What they're basically trying to say is let's just slowly work our way into this without all your historical grievances around statistics trapping you before you even really set sail.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll add one note on that.

This is like learning how the horse moves in chess or learning how the castle moves in chess.

And so it's possible to get super connected to your internal life narrative and the game of chess and people who would have no problem losing in Connect Four or checkers will feel very engaged emotionally, affectively by chess.

It's just something I've observed empirically.

Somebody else might have different priors on that.

And so this is a way of just starting with how the pieces move.

And then as we're finding out playing in a fun, we hope ecosystem and playground and sandbox.

So we can figure out how the pieces move and then we're going to connect them and do all kinds of fun stuff.

Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think, like you say, having the ability to stay with the pieces, do lots of fun stuff and look at the way things are generating with that data is different, for instance, to saying, oh, the meowing cat is an assertive cat and the purring cat is a docile cat, which could be this kind of imposed higher order model.

And then everything's trying to fit to is it a docile cat or is it an assertive cat?

But it's flattened out all of this, you know, it loses this ability to generate.


SPEAKER_01:
Professor Helen Longino has a book called Studying Human Behavior and Aggression in 2010.

That's like, once you define, oh, there's a significant difference between these two groups or in the count of this behavior per minute, and they've been pre-labeled, it passes the modeling in the broad sense.

into modeling into the narrow sense we found a difference between the groups so this is reifying our understanding of those categories so it's really important so this is going to be where the base enters the picture um the posterior which means afterwards

is calculated about how should the distribution p be updated as new information comes in so just like the last sentence in red what's a belief now conditioned on incoming data so now that is going to be symbolically or graphically described so probability the p distribution of world states conditioned on vertical line new data coming in and there's bay's theorem

Other videos and other channels and groups will cover Bayes better and more comprehensively, but here we can suffice to say that first we can write it in words, like what's the distribution Q that we control, the probability distribution of us thinking that it's in the kitchen,

That is the prior probability of it being conditioned on it meowing.

So how likely is it to be given that it meowed?

And then the numbers that we just looked at can be plugged in to that verbal equation and a number is going to come out.

And so we heard meowing.

And if we just looked at meowing, like four times in the kitchen, one time in the bedroom.

So four to five times it was in the kitchen, not the bedroom.

And then here's an equation that does literally that.

It just looks at the column and it does the conditional likelihood or the posterior of the world state after the data come in.

And then there's, I think, did anyone want to say anything here?

There's this...


SPEAKER_02:
learning task is difficult i think we already kind of mentioned that so yeah yeah and the whole thing is is that most people i i think i'm not going to say philosophers most people don't automatically go to being able to figure out what the probability is but i think what these authors are pointing out is there's a way of being able to show that there is a probability in play if you are not certain and this is how you might split those probabilities out that's all they're trying to do


SPEAKER_01:
okay so now we're going to go from as we've seen in other papers the sort of exact bayesian approach most similar paper to this in this sense is probably axel constance number 34 with a bacterium we first looked at the bayesian bacterium and then we looked at the variational bayesian bacterium and then in both cases we looked at how basically um

sometimes new data could come in and you could still make wrong decisions.

Whether you're doing exact base or variational inference, you can still make bad decisions as data come in.

So this isn't a Panglossian paradigm.

This is like a statistical tool that's already been detached from the philosophy or at least sort of docked at shore.

And then now also we're breaking the assumption that it must go the right way or that it will model real world systems especially.

So again, back within the narrow sets.

Sometimes the specific distribution of the world states conditioned on data coming in is intractable, so that distribution cannot be calculated.

This usually happens when the state space is continuous rather than discrete, which came up on model stream number 5.1.

If there's only two decisions left and right,

all you have to do is do two calculations and then compare which one is preferable.

Whereas if there's a steering wheel or a trim tab, then there's an open-ended number because 87.1 degrees and 87.11 degrees might be very different in their long-term consequences.

So continuous state spaces are very challenging from a sensory as well as from an action perspective.

In these cases, what is needed is a way to choose Q of W, the distribution we control on the world states, to make it close to P of W conditioned on X. So P of world states conditioned on data is the hard one to compute exactly, and this is going to be choosing a distribution that gets close to that other one.

um when the problem is formulated by statisticians we usually begin with a family of possible distributions q and search for the member of that family which lies as close to p w condition on x as possible so just like a linear model it's like condition on this being a linear model we're going to find the best linear model or condition on the quadratic form we're going to find the best quadratic form this is like a little bit more general conditioned on the family that q is

we're going to do basically linear regression fitting, but not exactly linear regression.

How do you make those distributions converge or align?

as best as possible.

We can do this also given that a structure has been chosen.

This is the fitting part.

This is not the structure learning unless the parameters about structure.

We can do this indirectly by using a measure of inaccuracy.

Active inference employs a measure of inaccuracy called variational free energy labeled F.

because it is a measure of inaccuracy smaller values are better than larger values so it's like frisbee golf and the lower the value is the lower the difference is between the actual p that you would have calculated perfectly and q the way simpler lower dimensional model that you can control and can save in ram so that's described here variational free energy

captures two sources of inaccuracy that we're going to go into in the next slides in belief and dictates how they ought to be traded off against one another the two sources which we're going to explore are overfitting and failing to explain the data so those will be introduced and discussed soon stephen yeah i think this also if we just connect it to that scientific standard models and this type of work is


SPEAKER_00:
This is looking at contextuality.

It's like what's based on where the starting point is that the probabilities are being picked up on.

You start to roll out the statistical results, what sort of meowing is actually happening.

And as opposed to a model where you're modeling a car engine and you want to know what energy it's going to give out at a particular moment, it's going to do that whether I'm watching it or not.

It's just the same basic model applies independent of the observer.

So I think that's also useful here.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, getting the model to this stage depersonalizes it, in a sense, because that model can be just transferred and used in another instrument.

Okay, so here's those two sources of inaccuracy that they described.

The first that we're going to discuss is overfitting.

The cost of overfitting, they write, can therefore be measured by checking how far Q, the one we control on world states, diverges from P.

the first term of F, free energy, is a measure of that kind.

This expression, two, is also called the relative entropy or Kohlbach-Leiber or the KL divergence.

So this is like the first half of the two-part equation that will constitute F. And it looks like this graphically, symbolically, but here's a kind of,

cool way to think about it.

If you were trying to fit a single hump into this two hump model in the empirical distribution.

So you're fitting a family that is gonna get sort of coerced into one of two extremes.

Either it's going to end up fitting one very closely, like the higher one, if it's like mode seeking and it will have no probability density, the blue line onto the other hump,

or it'll conflate them in a sense into two kind of subpopulations blurred together and have a solution basically that kind of goes between them.

KL divergence is a way to fit distributions optimally, given this kind of challenge, which exists for the one hump fitting two hump.

It exists for the two hump fitting three.

It exists for the one fitting 50.

It's a general statistical problem.

And KL is a method that helps bring that blue line as well as it can on a trade-off frontier into alignment with the black one.

Okay, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I suppose this also gets into the reason when this is useful is when you're in complex, non-equilibrium situations where things are fluid, then you're going to hit these situations and overfitting is quite common, social sciences being one of the areas where we see these problems.

Where it's equilibrium based and it's fairly clear,

then it's not really as applicable.

So it sort of speaks to where this type of approach is applicable, i.e.

where there's this kind of fluid ambiguity in the situation.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

about the second source of inaccuracy that is failing to explain the data mathematically they write explaining the data means assigning high probability to events w that make the probability of x high the penalty for failing to explain data is captured by the second term of f which looks like this

higher terms of the actual value are matched with high values on the distribution we control Q to keep this term low.

So this is kind of like if it were a linear regression and all the data points were lined up and the line just went right through them, then it would be doing really well on explaining the data and that would be given a low score here.

Whereas if that weren't the case, it'd be flipped.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
So when I was doing my work, I didn't have access, or maybe I wasn't looking hard enough for the KL divergence.

So I can remember even on here and some of these live streams saying, I have no idea what that even means.

I have a better idea now.

One of the metaphors that I tried to use was in terms of avoiding overfitting or failing to be able to explain the data was, so all those horizontal and vertical lines creating a mesh acting as a filter, how far apart do we set those?

What gauge do we set our mesh for in terms of what we want to have stay above the mesh and what's passing through?

Now, again,

Maybe that's not sophisticated enough for a lot of philosophers, but to get the basic point down, that's the kind of example I had to provide to be able to give people some sense, not just that these lines are now rigid and the 20 is on this percent and the 40 is on this percent and never shall the two pass again, but the lines actually move.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks a lot.

So you're so right about that.

The example with the active catference and the variational catference is like discrete by discrete.

It's four quadrants.

So in some ways that's like the simplest model.

It could be two continuous variables.

It could be like the volume and then the cat's position on the X axis in a room.

Now imagine if it was the X and the Y, it was continuous or something like that, but just even two continuous variables.

And you're totally pointing out where it's like, you're going to put the points around, whether you put them right in the middle of the four quadrants or whether it's more scatter shot or something in between.

And then there's two parameters.

There's like a linear regression through the points.

And then there's how fine the mesh is.

And you're observing like pixel densities and doing a regression through the pixel densities.

And so you could have a super continuous situation.

It is a continuous variable inside the bedroom.

But then in the model we just looked at, it's in one quadrant.

And we talked about that when we talked about Serval's paper and how it was just the park and the cafe.

And yes, there's locations within the park, but they weren't within our model.

So we didn't deny the reality of that physically.

We just were modeling statistically something specific.

Okay, Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, the filtering could also be relating to the sort of temporal sampling rate, because if you're measuring every millisecond, if it's meowing or not, it becomes pointless.

There's a kind of a making sense rate at which the entropy is being converged at.

And as we know, in the brain, we seem to have multiple levels of that.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome next few ones we're going to go through just kind of quickly and specifically so let's put those two terms together this is the overfitting and the over and the failing to explain the data variational free energy f the non-metaphysical version

is the sum of the penalties for overfitting and failing to explain the data.

It's those two terms that we just described added together so that the best explanation in a sense is the lowest on both of them.

It's not overfit.

It fits it well, and it doesn't do it any more than that.

So, you know, simple as possible, but no simpler or any other number of quotes.

That's kind of this equations.

It's not the only way it could be written.

It's not the only thing that fulfills that process, but it's something that can be used and it's very tractable.

As it turns out, this free energy has tractable computation. 13.

page 14.

So now it's possible to actually use that tractable approximation and do decision-making.

And here is where they have the decision-making.

here argmin means choose the distribution q that makes the following term as small as possible so this is where f goes from kind of being like a um a set of pipes with nothing really running through it

to a specific finite set of tested alternatives.

Those are affordances in the case of action selection.

They're discrete in the case of a discrete inference, like is it in the bedroom or is it in the kitchen?

It's continuous in the case of a continuous inference problem, like how bright is it outside on a continuous scale?

But even for continuous things, sometimes we just do one through 10 or one through 100 or one through 1,024.

So discrete state spaces are really important, even if there is a continuity to the world.

So those are the kinds of computations that variational inference helps perform.

It takes something that's descriptive and moves it into a decision-making imperative, just like the L2 norm or least squares is like a decision-making imperative for linear regression.

This is like an imperative for model fitting in this framework.

The free energy principle, the form here, inference, is the same as that of Bayesian principle discussed earlier.

In both cases, you perform a calculation and set Q of W equal to the resulting value.

The difference is that Bayesian principle counsels a direct calculation via Bayes' theorem.

In contrast, free energy principle counsels what might be called an indirect calculation.

Happily, in practice, this can be done by trial and improvement rather than trial and error.

So that's axil constant bacteria, the Bayesian and the variational bacterium, combined with going to the bottom of the bowl on the smooth gradient descent landscape with a straight arrow utility and the solenoidal epistemic component.

Various algorithms for finding Q, the distribution we control, are available depending on the details of the generative model.

Classic citation that gets referred to a lot.

One of the developments that prefigured active inference was the implementation of such an algorithm in a neural network, first in 2005.

Old citation, classic.

We're seeing that again in Model Stream 5, in Alec Chance's work, and of many others, that this format, even long before active inference brought it onto the scene in our little side stage,

Using neural networks to fit variational Bayesian methods was a common technique in machine learning.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
So when we say trial and improvement rather than trial and error, it's basically saying that the error can be used and utilized in an ongoing way.

It's not like you have to start from scratch and come up with another attempt from scratch.

You're using the same basic architecture and just keep running.


SPEAKER_01:
It's so true.

I never really thought how demoralizing trial and error was.

Like, how should we get stronger?

Oh, well, you're going to try and then you're going to fail.

When error is perceived as a failure, naively.

But trial and improvement would be like, we're going to try and we're going to improve.

So yes, of course, error is implicit in that.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and I'm glad you used the bowl analogy because one of the things that I read, and I was actually the one that highlighted the trial and improvement thing because, for example, if you had the bowl filled with water and a ping pong ball floating on top, and you had to drill a hole because you wanted the ping pong ball to settle at the bottom of the bowl at a certain time,

You could continuously improve by adding more bowls of a certain diameter until you were able to get that flow rate and have that ping pong ball arrive at the bottom of that bowl at the particular time, at the discrete time that you were looking for.

That's not an error thing.

That's just we'll continue to get a little bit closer and closer.

We'll figure out what the dosage is.

And I agree with you.

A lot of people think that the basic research part of it is, oh, I failed.

No, a lot of this stuff is I test it and then I test it again.

And then I, oh, I came really, really close.

So now the difference is really low, which is what these authors are talking about.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, I'm just going to continue on because we do have a ton more to do.

So that's still on the perception side.

We're not talking about where we're going to go walking.

We're talking about the sound of the cat and where the cat is located in the inference.

And so we're still within this empirical variational catference area.

This is the bull.

This is fitting that distribution, the conjoint distribution, that's the free energy distribution.

And that is the one that's bull-like.

So here is the variational free energy at the black line.

And it's basically the composition of two factors.

Penalty for overfitting and the penalty for failing to explain the data.

And each of those have a certain distribution underneath them in this setting.

So their combination is like f plus g of x. It's like h of x. It's just adding functions together.

So it's just another cost-fitting function for the really specific kinds of models that we're talking about here.

Let's bring in action.

So now it's still the same case of W and X going to the agent.

Now notice that the agent wasn't drawn in the previous model.

It was just W to X. So that was probably a graphical as well as somewhat of a conceptual simplification.

Like, I mean, these measurements, it shouldn't matter who's observing them, right?

Oh wait, quantum, it does.

But now the agent can also take action Z. So Z is going to be the whole question of control theory and cybernetics and action.

The previous section dealt with inference rule, how to choose Q of world states, beliefs on world states.

This section is about acting.

Now suppose you can perform an action Z that will place the cat in one of two rooms.

By changing the hidden state W, you can indirectly change future values of X or at least change their proportions or their likelihood.

so decision rules stem from measures of preference because if you don't know where you're going you're lost or if you don't care about the two things then it doesn't really matter one of the confusing aspects of active inference is that it treats the statistical model p the one that is the actual distribution we're trying to get close to and this is like the key point that we'll be returning to for our whole life

that model p is a measure of both probabilities and preferences at the same time and that's going to be what we continue to talk about because it's one of the most important points that this paper makes clear in a way that other papers um haven't really perhaps harped on in exactly the same way let's look at figure three again look at the yellow part active inference employs a controversial dual interpretation

of p of w probability of world states and probability of observations as probability distributions and preference distributions over hidden states and sensory states specifically dean with the red text again i don't want to take up a bunch of time for this we're having one of the authors or a few of the authors on we can probably pull this out a little bit but for now


SPEAKER_02:
that when we introduce preferences and probabilities, it isn't just a second consideration.

It can almost run away from us really, really quickly if we're not really careful in terms of pulling back on the reins a little bit and really thinking about what does that imply.

So I'll just leave that for now.


SPEAKER_01:
Great point.

Thanks for sharing it succinctly.

They write, recall that free energy principle, inference, counsels choosing beliefs by minimizing a function that measures the cost of inaccuracy.

And that's because the free energy calculation includes both of those features, the overfitting penalty and the failure to explain penalty.

Action selection is governed in the same way as inference.

Remember, we were talking only about inference when we were talking about the variational methods.

Now there's going to be a twist.

a slightly different cost function called the expected free energy.

So that's why we were previously just talking about the F, variational free energy.

Now we're going to be talking about G, expected free energy, labeled G. The definition of G is closely related to that of F. The interpretation of the two penalty terms changes

As the formalism is updated to reflect the fact, we are now making measurements over expected future states.

So this is not just measurement error, there's the fundamental unknowingness of the future.

Since future states have yet to be observed, the agent must average over them to obtain expected values.

The penalties are associated with failing to satisfy preferences and failing to minimize future surprise.

overfitting preferences failure to explain surprise expectation preferences preferences when now or then let's look at how those play out in this sort of action selection through variational free energy through time aka the expected free energy formulation

and how those two pieces, satisfying preference failure and failure to minimize future surprise, look now.

But this is sort of the elaboration or the cousin of this one.

This is like snapshot inference, and now we're going to be looking at expectations through time.

Okay, so first filling to satisfy preferences.

So again, keep that simpler version in mind.

This is going to be a slightly different one in six.

They even write, compare equation two.

This is, I hope, failing to satisfy preferences given a clear enough term, but it totally brings in something different, which is something about the agent, as Dean wrote.

So there's big implications, of course, because there can't be a non-preference driven action selection in any useful sense.

Whereas the variational one was just like, given the scatter, I want the best mesh and regression.

that one it does embody implicit assumptions about the world and so on but this takes it to a whole another level and here's where that controversial dual interpretation comes into play not only is it unusual to treat p as a preference distribution it is unusual to treat the goal of decision making to produce a distribution that matches that distribution rather than maximizing expected utility

you don't need a preference distribution other than more for reward learning whereas here we're trying to realize our preferences and match distributions rather than maximize we're minimizing the divergence from these realistic but optimistic expectations so perhaps it is best to keep in mind that preference in this sense might mean something different than utility in the traditional sense stephen


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, without going back into that, but the whole point of having this matching distributions rather than expected utility, which effectively, again, becomes kind of like equilibrium states, places where things settle and can be measured and are kind of stable.

You're in this kind of realm of a more fluid flux type process.

So I think that's one thing.

And I think the other one is

this focus on the future, the focus on predicting and things going into the future and how to make sense of that rather than looking back and trying to, which is often what science is doing, and explain retrospectively in the same way psychology is often trying to explain what it sees before it and coaching psychology is trying to see what can be done to get closer to something that's more suited.


SPEAKER_01:
Great point.

Thank you.

It really embodies the forward lookingness rather than the optimal reward or prediction on previous observations.

All right.

So failure to minimize future surprise.

This is the other term.

Failure to satisfy preferences.

Now, failure to minimize future surprise.

Formalism 7.

One of the tenets of active inference is that agents should act.

This is in the normative form.

stance to ensure that future data are not too surprising and so here is the formalism as written this is the failure to minimize surprise in addition to conditionalizing on z z is action so

We know that the vertical line is conditioning on, and then Z are the affordances, like the action states.

In this simple example, we're not going to go into the Markov, to the policy, into the action state yet.

This is from the simpler cybernetic or sort of agent environment framing that doesn't distinguish that as clearly.

But Z is just an action that the agent engages in.

The failure to minimize future surprise is conditioned on Z. So it's not that there's some sort of world that we're not altering, and then we're doing some strategy in that inalterable world, leading to this total ad hoc way of integrating the outcomes of action into the niche.

the world states in the future have expectations that must be calculated as expecting on policy selection.

So it's not just that some policies have effect and some don't.

It's that the inference of the future failure to minimize surprise is conditioned statistically in the algorithm on the choices.

Now, when that includes choices about beliefs, doesn't it get so interesting?

So,

That is one of the cool parts about this calculation.

And then this expected free energy.

Okay, Steven, yes, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
That also brings in an element of this contextuality.

It's what sort of choices were made then in context X, or let's not use bad context, right?

It's important and it changes things.

And you can't do that if you're taking averages and sort of pre-built models.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so now, just like we kind of looked at the two parts separately and then summated into F, the variational free energy, and then looked at those two parts here, we've gotten to equation eight in the paper.

which is g which is a function of those two distributions p and q as well as action and here are those two pieces that we just discussed and then they write the third input to g is z rather than x so not observations but action as mentioned above this is because we are calculating the expected value over possible future sensory states rather than inferring on the basis of a sensory state that has just occurred

Okay, so that's exactly what Steven said.

F is really good for sensory inference.

It's about given the just observed sensory data, what the estimate of the world should snap to.

But action is totally different, not just because it entails preferences like Dean raised, but also because the consequences of action and the future are unknown.

So the distribution for planning as inference, for action as inference, rather than for perception as inference, needs to require conditionalizing on action, not on sense.

Even though sense does come into play, it's a little bit like hidden away.

Here's what we're getting at, which is the sensory distribution, noticeably not here, but on the right side only.

And then the function that we're minimizing on is action inference, active inference.

As with F, the measure G suggests a principle.

Free energy principle in terms of action, not as inference, is minimizing the free energy on action selection.

That can be read as an approximation of not optimal Bayesian sensing, but optimal Bayesian design of experiments and optimal Bayesian decision theory.

Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
And I think right here is, I'm just pausing for one second.

I think that we're going to get into some more evidence of this, but I think this is the first moment when we can say,

active inference and free energy, well, not free energy, active inference does not necessarily constrain itself to being just a framework.

It's actually a filter as well because of the active part.

It's not stable.

It's constantly being updated because of that active piece and the preference piece.

So we could call it a framework, but I don't think we're doing it justice.

There's a framework aspect to it and there's a filtering piece to it.

And so that's why I talk about search fields all the time.

So I just want to drop that seed now so that when the authors come on, we can talk about that a little bit more in terms of the context that Stephen mentioned about guiding.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you.

So now we're going to return to the active cat fronts.

So let us present a solution to the cat example.

For the problem to have a determinant solution, we need the conditional distribution, world states condition on action Z.

That means that the consequences of action have to be estimated.

If we put the cat in the kitchen, it usually stays there.

So this is, again, the two pieces that action introduces into the puzzle is the question of preference, otherwise why bother, and the question of the consequences of action.

So the red is a statement that's empirically observed from observed data about what happens when you are estimating location conditioned on action.

This is that Q of W conditioned on Z. And so you can see when it goes into the kitchen, it stays in the kitchen nine out of 10 times.

Whereas if it puts in the bedroom after some period of time, like Steven brought up, not one millisecond later, but one hour later, one minute later, it's model specific.

it's time scale friendly it's not time scale free and then you can compute numbers having to do with action selection within this model it is worth restating how unusual it is to interpret p as a measure of both probabilities and preferences but i mean it's the letter p

There's nothing wrong with treating a distribution as a measure of preferences.

Distributions don't demand to be interpreted as probabilities after all.

But what is unorthodox in what church?

And in need of justification is giving the very same mathematical term two different interpretations within the same equation.

So that's the two eyes at once kind of looking back.

and then they go into a little bit more detail about what that actually means we are not aware of proponents of active inference taking this interpretive line but it appears to be a viable option so just awesome and clear writing and drawing something out through the re-understanding and the communication which happens synchronously and asynchronously

One of the ways proponents of the framework turn to this unusual interpretation to their advantage is by casting action as a form of inference.

So here's from a Buckley citation, and that's why it's called active inference.

And we just kind of talked about it a little earlier.

So the mechanism underlying minimizing expected free energy is formally symmetric to perceptual inference.

Formally symmetric.

overfitting, failing to satisfy preferences, failure to explain the data, failure to minimize expected surprise on future data.

That's why it's the only one that has the X in there.

Rather than inferring the cause of sensory data, an organism must infer actions that best make sensory data accord with an internal representation of the environment.

statistical representation not the debate on whether organisms have representations 2.4 simple model of selection this is where the markov blanket is going to enter in our model x and z are the inputs and outputs of the agents x observations z actions the set x and z is the agent's markov blanket the term is derived from judea pearl's work on inference using bayesian networks pearl 1988 classic citation

Other live streams, we talk more about Markov blankets.

So we're not going to go into it too much more here, but it's definitely the tip of an iceberg if you want to check out more.

But here, in the sense required here, a Markov blanket can be understood as the set of nodes that screen off the agent from nodes considered external to it.

Screen off the agent or screen off the internal states of the statistical model.

Another toy model will help illustrate.

Consider an agent whose surface temperature, x, can safely lie between negative four and four units.

Temperature's continuous, okay, but it's a discrete model.

And so here, death is coming into the picture on either end, too hot and too cold.

So this is gonna be like variational catference, but now it's a freezing and a burning end of the room, and the cat,

or the robot cat is going to be making decisions about what to do.

So the external world state is W, the temperature, and then the perception is going to be X, the observation.

Notice that the value of W does not affect the agent's preferences.

So the preferences for living or for homeostasis or whatever, regardless of the observations in that snapshot moment.

but not precluded over longer time scales.

All the agent directly cares about is its surface temperature denoted by X. That's why the two rows are identical.

So these are sort of the observations and the different actions that can be taken to move between one end and the other, perceiving only the temperature.

The agent tries to guess how to act, how to stay within its expected range.

And then this is sort of the intuitive pseudocode.

When the temperature is high, you want to go towards the lower end.

When the temperature is low, you want to act to go towards the higher end.

And so here is like the simple example.

This is kind of like the bacteria that has the right priors versus the one that's just deciding randomly or without any resemblance of relationship to the other observations.

And so here is the smart agent that's just keeping its free energy.

Every time it gets up, as it moves away, it acts to bring it back down into alignment.

And then here's the agent's control over its external state is 95% accurate.

So 5% of the time it slips.

And then that's what they say.

It's grasp slips.

The optimal control, the handle has been lost because of a motor ineffectuality, but that can be recovered.

Whereas the randomly acting or just sort of like this sort of Brownian walk diffusion process ends up dying.

Okay, Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
All I was going to say here is they did a great explanation.

And if this was your first encounter with the W and the Z and the X, you'd have to really, really slow this down because the first time you encounter it,

It takes more than one pass.

You might have to go over it a third and a fifth and a seventh time for it to actually make sense because we all have a certain capacity in terms of the amount of variables we can juggle at once.

And when I first looked at this, it made sense to me, but I could sense from somebody who's maybe coming from a philosophical background and not necessarily having the same degree of statistical knowledge

hands-on experience as maybe the three of us do, this would be a moment where you'd really want somebody to hold your hand.


SPEAKER_01:
That's what community and Act In Flav is for, because then it can be like an interaction and every question is welcome.

So as long as there's attention in the game, everybody's going to make it.

Stephen?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
so this also does give an indication that with variational free energy having some sort of perturbations can be useful particularly if you have multiple parallel kind of sources of information being integrated it so having some noise is a good thing right it's not it actually gives you a way to start to make inferences one question is there

On the left, there's no real learning happening.

No.

But it still makes it, even without the learning component, it still is more stable.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, it's not doing parameter updating.

It's just like a previously learned association between the temperature and the direction to move.

And also notice like the observation of sensory is assumed to be perfect here.

So there's many layers which can be brought in, but this is kind of like the kernel motif.

Okay, the correspondence between high values of F and life-threatening states lead to a third form of the free energy principle.

So we had inference and action, perceptual inference, then we had action selection, and here is free energy principle selection.

Any system that survives long enough will act so as to appear to be minimizing F.

That's the first time we got any discussion of far from equilibrium thermodynamics of anti-dissipative systems, resilient systems, anticipatory systems, except indirectly through action.

But this is the sort of selective Darwinian side of FEP.

Okay, of course, there's a ton that could be said here.

This is not a normative principle, not a suggestion to agents regarding how they should perform inference, but a means of describing how agents behave.

Axel's paper.

Minimizing free energy is not living alone, but living systems will be those that appear as if they've minimized free energy.


SPEAKER_02:
And then here, I think someone wrote- I just wrote that in there because that's going to tell you what your autobiography is going to sound like.

given that you're still alive and can write one.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

My last words are, ah.

In recent work, Friston gives a deflationary interpretation on which agents do not, in fact, minimize anything, but perform acts which can be interpreted as minimizing F. So, see live stream number 34.

Zero, one, two, three.

That is the reason for the emphasized phrase, so as to appear to be minimizing F. That's

deflationary instrumentalism.

Highlight.

Despite this deflationary approach, there is a link between this and the earlier principle.

Agents subject to the free energy principle of inference, perceptual inference, ought to minimize F

So if this is ought is tied to their survival, then the normative principle has the same underlying justification as the descriptive principle.

So this is sort of, I don't know if it's been noted before, but basically it's equivalent to saying the evolutionary ought is an is.

So it's kind of like not from the fitness side, the Malthusian Darwinian side, but from the anti-dissipative side,

This is how things have looked.

It's like saying fitness isn't necessarily being projected into the future, but if you do do the computations, fitness can be assigned to like different single nucleotide polymorphisms that have had different success.

And you will only see successful ones, but it's a bit more complex than that in the moment.

So here are the three piece, the tale of three piece.

We had the tale of two densities.

What other jokes have we had?

In each of the three examples discussed in a section, there has been a distinct role for the distribution p and a distinct interpretation of each model.

Narrow sense.

In our first model, p was a generative model employed by an agent.

It was therefore interpreted as representing probabilities.

like where the cat is.

But now, in order to introduce action in a meaningful way, we had to have preference, like I want the cat to be in the kitchen.

So when we brought action into the game, we had to introduce preference.

What makes active inference similar but also different from other frameworks?

Probabilities and preferences are represented by p. In addition to representing probabilities, in the second model, p measured the desirability of certain future states over others.

I expect you to go to school every day.

That's something having to do with action, if it's serious.

It was therefore interpreted as representing preferences.

In our third model, P tallied the historical frequencies of a set of hypothetical ancestors, fitness.

It was therefore interpreted as representing the fitness of different states.

So supporters of the framework often point to the third role, fitness, pH, to explain how P can simultaneously fulfill the first two.

It's like, if that thermal bacteria is rocking its niche, it will have high fitness.

Okay, so that is where the three Ps get us.

Here's just a brief look forward.

So for any of these next slides, we're not going to go into the actual very nicely fleshed out arguments themselves, but Stephen or Dean, just raise your hand if either of you have anything to add on like each of these section headers.

So section 2.5 is extensions to the model.

More things to learn, more ways to act.

We've seen adjectives added to active inference.

Deep, sophisticated, contrastive.

affective what other adjectives have we seen that's sort of this section of the guidebook it's like there's your um usb port what can you have added into it or how can it be developed and so that's where we see sort of the adjectival family of something active inference maybe even n active inference coming more to the philosophy side but also there's all the elaborations that we've seen of the actual parametric model in the narrow sense

Sometimes it's in both camps, like affective inference has to do with a model derivation or metacognition, as well as something about like the model in a bigger sense.

But we can recognize both those lanes at once, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, one other one's inactive inference, reciprocal active inference.

There's a couple more.

That's definitely true.

Just one thing I was going to throw in.

I noticed they talked about this, and I know it's in the quote, but they talk about any system.

I always wonder whether that's a bit of a,

that a little bit of a piece of a paving stone waiting to be tripped over.

Um, because I kind of feel like, you know, if you're going to say it may be any nonlinear dynamical system or nested systems of systems or things.

Uh, I just always think that that, that can be a little bit of a hazard.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah it inherits a lot of the legacy ambiguity around system like you've brought up a bunch of times so it's really helpful so in section three notice how the history brief history of the free energy principle comes after what we just spent the last hours and pages on so it isn't a history of science perspective but it is being recognized as important and so the free energy principle is a modern incarnation of ideas that have been raised sporadically over at least the five decades

It combines traditions from physics, biology, neuroscience, and machine learning and other areas, especially the modifications and increasingly the applications.

And it's a bi-directional freeway.

It's not just two lanes in both direction.

It's going both ways.

So this is sort of the history, which is fun because it's a recent history in some parts.

okay section four moves from the historical to the philosophical so section four dialectic the free energy principle and related claims mathematical empirical and general claims section 4.1 this is where all that mathematics groundwork pays off because in the author's words we think a great deal of confusion can be overcome by considering three kinds of claims first there are mathematical claims

Those were the ones that were just brought up in earlier sections.

So that's the theorems, the scientific models, and the statistical techniques in the more narrow sense.

And by doing good scholarship, we show that the core features absolutely predate active inference.

And there's less controversial than some might suspect.

However, Frist and colleagues have since introduced many novel mathematical elements, like the perception and action interpretation on the Markov blanket.

Importantly, claims in this category do not need to be interpreted as statements about real systems in order to be evaluated.

So part one is it's instrumentalism.

Part two is separate the parts that predate active inference from some of these more recent derivations, even within the only technical area.

Second area of confusion, or the second way that confusion can be overcome by considering another kind of claim is partitioning off, you know, we can add like a line here, from that mathematical.

Everything that was in the section that we just discussed, plus stuff that was more recent, like 32,

There are empirical claims about cognitive and biological systems, how brains and bodies actually work.

These are the remit of cognitive neuroscience and biology.

So those are empirical biological claims.

Third are general claims that typically abstract across a wide range or by class of empirical claims.

So that's like the sort of

everything nested systems collective behavior angle so separating those and maybe there's more is really helpful because sometimes people say well this general claim is true because look at how this in the skin works well what about the skin well that look at how the math works and why does the math work that way because of the general claim is that an argument what is the justification and the links among these dialectical categories

Well, if there's three kinds of claims, mathematical, empirical, and general, then there are all the edges of that triangle.

If you had a fourth one, you'd have all the edges of a tetrahedra, and then you'd almost have a model.

The mathematical to empirical direction invites philosophical analysis due to novel interpretations of scientific model terms.

So how can math be used to justify empirical claims?

Why does equations have anything to do with what people say about the brain and the body and the niche?

Why is that justified at all?

Other than just other people and their epistemic authority have done it or it's how it has been done.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Instrumentalism also gives a kind of a bridge between realist science and applied science.

And it's kind of sitting somewhere between the two.

So I think that's quite a useful piece that this adds to the equation.


SPEAKER_01:
nice and then the last two edges of that triangle are how can mathematical not both directions on each edge you could add but how can mathematical claims justify general claims well how could you say that about nested systems about nested markov blankets the math

Okay, that's important to investigate.

And how can general claims justify empirical claims?

How could you say that about the ants?

Well, fitness or dissipative systems.

So how can general systems claims justify anything about empirics?

So those are some of the edges of these three kinds of claims.

And there's also claims and subclaims, which is why it's really important to have rhetorical ecosystem mapping

and in ontology for active inference so that we can actually learn and apply across languages and through time.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and I think also we can think of this as structural and functional insights being gained rather than necessarily repeatable measured outcomes every time being gained.

So there's an idea that these insights might reveal something about the structure or the functionality of the dynamics, knowing that no one simulation may ever be repeated quite the same way, particularly if it's got a fair few variables.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So the concluding remarks.

The active inference framework is incredibly ambitious.

Is it the framework or the people?

In its explanatory scope.

From humble beginnings as a theory of brain function, it is now positioned as a framework for understanding life itself.

There is a critical tradition in the philosophy of biology inspired by Richard Levin's with regard to such ambitions.

Many then

will approach active inference with skepticism.

Healthy skepticism is a good thing, but healthy skepticism is informed skepticism.

Unfortunately, getting one's head around the details of active inference is no small task.

Our goal in this introduction has been to clarify the basic mathematics, history, and internal dialectics of active inference, in that order, those were the sections, and draw attention to some key concerns.

With these details on the table, philosophers of biology are in a better position to critically evaluate the framework.

We look forward with interest to seeing the results.

Classic future-looking last sentence.

So, that's the final lines.

We have a ton of things to discuss in 37.1 and 2.

It'd be awesome to have any of the authors as well as any other people who just want to jump on for a returning or a first-time discussion.

But we'll close under the buzzer in the third period.

I know that's how they count up there, Dean.

So any final comments on just what you're looking forward to discussing?

Dean first, because you never get the last word, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I don't want the last word.

So one of the things I want to talk about in that point one is that the general claims, because I get to trot out one of my favorite parables that I made up, which is three functions walk into a bar.

And I want to be able to because I get lots of mileage out of that.

And whether it's three functions, or it's probability, preference and fit.

the same holds true it can be great taste and less filling so i want to have a look at that because i think that really tags on to the idea that what they're talking about here in terms of a guide could also set us up really well for creativity and then i also want to be able to say that that creativity isn't because we're framed in but because we can filter as well three interpretations of a function walk into a bar stephen


SPEAKER_00:
yeah i'm really curious about how um especially if we speak to the authors um these first principles of hidden states and inferences and which ones are selected and which data is available to actually make inferences on can be used um particularly for me the example of psychology versus coaching psychology and that type of uh paradigm shift


SPEAKER_01:
awesome yeah i really appreciated um both of your perspectives on this paper um it really shows how different life experiences can be in conversation with some of the technical details so thank you both and for everybody who's watching and participating see you around the lab see you in the upcoming weeks for dot one dot two peace thanks guys bye

## GHcpJ_bMuu4

SPEAKER_03:
All right, hello, and welcome to ActInflab live stream number 37.1, Free Energy, A User's Guide.

It's February 2nd, 2022.

Two, two, 22.

20 days till the big one, of course.

Welcome to Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at links here on this slide.

This is recorded in an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live stream.

Maybe people can raise their hand visually so there's not a little jitzy blip until we figure it out, or either way.

Go to activeinference.org if you want to learn more about participating or check the Coda link here.

okay today in 37.1 the goal is to learn and discuss and also appreciate having stephen mann the first author here with us this paper free energy a user's guide

And for this 37.1, we'll start with an introduction and then we'll just fire up some slides and hear perhaps an opening and a contextualizing statement from Stephen to be introduced last and then go into whatever questions that everyone else has brought and anyone watching live.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and I will pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, Stephen.

I'm a practice-based PhD researcher based in Toronto, and I'll pass it over to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Good morning, everybody.

I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary.

I'm somebody who did some programming, went from being an educator to a wayfinder, and I find guides really an interesting topic to have conversations around.

I'll pass it down to Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I'm a research consultant based out of New Mexico, and I will pass it to the first author, Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Stephen.

I am a philosophy PhD, currently a postdoc in the linguistics department at the University of Surrey, and a guest at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, where I live.


SPEAKER_03:
Alright, maybe Stephen, would you, or Stephen M, would you like to just give a little context on the paper?

Like, how did this fit into your PhD or research interests?

How did this specific collaboration come to be in the format of the paper and the way it is?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

Well, first, thanks for having me and thanks very much for last week's session with Dot Zero.

I think you did a really excellent job at overviewing and I'm really looking forward to talking about it today.

This paper came about because we, myself and Ross and Michael, the other authors, had been in discussions with a few other authors

around a symposium discussing active inference in the free energy principle and also predictive processing at the australian society for philosophy and psychology conference in 2018 we put together a small symposium um it went relatively well and um

After a few more months of sort of passing ideas back and forth, we approached Michael Weisberg, the editor of Biology and Philosophy, about putting together a topical collection, sort of like a special issue, but sort of collected digitally.

And eventually, sort of after sort of pitching it to him and managing to get to talk to him in person, he said that he and the other editors were quite excited.

But what they wanted was an introduction from us that would explain the mathematics and the philosophical dialectics behind sort of at the core of active inference and the free energy principle in a way that was accessible for philosophers.

And so we said, sure, we can do that.

And that was a little while ago.

We started soliciting out for papers.

We've now published most of the papers in that topical collection.

And since then, at the same time, sort of finalizing, finishing off my PhD and then moving to Europe from Australia where my PhD was, we were getting to grips with the real mathematical core of active inference and trying to figure out

what was the necessary mathematics to explain the basics of the framework, and then how to present that mathematics to a philosophical audience who has sort of some mathematical competence.

And the result is the current preprint.

So we think we're probably about one more set of revisions away from submitting for publication, and it will eventually come out as the introduction to that topical collection.

So what I'm really interested in hearing from everyone else today

uh this the same thing we're interested from hearing from the wider community which is the reason we release the preprint which is just comments and suggestions and any kind of corrections that can help improve the paper um so that its final form is sort of even better as good as we can make it okay thanks for the awesome context stephen s


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Yeah, we're really enjoying this paper.

And one thing that'll be interesting to think about, even though you sort of aimed it at maybe a philosophy audience, is some of the aspects of it at this nascent kind of foundational level

could help in an applied context that may be beyond the modeling.

So we're kind of interested in some of that.

So that might be something we might tip into, even if it's not in the remit of this paper's direct publication, I think it would be really helpful in the broader sort of journey of using active inference in the world.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_03:
okay um blue or dean would you like to start with a question or we can return to one of the points that were already kind of brought up i'm good for now um okay so maybe just one starting point was just what backgrounds like

How did you go from thinking about who you wanted to make the paper accessible to, to writing it a certain way?

And then you mentioned it was for philosophers.

So what is the impact in this community that you'd like to, how would you like to update their generative models?


SPEAKER_01:
Nicely put.

First and foremost, we would like to fix in their mind the relationship between variational inference and Bayesian inference.

So I know that's something you've talked about before.

It's something that predates the free energy principle and active inference as an explanatory framework for cognitive science and biology.

And it's something which, as far as I can tell, is sort of the first step in understanding what's going on with that mathematics.

So that's the sort of the key thing we want philosophers to sort of have in their minds.

Also because almost all philosophers, especially philosophers of cognitive science, but also philosophers of biology, will be familiar with Bayesian inference, at least to some extent.

So by pointing out that what active inference is, is something sort of a step to the right of Bayesian inference, something that they can start to understand by analogy with that, we hope it will stop them from sort of getting scared of all the complicated mathematics that you can read in a lot of the papers.

So that's on the math side.

On the philosophy side, a lot of the stuff in section four of the paper was our attempt to really strip back a lot of the claims that were being made, but also sort of categorize the claims that were being made.

One thing that I noticed in reading the literature and attempting to understand it was that different kinds of claims were being conflated and

there was jumping around from claims in different domains, mathematical claims that suddenly leveraged to justify an empirical claim and then suddenly moved to an extremely general claim about all of cognitive science or all of biology in general.

So that's the second thing we want the philosophers to get, that it is possible to disentangle these claims despite the fact that they are habitually sort of conflated or not made distinct enough in the rest of the literature.


SPEAKER_03:
All right, one follow-up, and then I see Steven and Dean.

You mentioned that Bayesian inference may be more familiar, especially because it's used in all kinds of modern statistical descriptive approaches as well as generative.

Just to hear it in your own words, where do you think variational inference is more familiar?

So who does it represent who's more familiar with variational methods or who would be familiar?

And then what are the key differences


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, so my understanding is that physicists, statisticians, and machine learning practitioners

may well have come across variational inference certainly will have had a much better chance of having come across variational inference than philosophers, at least as of 2022.

What I understand variational inference to be is a certain kind of technique for choosing a probability distribution over unobserved states.

that started in physics, as I understand it, with Feynman, although I put a little footnote in the...

preprint pointing out that I haven't been able to translate the stuff in that Feynman book to the latest stuff, especially stuff that David McKay talks about in his textbook on information theory, which includes some issues in variational inference.

But as I understand it, it started in physics, then was adopted into sort of statistics more broadly as a means of approximating Bayesian inference in cases where exact Bayesian inference is too difficult to carry out, too computationally difficult.

and then moved from statistics into machine learning, where it's possible to actually build machine learning algorithms or systems that can perform variational inference.

And then from there, it ended up in the active inference framework.


SPEAKER_03:
All right, thank you.

So Dean first.


SPEAKER_02:
Stephen, thanks for joining us.

I really appreciate it.

Here's a question for you.

Now that...

an examination of the situation and the situation, as you stated, was kind of math and philosophy

have now got a relationship and we're going to out pops a guidebook or a primer.

When the pump is primed, what do you see as being the effect of that relationship between the sort of philosophical audience and the math that was used to get us to this place?


SPEAKER_01:
relationship between the philosophical audience and the math that was used to get us to this place.

I mean, first and foremost, I want the philosophical audience to gain a certain kind of facility with the maths.

I think one of you, I'm not sure who of you it was, but in the point zero, put it extremely well by saying it's like learning how the horse moves in chess.

I think it might have been Daniel, but I don't want to misattribute it to you.

Giving the philosophical audience the basic understanding of the most basic maths.

will give them that first kind of tool, which they can then go on, if they so wish, to build up and learn more of the moves, learn more of the complex maths, if they want to then go on and interrogate the rest of that literature, which is more complex.

We've tried to sort of forego too much critical analysis in the paper.

There is some in there.

We've tried to forego that a little bit just in order to get the understanding of that maths across.


SPEAKER_03:
I can follow up there.

What does it matter for the philosophers?

So what are they in your sense or their sense?

What will knowing the difference between Bayesian and variational help them evaluate?

Or what will seeing it structured this way help them evaluate?

think there's a few so i hope other people also can think of philosophical questions that knowing the difference between the two would help you change your mind on yeah i mean the simple answer is just it will help them understand what friston is claiming


SPEAKER_01:
And by Friston, of course, I'm using him as just an umbrella for anybody who's writing positively in the active inference tradition, attempting to demonstrate that the active inference framework can provide or inform certain process theories that explain cognitive or biological systems.

Philosophers need to know the difference between Bayesian inference and variational inference because they need to know what it is that Friston is claiming can be attributed to systems like this.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Blue on that.


SPEAKER_06:
So I have a question and, um, like maybe I missed it and I was looking, I just did like a quick control up on the paper just to make sure that I didn't miss it.

And I'm not like misinterpreting, but, um, in your explanation of, um, the generative model, like, I just wonder why you didn't choose to.

go into the recognition model.

And I think that while you discussed at length P's and Q's, why did you leave that out?

Or do you think it's not significant?

Or did I miss it?

And did you talk about it at length?


SPEAKER_01:
So by the recognition model, I understand that to be a sort of alternative way of doing inference that an agent could employ.

So I'm saying what I understand by it so you can correct me before I try and answer the question.

I understand it to be, yeah, an alternative to generative inference is just to employ a kind of recognition model which simply takes in data and immediately produces some kind of statistical result from that data.

It doesn't need to simulate or generate its own data and then compare that to what it sees.

That would be the generative way.

Instead, it just applies some kind of, say, mathematical statistical function to the data and then gets a kind of result.

which describes what it hasn't observed.

Is that what you meant by recognition model?


SPEAKER_06:
No.

So I'm referring to the paper, The Tale of Two Densities, the 2019 paper by Bramsted et al.

And in that paper, they refer to the recognition model as the Q, right?

The inverse of the likelihood model.

It's the mapping from the consequences to

the hidden causes.

And so you got really into the maths and discussed the generative model, but just didn't acknowledge this recognition model.

And I just was curious as to why.


SPEAKER_01:
OK, so you just mean the distribution queue by the recognition model.

Am I using a different cue?

I haven't read A Tale of Two Densities, I should say.


SPEAKER_03:
The recognition model is in the kind of namespace of expectation maximization modeling.

The recognition model is like the sensory update

and then the generative part was like emphasized i hope that's not too simplified or what two densities were and then the outbound was more like associated with the generativity and that's also um that's why it's important to go from the frequentist to the bayesian at all because with bayesian generative modeling like the model can be run both ways

though it's used with different adjectives that's like variational autoencoder that's um

all these methods where it's not just descriptive modeling on a data set like principal component analysis or multiple regression it doesn't just describe then it can be used although those can be used or be thought of as bayesian like and be used in a generative way as well but that's the part that people will have less empirical experience seeing but let's think about this and then return to it next week um yeah okay so stephen s


SPEAKER_00:
Just following on from the Bayesian, which is often used in the embodied context.

People think about embodying and multisensory integration and that type of work.

And that field is a bit challenged by moving over to this variational machine learning paradigm because it's highly mathematical.

But what's interesting with active inference, it sort of comes back into...

that being grounded in embodied action, because that gives the preferences somewhere to be anchored.

So how do you see this going back into embodied cognition as a way for those preferences to be grounded?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a difficult one for me to answer in part because I'm not really part of the tradition that emphasizes embodied and inactive approaches to cognition.

The way I was taught it, they were sort of,

alternatives to the representationalist tradition and i was much more in the representationalist tradition so there has been some talk of whether and how free energy approaches support one or the other of those two traditions uh and to some extent because i'm already sympathetic to the representationalist tradition

I'm already leaning towards the idea that a free energy approach will support that, you know, as opposed to an embodied or an inactive kind of approach, which is sort of a shame because like all of those kinds of binaries, it's probably somewhat a false dichotomy.

And it just means that, you know, my direct, my attention has been directed elsewhere than your attention in looking at these issues.

And so, yeah, I don't have enough of value to add, unfortunately.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, Stephen, one second, but our previous paper, 36, was like a taxonomy of perspectives on the representation question in FEP.

So I think we're all very primed to just take a totally open stance and

is is every possible stance for every person to focus on it's just kind of not within our time and attention capacity so i think it just speaks to um like a diverse field where of course people are focusing on chemistry of this element of that element it won't be exactly that split but

in the broadening field of active inference and FEP, there's going to be people who are focused more on one question or other.

So that's kind of cool to know where we have similar regimes of attention or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

Yeah, I'm agreeing with Daniel.

And also, actually, we found this really, really helpful from an embodied perspective, because the way that you separated or you gave the probabilities and preferences of working together was...

it was kind of like a deflated or a more nascent form of representation.

And that jives quite nicely

with potential ways that inactive approaches are also potentially there because of the nature of preferences.

So you start to have a way where they can both live together.

Because I don't know, we were talking about this the other day, weren't we, Daniel, that it wasn't so clear how these two can live together.

And often when people who are from philosopher quote the free energy principle, they talk about early papers like 2008,

maybe 10 years ago even, and that is often then a false argument that gets painted.

So now we've almost got a new paper

which can kind of help ground those philosophers.

So I'm wondering what your thought is in terms of whether you're trying to help people use the most latest form of free energy principle when they were talking about philosophy and to stop some of the conflation of just people criticizing models which are now out of date, if that was part of your rationale for the way this paper was created.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, we absolutely wanted to direct people's attention to what we thought of as the real issues, in a way.

The appropriate issues.

I mean, we reckon that...

A critical assessment that is not well informed by the actual workings of the theory is not going to be helpful because you might accidentally hit on a critique that works, but only accidentally.

If you're going to criticize a framework, you better at least understand what's going on.

My worry is that it will become out of date as things change, but there's not a lot you can do about that.

I mean, it took us quite a long time to get this first draft together, to get this preprint together, and I'm sort of hoping that things haven't changed so much that it's out of date by the time it comes out.

I mean, one way to forestall that is to just be as basic as possible so that you're really capturing the core that can't possibly change.

But otherwise, your best chance is just to publish what you've got at a particular time and keep your eye on how things change and update as you go.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

Yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Stephen, I use a lot of metaphors.

So if you walked into a singles bar and one of the singles was a philosopher and the other single was a mathematician.

And you had to guess now going through the process of building that guy, right?

Like you're not match.com, but right.

You have to make a guess as to whether that long-term relationship, they walk out hand in hand or they're completely repulsed by one another.

I know it always depends, but you're talking about updating the guide.

I'm kind of want to go back one previous step.

What keeps them together?

What pulls them apart?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so how do you write what is essentially a philosophy paper but include mathematics in a way that does justice to both is roughly how I'm hearing that question.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, a long-term relationship, right?

Like, they've still got to have some compatibility.

Compatibility, right.

And Steven Sillard's point was...

Up to now, it's been, I don't know if I even want to go to the bar.

So that's what I'm asking you now, based on what you've journeyed into, right?

Because not everybody... I appreciate the idea of the guidebook because not everybody goes into situations...

Freely, right?

Sometimes you get dropped into situations and it's a little bit more intense.

But what causes people to go freely into that kind of relationship and sustain it over a long enough period that it does make sense?

It doesn't remain kind of a superficial thing or just a concept, but it actually becomes realized.

I was curious what your thoughts on that are.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I think that, you know, trying hard not to repeat myself too much.

The way I try to think about that question is to try and think about what has prevented philosophers from really accessing the mathematical parts of active inference so far.

And that's just from sort of communicating with philosophers and talking to them and hearing their dissatisfaction with it.

And it was always just that there was too much of it too fast.

And so the, the sort of the only approach we could see that could remedy that was to go as slow as possible in a way.

Uh, and so spend sort of have a much heavier, racier ratio of words to equations in a way, and go into much, much more depth in explaining each equation as it comes along.

rather than throwing all in at once and then decomposing it.

I mean, one of the earlier versions of the draft, we started with the main equations and then decomposed them.

In the current draft that you've read, we start with the components and then build up to the main equation.

That was a little bit risky, I thought, because I was worried that people would feel we were holding the main event back for too long.

But...

So far, it seems to be working, I'll say.

I'd be interested to hear your thoughts on that approach, whether you think that meshes together well enough.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, no, that's one of the things.

And again, I don't think mathematicians are trying to be pushy.

But if you don't have that context, it can feel pushy.

And so how long you're willing to leave something open before you drop the big question is sometimes easier for somebody then to size the situation up and contextualize it.

So in this delivery, I don't know previous versions, right?

But in this delivery, in that respect, I actually think it makes it easier


SPEAKER_00:
less intimidating but that's just my that's my personal opinion sorry steven i know you wanted to say something steven yeah just carrying on from what dean was saying as well is um you you looked at the inference model

almost prior to having a Markov blanket.

And I thought that was quite useful.

And one thing that made me think as I was reading it, and I'd be interested in your thoughts, is it helps with this idea of really thinking about how are we going to create the blanket?

When does the blanket come into play?

And what assumptions are there about the blanket?

And in some ways,

it's easy to pick up a pre-built idea of what blankets are and then model off that, whereas it's like, okay, well, let's question that.

And that actually could be useful at a more heuristic level, you know, for other fields of practice.

So I'd be interested in your thoughts about what you think your motivation for that and also maybe the sort of surprising or unsurprising outcomes of not going straight for the blanket.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, one of the big revelations for me in researching this paper was that you can talk about variational inference and you can talk about minimizing expected free energy without talking about Markov blankets.

I had sort of come into this with just sort of a huge deluge of literature from the active inference tradition, lots and lots of like keywords,

Well, what could more uncharitably be called buzzwords like Markov blanket and non-equilibrium steady states and things like this?

And it was a concern that I would first have to understand statistical physics and fluid dynamics before I could understand the claims that were being made about inference.

But looking back into the history and you realize that, first of all, variational inference.

is a precursor to active inference.

So you can think about variational inference in its own little bubble as we have it in its own little section.

And then the sort of next step, which is novel and is quite excitingly novel, which is minimizing expected free energy, can also be construed just in terms of decision theory.

You don't, as far as I can see, you don't have to think or talk about Markov blankets at all to talk about decision theory as

minimizing expected free energy.

So the reason why we separated them was because they're separable.

The reason why we put those two first variational inference and expected minimizing expected free energy is because I think they are simpler and easy to grasp.

And we were trying to start from the simple and build up to the more complex.

It's, I think it's definitely true that the most sort of intriguing and possibly the most sort of difficult part of understanding this whole idea

system which friston is building is understanding the things to do with markup blankets in real like physical situations um but

what I'm sort of interested in now to give you a preview of what I'm like thinking about next.

The thing which I'm more optimistic about being able to make headway on is investigating minimizing expected free energy as a decision theory.

That sort of gets the middle ground between, it's not just something that prefigured active inference as variational inference did.

It's not something that seems to require a very large amount of mathematical understanding as the Markov blanket stuff does seem to, to me.

It's something which is claimed to be a certain way of approaching decision theory.

Decision theory is sort of a philosophical sort of technical term or statistical term.

So it's that nice middle ground between novel but understandable, which is why the thing that I'm sort of most interested in investigating next is the expected free energy approach.

And again, I don't think you need to talk about Markov blankets to talk about that.


SPEAKER_03:
okay thanks for sharing that one thought on where the Markov blanket comes in so you said that variational inference and the minimization of expected free energy in the context of a paper that was structurally laid out with first perception and then introducing action into the loop so it kind of

fits this perception of case as like action affordances are not possible and so that's the special case the more general case is when action can come into play that whole realm of action theory decision theory game theory cybernetics signal processing none of that it was said requires the markov blanket formalism

I'd like to maybe add that there may be a weak sense requirement, like in the sense that on a Bayesian graph or using Bayesian methods, using Perl 1988 version of the Markov blanket, there are Markov blankets in the machinery of these Bayesian methods, because there are variables that are isolated or conditioned on each other.

so that's like the trivial markov blanket the non-contentious one that people are not spending a lot of time and attention on that um and then part of the unknown or at least less clear is the action and perception

interpretation or concordance that fristen has introduced kind of taking the unitypal markov blanket concept and splitting it into like an incoming sense state dependency and an outgoing action state and then none of that gives a clear action perception topology which is why we've seen like around the clock and then with the ones like action and sense are connected and backwards arrows so

There's the part about the partitioning of the Markov blanket and then taking something that's kind of a trivial consequence of statistical models and then tying it to potentially realism in the strong cases, like people saying Markov blankets as defining things.

And then even just within the formalism, how do you go from, how do you ramp up the meaning of this Markov or does it need to even be that way?

which is kind of related to this question which I'll ask and then anyone can give a thought like you talked about necessary and sufficient so is this some of the necessary and sufficient pieces of FEP what is what is necessary like what's the kernel that everything else can continue to elaborate around

What section and page number, please?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, you'll notice that we were cheeky in defining three distinct free energy principles, probably none of which would be assented to by the actual proponents of the free energy principle.

Yeah, exactly.


SPEAKER_03:
Could you go through and just describe in a few sentences or just what is each one of these, the three free energy principles, inference, action, selection, what did they mean to you?


SPEAKER_01:
First one, free energy principle for inference, as we've defined it, is when updating your... Sorry, my cat is biting me.

Ow.


UNKNOWN:
Sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll hold him up here so he doesn't bite me.

Well, the short version is choose Q by minimizing F. So choose your beliefs about hidden states by minimizing variational free energy.

So that's a principle in the sense that philosophers would call a normative principle.

It's a command for how to act.

In this case, the specific kind of action that is how to choose your beliefs.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
And free energy principle for action, also a normative principle telling you how to act.

And this one is, again, in our terminology, choose Z by minimizing G. So choose your action by minimizing its expected free energy.

this is all for anybody who's watching this who hasn't looked at the paper we've tried to sort of describe um in very slow but understandable way what what these different sort of letters are standing for uh let me give the definitions for a discrete case okay so we have perceptual inference


SPEAKER_03:
Bayesian expectation maximization like.

Choose Q, the member of the variational family distribution, by minimizing this snapshot F based upon your priors, basically, and new information coming in.

And then that takes on a normative interpretation.

It's kind of like saying, if you were doing linear regression, you would do the L2 norm least squares.

If you're doing this type of regression,

then do this kind of inference the second one is also normative but it's action theoretic because you introduced action and then that introduced the elaboration on f to the g function um maybe stephen s how would you say that this movement into the future first matters for maybe not necessarily how a philosopher but how um

any other relevant area might see this in an applied context.

Like what does the F to G movement have to do?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I think it's, I think what's useful is that it's like, it's almost taking what's evolved out with a Markov blanket with the expected free energy and bringing it back down into a more

a form which isn't only a form which is involved in the modelling out of particular systems at low dimensionality.

It's coming in and saying, okay, this is a broader principle that can be talked about.

And I think that then ties into some of the stuff the Active Inference Lab is trying to look at.

So how can active inference itself be used as a way to think of organising and structuring our lives, like George Parekh might have thought about it, and how

Can it be used as a heuristic in areas like coaching psychology, in areas where you're looking at action-orientated decision support in complex, evolving ways?

So you can't model it.

the in the traditional sense of a market because there's nowhere near the dimensionality can be approached so what's useful is they say okay look we've got these general ideas we've got a route to it but that this the general deflated forms of that actually then because they're not so high order and they're not so

nailed down to one idea of a Markov blanket maybe has a more universal application when someone's trying to look at complex contexts and how to act in the world.

So I don't know what your thoughts on that, but that's what I'm very interested in is this idea between sort of

diagnostic kind of syndrome-based psychology and how do we look at actually what's going on in a context look at the the symptoms look at the context unfolding and work on modeling using our own apparatus as dialogical sort of collaborative human beings


SPEAKER_03:
steven uh uh dean first and then steven m if you want to give a thought on that and we're just going to talk about this inference and action piece because i think there's a few more pieces to draw out and then we'll get to the third selection but dean go for it


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so back to my strange twisted metaphor.

So now all of a sudden the philosopher walks into the bar, and instead of one math showing up, we'll call it the geometry, which is much more amenable to the model in terms of how a philosopher might walk into a space and see the geometry first.

All of a sudden there's two maths.

There's a statistical math that's showed up at the same time.

Are they twins?

What's going on here?

And I think that's where the guide is kind of handy because if you first walk into the space, I'm not arguing that a Markov blanket exists.

I think relationship matters.

But I think what most people that walk into that bar

don't realize is that you're walking in on two different maths and they're both showing up at the same time when you were expecting one.

You were expecting to be able to work with a model.

which is, as I said, it's far more proximal to the geometry math than to the statistical one.

And so I think that again, when we're talking about guides, I don't have to, I can put my hand in the ocean and figure out what the current is, and I can look up at the stars and figure out where I am in that invariant space.

I don't necessarily have to have a laptop

with the statistical distribution.

I mean, that might help, but that's not a tool that I need at first hand.

Whereas I think the modeling part, which is what you were trying to bring up with this guide, is at hand.

And so it's the availability piece that I think philosophers are trying to

What did I walk into here?

That's essentially what am I walking into and what is the betweenness of those two types of math that they're probably, if they're like me, but I'm not a philosopher, they're asking when they're being introduced to this.

So I'm just curious, again, if I'm going way off on a tangent or if we're introducing something, we actually know what we're being introduced to.

And that's the part where Stephen Hughes talked about slowing down.

Because I really agree.

It's not a breaking down.

It's an actual slow down.

Nothing wrong with that.

Whoa.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I could try and approach an answer by sort of extending your metaphor if you'll give me license to do so.

Imagine you're going to the bar and there's dozens or even hundreds of people

Maths or different components of maths or different approaches to maths.

And what you'd really like is some way of pairing that down to something that is approachable.

You know that only a few of these will be approachable, but you don't know which ahead of time.

I'd like to think that you could use what we've written as at least the first step to pairing some of that away.

So what we've left out essentially is the stuff that you could pair away and say, I can't approach that yet.

What I know I can approach is these first few things.

And what I like to think is that we've...

done okay at getting at least some of those first few things in there.

You know, not too much, not too little.

It's really trying to find that Goldilocks zone.

And those will be the ones that are approachable, even, you know, approachable for a philosopher.

who's met very little maths before.

I know I owe Stephen S a response to your earlier question as well, but if you want to go ahead first, Stephen, or Daniel, you'd say what?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, Stephen S, go for it.

Yeah, I was just saying, maybe bring up slide 13 if you're able to, Daniel, because that might be a useful one.

Yep.

Just as it has.

I have it.

Yeah.

Because that's got a little bit there about the penalty for overfitting, penalty for failing to explain the data.

And that has...

Oh, is it?

Oh, wait a sec.

Maybe I'm looking at the numbers at the bottom.

Okay.

But on page 23 or slide 35 here.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Yeah.

Slide 21.

Yes.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
This definitely juxtaposes the F and the G.

it's like a Pokemon evolution, but it includes those different pieces about bringing in action with the uncertainty on the consequences of action and the fundamental and the ability to impact it.

But that was actually what I had kind of written down.

So Steven made the point about how action is a lower dimensional space.

And that's like,

making an algorithm tractable like conditioning inference on action which is something that's very different structurally than a lot of other control theory where the target of inference is a policy selection here the affordances play a little bit of an upstream role and they make the downstream calculation conditioned on action so that speaks to a different embeddedness of action in active inference and then

a few other things but first stephen m what would you what was the answer that you owed the other stephen


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, I was really just picking up on the point that Stephen made about the difficulty of accurately modeling.

And we talk about this a lot in the philosophy of science.

I mean, in the philosophy of any of the special sciences, but in the sort of philosophy of science more broadly, one of the biggest topics is modeling.

And one of the biggest questions is how...

how do you trade off between getting a model which is a perfectly accurate representation of the thing that you are modeling versus something that is tractable and that you can handle.

And the analogy is always made with maps.

That's sort of the first analogy.

You can't have a map that is an exact replica of its territory because you wouldn't be able to use it to navigate.

It could not provide you

with anything that was more helpful than the territory itself.

So we have some kind of practical knowledge of how to make maps.

We know what to leave out.

We know how to condense it.

We should at least shrink it, usually, if we're creating a map from a territory.

What we don't really have

in a very general sense across all of science, is a set of principles for how, given a specific situation that is too complex to produce a perfect representation of, what ought you leave out and what ought you keep in, and how should you transform that space into a representation of that space in order to produce a representation that is a useful approximation of it.

So the question coming, you know, back to the formalism would be, how do you choose a kind of a Q distribution, your approximate distribution, the thing that you're going to harbor in your brain and believe that throws out enough of the useless stuff of the real world, but keeps in enough of the stuff that you really need to keep in, in the world.

This is sort of the, one of the big questions in philosophy of science and I guess science proper at like the early 21st century.

Hmm.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome answer.

Thank you, Dean.

And then Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just real quick.

So, Daniel, when Daniel talked in the point one about the third P, but he called it the P-H-I-T-N-E-S-S, the fitness.

That's what basically you're describing.

How do we take that fitness?

variance field and collapse it down to something more tractable as you said.

And so at some point later on, either later on today or in our next live stream, I think that's what the active inference model, which is not a map,

And it has probably two parts.

It has a frame, but it also has a filtering effect.

Maybe we can talk a little bit about that because that's what the fitness is really about.

So I'm looking forward to sort of diving a little bit deeper on that because it's not just a back and forth across and reaching edges.

It's actually going deeper into it and then returning from.

So, yeah, I'm kind of looking forward to that from a mathematical standpoint as well.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Dean.

Blue?


SPEAKER_06:
So that's a perfect segue, fitness, into what I was going to bring up.

And so, Stephen, something that you mentioned earlier is your attempt to capture the essence of the FEP and the things that will not change and kind of build slowly, incrementally.

And so...

if we have a theory that does not change, essentially like does not evolve, it will die.

Like it will become extinct because we're constantly learning new things.

And so, I mean, I think I like from a counterpoint think that it's kind of critical to capture the evolution of the FEP over time because

it really changes the potential applications and ways that people interpret the principle and the theory of active inference also.

And so if it doesn't change, I mean, will it not ever change?

Or is it subject to change?

Or just what are your thoughts on that?

Like, is it totally inflexible, these points that you've attempted to lay out?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I mean, yeah, that general point is very well taken indeed.

I guess I think that by trying to capture something that we thought wouldn't change, I think we meant or I should have said we're trying to capture the parts of it that the rest of the framework will continue to depend on

for sort of as long as possible.

We've tried to keep the most stable parts of it without necessarily implying that active inference could survive without these mathematical components, but just that

The change to the theory or the change to the approach would have to be so radical once you'd got rid of these core mathematical components that someone could legitimately ask, is it still the same theory?

So that's roughly what I would mean by essential such that.

If, for example, tomorrow, Friston were to say, we don't need to talk about variational inference anymore, or we don't need to talk about minimizing expected free energy anymore.

Someone could legitimately ask, okay, is he now talking about a new theory that's no longer active inference?

Is it so different because he's thrown out that sort of fundamental part that he's now actually proposing something completely different?

I think that someone could legitimately ask that question.

I think that a reasonable person could say that he's now talking about a different theory because I think that those mathematical parts are so crucial to it, as opposed to some of the other parts, which seem, some of the more complex parts seem more dispensable.

You could throw out some of the more complex things, keep these more basic things, and you would still more likely be having the same theory.


SPEAKER_03:
Yablou?


SPEAKER_06:
So just to respond quickly, so for me, that's kind of an arbitrary line in the sand.

And one thing that we've talked about back and forth a lot is this concept of ergodicity and an ergodic system versus a non-equilibrium steady state density, locally ergodic.

What does it mean?

And if we throw out ergodicity and eliminate this requirement, is the theory still the same theory?

And so that's one point, but I mean, there are many points in the minimization of free energy and so on and so forth.

And so as we add on to the theory,

we are changing the theory all the time.

Like as new papers come out, like the recognition model versus the generative model and, you know, Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes was kind of really highlighting a couple of key points, but as the theory goes and changes,

It's like at any point we could say, well, that's not the same theory.

And so if the theory is not allowed to evolve over time, like it's just this arbitrary point in the sand that we don't want to cross, like the minimization of free energy.

What if we decided that the minimization of free energy means something totally different?

Like even in this paper, I mean, you had in a footnote about the complexity versus accuracy, but to refer to free energy as inaccuracy is like,

I've not heard of it described that way before.

And so for me, I mean, it is this complexity and accuracy and I understand like the, um, the way that you framed it, but it's a completely like novel way to talk about free energy.

Like I always hear about as here, here it's been framed in terms of like uncertainty or surprise, but not in accuracy.

Like that was completely.

like caught, took me off guard actually.

So, I mean, as the theory evolves, like, I don't know, it's just, what are the, what's the irreducible component of the FPP?

Like does such a thing exist or is it just turtles the whole way down?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, you're asking me the really hard questions.

I like this because it's tough.

It's really tough to think.

It's honestly, yeah, it's tough to think and answer that and to ensure that I'm answering sort of honestly as to what I really believe as opposed to just trying to sort of dismiss what you say.

You know, I'm not trying to dismiss what you say.

I do think...

that the line is blurry, so it's not clear and distinct.

I don't think that it's arbitrary.

I might be wrong in that, but I don't believe that it's arbitrary.

Let me just leave to the side for a moment the description of free energy as inaccuracy.

I'll come back to that, because I'm interested in picking up what you think about the different interpretations of the function f. But I'll try and go back to the idea of herbicity.

Yeah, there's a sense in which things are still being worked out.

And one of the things we put in the paper is something that we were urged to make clear, which is that active inference is a work in progress.

Even the sort of mathematical underpinnings are still being worked

fleshed out in a sense or still being put together in a way that helps connect the different parts of the theory okay that's okay that that in fact was a little bit difficult for me to swallow at first because i felt that if that's true then it doesn't legitimate all of the strong claims that are being sort of made but all of our complaints about that are in that fourth section of the paper um so we tried to make clear what we think is sort of justified and not justified on that basis but it's still true to say that it's fair to have a framework and to you know to expend time trying to

put together the mathematical underpinnings of this framework, even though they don't yet exist.

You know, we don't have to, we shouldn't just throw out the theory or disparage it just because the full maths hasn't been worked out yet.

I agree.

We should allow it to change.

We should allow it to evolve.

We should allow it to be applied to different things and see what works and what doesn't.

With all that being said, I don't think, in this particular case, maybe it's true of other theories, but for active inference, I don't think that it's true that there are things that you could remove and still reasonably say, yeah, this is still active inference.

I think...

a theory could not be that amorphous and still be treated seriously as a way of pursuing science.

I think that you would have to say, if you threw out minimizing variational free energy, or you threw out minimizing the expected free energy, or some other of the core components,

I think you would have to say, if you're being reasonable, again, the word reasonable is doing a lot of work in this paragraph that I'm building up to.

I think you would have to say, okay, it's a different theory.

I think you'd have to say, okay, we were wrong to pursue the minimization of variational free energy as a principle for understanding the behavior of biology and cognition.

We were wrong to pursue that.

We're going to pursue something else instead.

And so you couldn't just say, oh, it's still the same theory, but we've changed this core component of it.

I don't think that line is arbitrary.

I think there are some things that if you change, you have to sort of admit that you're wrong about that approach and go on to something else.

That's sort of my piece.

I've talked for a real long time.

I do want to pick up the idea of free energy as a function that measures inaccuracy, but I don't want to talk for like a huge amount of time.

So maybe I should put a pin in that and we could potentially return to it later.


SPEAKER_03:
How about first free energy selection, Stephen M, finish that three, then as the inaccuracy, then I have a point.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, great.

Yeah, I forgot we were only two thirds of the way through our descriptions of the different free energy principles.

I'm sorry.

So free energy principle for selection.

Let me try and pull it up here so I can just read it directly off the page.

What we have it as is any system that survives long enough will act so as to appear to be minimizing F. One of the issues here is that we've left out G, but for the sake of sort of focusing our attention, we can just talk about F. Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
And then how about the FEP or free energy as inaccuracy interpretation?


SPEAKER_01:
Great, yeah.

So this is something that I was hoping would be, again, a way to present it to philosophers so that it would be easier for them to grasp what was going on.

I wanted them to understand, why do we care about this function f?

Why do we care about variational free energy?

Well, suppose that I tell you that in order to do inference, what you ought to do is minimize variational free energy.

And then you could very well say, why?

Why should I care about minimizing this thing?

And then if I tell you, oh, it's the measure of the cost of inaccuracy in belief, then you immediately say, OK, I understand why I would want to minimize that, because I want to maximize my accuracy.

So very simply put, it's a way of explaining why we should care about f. It's a measure of inaccuracy.

I think that that interpretation holds up just to the extent that if you look at the two components, which can be sort of thought of as a cost penalty for overfitting, a cost penalty for being inaccurate, there's a part of that which is inaccuracy.

It's not the whole story, of course, because the other part is to do with complexity, not just to do with accuracy.

So what I think we've done by describing free energy as a measure of inaccuracy or the measure of the cost of inaccuracy is...

trading off that sort of ability to enter into understanding the maths for a perfectly clear, mathematically very precise way of describing it.

But I definitely think that it should be thought of as containing a term which is a cost of inaccuracy.


SPEAKER_03:
So we talked in the dot zero about it's kind of like finding the shape from the data and the fineness of the mesh and inaccuracy in the real world kind of has elements of both, or at least we're used to thinking about complex decision trade-offs.

Like you could make a bad decision because it took too long, but then you came to the right outcome in the scheme of thinking bigger than just one p-value.

And so it's kind of,

opening up even this very kernel piece of the puzzle to the whole question of how specific and how many subgroups and always leaving space for not overfitting given this whole map territory borges discussion um stephen s


SPEAKER_00:
And would you say that the overfitting inaccuracy is more around when you talk about adaptive active inference, where there's a way to adaptively look and have an idea of beliefs in some way, and that underneath that, there could be a kind of a,

more abductive swarming kind of entropic kind of process which is sits in the background but in terms of how we normally explicitly think about meaning we would think about it more in terms of what can be understood as beliefs so just be interested how that how you see that from a philosophical point of view


SPEAKER_01:
Well, one of the things that's still unclear to me about the overfitting part of F is that it seems that it can only be interpreted as sort of a cost of complexity if what you already believe is simple.

because what it's really measuring is how far you are straying from what you already believe.

So that there's kind of an implication there that everybody always has simple beliefs in the first place and that therefore they ought not stray from those simple beliefs.

One of the things that I'm trying to think about now is what happens if you are starting with sort of more complex beliefs?

Maybe that's not a sort of appropriate question to ask given the framework or the way we're supposed to interpret the maths, but I can't help wondering it, given that it strikes me that in order to interpret it, there's a penalty for complexity.

You have to say, you have to assume that what you're starting with is simplicity.

And I guess there would be real life situations in which you don't start with simple beliefs.

And then presumably this would tell you, well, if your beliefs are complex, then they ought to stay complex because that penalty is a penalty for straying from that kind of complexity, which seems, you know, different from how it's usually described.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, Stephen S. And would you say that that falls into our more recent move from science as creating models and fitting things to those models in the most simple way to be modelers, like with post-normal science and even Friston's work with the COVID.

So there's a belief in engaging with a complex, non-resolvable world

system question which is different to science's traditional role which is to have an answer and to fit things to it.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, one of the most exciting and sort of scary aspects of active inference is the idea that it's applied not just as a way of understanding what our target systems are doing, so not just as a way of understanding what a biological system or a brain that I'm studying is doing, but also as a way of understanding what I myself am doing when I represent that target system in order to try and understand it.

You get a kind of...

loop in a way, in a sort of sense in which you feel as though you could model your own activity by using these technical tools which Active Inference is giving you.

but then you feel like how could that be done in a way that doesn't invite any kind of infinite regress?

That's why it's scary as well as exciting.

It's exciting because it seems to potentially provide some kind of extra power or insight into our own activities as scientists or as modelers of any kind, but it's scary because it seems to then drop you into a kind of spiraling hole of the modeler who is modeling themself, modeling themself, et cetera.

That's something which I can't think around even informally, let alone try and get to the formalism of it.


SPEAKER_03:
That was the very structure of paper number 36.

So even in its qualitative application, just at the terms and concept level, it does turn the mirror back.

And that is speaking to the pre and post or pre-post trans distributional aspects of ACT-INF.

The...

all the funny things that dean says as well and the strange loop there so what that made me think of is like the statistics and then the famous quote like the statistician can come in for the post-mortem or something like that but a lot happens before the statistics happen like the design of the experiment and so the optimal experimentation and then the knowledge that it will be passed through a distributional filter

in the big macro of the scientific method, like planning months in advance for how many minutes and hours one is going to count insects or how many microliters of a fluid they're going to move.

That is sort of the implementation phase.

And then there's a design time.

And so that's also what ties science to engineering in a way that it hasn't been in design thinking in a lot of other areas too.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, this is awesome.

So, I mean, one of the things that we talk about is some of those density questions around what's the linear aspect of it and what's the solenoidal aspect of it.

And we also talk about walking into a room of mirrors with a mirror suit on.

I mean, it all comes together in the sense that there, I think one of the things that Steven Mann pointed out is that there are, I think there are, one of the things I think we can say about active inference that's consistent is that it has at least a minimum of two in that back and forth up and down the density bump and around the density bump, you can go either direction and

So that has me asking whether every time we say that this is a framework, whether we're only giving it half its due, whether it's a framework and also a filtering exercise, like does there have to be a minimum of two, not just the boundary, but then what is actually going on dynamically within that border

so that we know when we're crossing, when we know when we're within the boundary that we've maybe are looking at empirically, right?

Because we selected our unit of analysis, but then when we know when we've crossed outside that, when we've gotten to a place where the mesh is holding certain things back while other things that are of a smaller circumference are still able to sort of pass through.

And so I think as a guide,

that question of as we model, as we model, the model is the minimum.

I think if we just say the model, we don't do it justice.

And if we just look at that as we model, the act of doing that, I think, again, we're looking at sort of a side of beef and expecting to be able to milk it.

And I don't think that that works.

I think you have to have the whole thing or else you don't really have active inference.

So...

I think that's kind of where we're at when we're coming to the place where we're trying to decide what goes in and what doesn't go into a guide.

And it's a struggle, right?

There's no question it's probably one of the hardest things that you can do because the majority of people that are guides are there because they've been there before versus the one who hasn't.

And that would require upending that basic premise, which is, no, everybody has to get into the boat and we're sailing off onto the event horizon.

That would be the only way that we would change that.

So the actual nature of guides would only change if everybody had to get their skin in the game and start at that basic place of not knowing.

But we'll leave that for another discussion.

another live stream.

But at this point, that's what's really interesting here.

One of the assumptions that we made is somebody has taken the time to go and search and explore and come back with information and the other people don't have it.

And the only way that changes is if everybody gets in the boat and sails off and hopes that they don't come to the edge of the cliff and fall off, so.


SPEAKER_03:
okay a lot there thank you dean just a few other points people have different perspectives on what is core or not some of the uncertainty let's get at it with the ontology development and making some definitions and translations and the formalisms clear in the history of science and all of that but even then it might be pretty fundamental like if it includes action and inference these variational methods necessary

So who knows?

People will have different interpretations just about a lot of things.

And so that's, again, all part of the fun.

So Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
So one question I'd be interested in is talking about guides in terms of that book, Life, a User's Guide.

That's a very deep...

read it for a long time and then i lost it but it's sort of like it takes you into all these aspects of people's lives in that parisian neighborhood and um it never gives you an answer it doesn't but it in some ways it's leaving it to your intuition it's leaving to um your

integration and i'm wondering where you see that that integration that's happening at a non-perspectival level the integration the intuition the the affective consciousness that is part of our knowing and how that relates to this and maybe if it's even something that's not part of science but is part of this kind of work


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, firstly, you sort of cracked the code in a way because the title of the paper was directly and explicitly stolen from the correct book.

It wasn't necessarily a sort of...

the best like joke because it's not it's in a in the sense in which the book is about an incredibly hyper specific and detailed description of a system you know an apartment block at a specific time point on a specific day of the year gave me the idea about okay it's like it

It's not true that we ever really represent things that way.

It's not true that science intends to represent things that way in the way that Perrette does and is sort of making fun of.

But also he's incredibly constrained in the way that he wrote the book, as I understand.

There's some...

there's some really crazy games that he plays with language in writing it.

And that caused, for example, translators a huge amount of difficulty in translating it because how do you know, how do you translate the game that he's played in French into a game that you can play in English while writing the English version of the novel?

So definitely the idea of representation

and sort of naturalism was on my mind.

But the short reason we called it that is because we wanted a punchy title.

We wanted something that people would think was accessible.

But definitely when it came to casting about for punchy and accessible titles, that was the one that primarily came to mind.

Where it comes to sort of

affective consciousness and sort of experience, again, it's a little outside my wheelhouse.

I was very, very impressed upon by the novel, even just in the English translation because I can't read French.

I was really, really sort of moved by it in various different ways, you know, intellectually, emotionally, things like that.

There's a lot about sort of representation in there, just the concept of representation.

And that's something that I'm interested in.

But again, that pulls sort of in the opposite direction from an activism or affective consciousness and things.

And I'm very much situated in that kind of formal dry approach to philosophy, the kind of analytic tradition where we try and chop things down.

We think we're scientists inspecting the human condition under a microscope.

Um, and so, but you know, I can't deny that in reading a novel, it flows over me in the same way, you know, I'll experience it in a similar way that you experience it.

I hope.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, blue.


SPEAKER_06:
So totally funny.

Um, I was also had a question about a guide, but like on the opposite of like life, a user's guide, I was reminded of the movie Beetlejuice.

and they, like, the couple dies, and they have this, like, handbook for the recently deceased, right?

And, like, the core of, like, the theme that they can put, well, did you read the guide?

Well, did you read the guide?

And it's apparently, like, a very thick, dense book, like, that, no, like, you can't, I mean, we're dead, and we don't know what to do, and we're freaking out, and we don't have time to sit down and read this book.

And so I was reminded of that, which is kind of totally juxtaposition, but it's, like, when you are creating a guide, it's very difficult to, like,

make it usable, right?

Like the map versus the territory, like what,

what will people read and be able to take away and walk away with some kind of general understanding versus like, if you really want to know what to do when you're dead in this situation, you've got to read the book, you know, how to like haunt the house and all these things.

And so like, do we really need to like pull grip of the FPP to really sit down with the guide, you know, whatever, like 3000 page manual

Or, like, how do you distill the essence of something that's so complicated?

Like, what is it to be dead?

Or what is the FEP, right?

It's hard.


SPEAKER_01:
That's such a good example.

It's a handbook for the long-lived, I guess, the free energy principle, as opposed to a handbook for the recently deceased.

Yeah, what is the line that they have in that?

It's something like some incredibly dry statement, which is absolutely no help at all.

Like operational parameters vary from manifestation to manifestation or something.

And yet, I mean, the idea behind it was that the philosophers that we talked to that urged us to try and research and write this were pointing out that when they attempted to read those papers in the active inference tradition, even those that were billed as tutorials,

It was like trying to read the handbook for the recently deceased.

It was, if not too long, then at least too dense.

And they couldn't pick apart those statements because they were too condensed.

And so, yeah, the difficulty was big.

un-condensing it, pulling it apart, selecting what was necessary, and then presenting it in an accessible way.

I mean, all I'll say is that it took sort of on the order of years to do it.

We sort of got commissioned, as it were, in 2019.

I started researching it in earnest at the beginning of 2020.

And it went through a few drafts, and people gave us a lot of comments behind the scenes.

But the first preprint came out in December 2021.

yeah it's for me at least and for us the authors it was that difficult to trawl through the literature find what was necessary and then present it in a presentable way but that's such a great example thanks so much that hadn't crossed my mind but i love that film and the concept of the handbook as well


SPEAKER_03:
just a few comments on that it's not called free energy principle a user's guide it's actually very specific it's about the variational free energy and the expected free energy f and g respectively what's the fep so that's sort of where it takes you and it's very subtle then um that was pretty interesting a handbook for the long lived and

it reminded me about metacognition in learning and about what we expect and prefer and think we can know and how like just being a um learner and like a teacher's assistant seeing how there'd be lecturers that would give um maybe it could be thought of in sort of an effigy framework another day but they would simplify and learners would have high precision on a very simple model

And then other times they would convey too much of the complexity.

And so at the end of the quarter, even if the students learned a ton and they would still feel like lost in a bigger space and there's like good and bad aspects of all of that.

So I think this is kind of like a snapshot.

It's kind of cool that it is so recent.

That was only a few months ago, right?

Now that it's February 22.

But this is very recent and still kind of ongoing that you're looking to update it to.

So it's sort of like a kind of window where there's interactions with the community and hopefully people really think about it.

And the people for whom a section isn't clear have an opportunity through this affordance we have now as scientific publishing with preprints like to ask or correct or you missed a citation here.

That is awesome.

And it's a world apart from sort of three people with it on their desk who are delaying it in review.

And then maybe they have good comments, maybe they don't.

But here there can be something that's so much beyond that as this is just like one thing that you're working on and you're developing.

And then one last comment on that is like SPM, the textbooks are still kind of classics, cult classics, we might even say.

And it's not that the notation hasn't changed a lot because it has in some cases, it's a snapshot and there's some amount of linking back to the past that's clarifying.

And then there can be an understanding that there's drift and focus and evolution of techniques.

And the SPM textbook, it's going to have sentences that you wouldn't include if you're writing it today.

Great.

That's why it's different.

But also there's something about it that helps inform.

So every snapshot that's well intended always is good.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think one of the other things that's really interesting about this is Stephen M. has kind of pointed to the length of time when the question was posed, can you summarize this for us?

Can you synopsize this for us?

Basically what the philosopher, it sounds to me is what the philosophers were asking was, can you go and do

the figuring out and then present that to us in a finding out way.

Will you save us time?

And so I think that's one of the things we have to keep front of mind when we look at this, because those philosophers now didn't do the two years of heavy lifting and searching and foraging.

That's a whole different aspect.

That figuring out is a whole different processing method and mechanism than the finding out, right?

And so again, if you want people

If you want people to come away from guide use with more than the finding out, they're still going to have to get in the field and do the figuring out themselves.

And it's that interaction part which

Thank goodness for Blue and Beetlejuice because that was, again, that was just a wicked example, right?

Because the timing of this, the when-ness of this really, really matters.

And I know that in a lot of educational settings, time is at the essence, right?

13 weeks, X number of hours, blah, blah, blah.

We tend to get that.

That's the only part of the when-ness that we focus on.

Not...

Should the guide or the plan be the thing that initiates all the action, or is that the thing that falls out afterwards?

If we're doing figuring out, it has to fall out afterwards, not before.

And we have a really hard time

with that because traditionally it's always been the legitimizing of guides because they've been there before and they'll help you find out, but they don't necessarily help you figure out just because of the amount of time.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, please, Stephen M.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, yeah, so both of the things that you both just said, Daniel and then Dean, like they both open up huge topics which have so many interesting questions and so many interesting ways of approaching them.

Dean, I think I agree 100% with what you just said.

They've done the...

they're going to have to use our guide as a kind of shortcut in a way to doing the initial stuff, the finding out, but it behooves them in a way to do some extra work of figuring out afterwards.

The thing that that most sort of resonates with me regarding is just the idea that our mandate, what we had to do in producing this,

was give them the ability to work through the examples themselves.

Because that's a part of, I mean, I'm not sure how you're distinguishing these two things, but to me, that's a part of figuring out as well as just finding out.

To me, we're not just saying, this is a measure of inaccuracy.

And this is the algorithm by which you minimize it.

We're saying, look at this example with these numbers in the imaginary situation.

And if you work through it, and if you print out the graph yourself, you will find that this is where the minimum lies, for example.

And you will compare that with this other thing.

So we're doing the sort of the first tiny step in helping them figure out how they would figure it out in a way, if you see what I mean, giving them the means to go ahead and do it again themselves in a different kind of situation.

But the sort of the other thing that it brings up, I mean, I shouldn't say that, you know, they they like Michael Weisberg didn't say, you know, go and do this for me.

Go and be my research assistant for two and a half years to print this thing.

He, along with Peter Godfrey Smith, who is another person not connected with the journal in that capacity, but very interested in having this framework explained for a wider audience, pointed out that first and foremost,

we ourselves would get some kind of like plaudits for having done the work, having helped people to understand it.

So, you know, there was the personal selfish incentive to do it, but also that it would be something that would benefit the community in a sort of, in a positive way, not something that we would be giving them for free as it were, but something that we would be

creating for everybody to draw on and use and just improving how the community approaches this question.

So in the same sense in which, you know, in the best case, academia is a wonderful collection of people who are all helping each other to, you know, find those shortcuts, do the finding out without going through however long it takes to sift out

the stuff that is not necessary.

We're all helping each other to do that.

You know, I can read somebody else's paper who is working for two years on something completely different.

And having split up that labor, divided that labor up, we can both sort of benefit from it.

Sorry, I'm going on far too long now.


SPEAKER_02:
No, no, no.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm only answering one question.


SPEAKER_02:
One last thing about the minimum of two thing, though.

If we could get you and Connor Hines into a live stream, I think my mind would be blown.

Just because that math and this philosophy in one proximal location, because that to triangulate off that would be...

amazing because that's essentially what you have to do.

You have to put the finding out and the figuring out together.

I don't think, again, I don't think it's one or the other.

I think it's our ability to sort of be able to hold up both at once and appreciate how each of those things fills in the picture.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and I do want to, Daniel, you should tell me when I should stop or, you know, please just jump in and interrupt me anytime.

But, you know, I just wanted to sort of respond to your points as well.

The other good thing, since I'm in an optimistic mood about academia, like you say, the kind of pre-publication, pre-print, sending it out and enabling people to give us comments back on it.

If you think about it like is that metaphor with going to a classroom and teaching before you go in and teach, you have to pare away all of the nonsense, the stuff that's too complex, get it down to the level that's simple enough so they can understand, but has enough information so they can actually learn something.

In the really good case of getting a kind of course evaluation, you do a whole course.

You get a bunch of students tell you what was right, what was wrong, what went too fast, what went too slow.

And hopefully there's a kind of average where it averages out.

And you improve it sort of next time.

You make it easier for the learners because the learners have told you what was right and what was wrong about it.

It's always that kind of feedback process.

Obviously, in real life situations, it doesn't always work that well getting that kind of feedback.

But if you're sort of lucky enough to start off from a decent point, as I think we have at this paper, you can...

you can get to a kind of point which, once it is snapshotted, because that's the other important thing, I think that this kind of pre-publication peer review is really useful, but there shouldn't be constantly evolving documents all the time.

There should be some kind of snapshots.

Once it's snapshotted, it's as good as it can be at that time, even if it becomes redundant eventually, even if it uses language which won't be used in 10, 20 years.

Once it becomes something that people can refer to valuably for a certain amount of time afterwards, that's really the best that you can hope for.

Certainly, just a paper.

This is just a paper.

It's nothing more than that, really.


SPEAKER_03:
Just one thought on that, on the finding out and figuring out, connecting that to the peer review.

It's almost like

We're all co-learners in participatory engaging education.

So we want to make it easier for the learners, which is us.

And we're all co-learners.

So sometimes we find out that would be somebody with more domain expertise

giving us the feedback on the paper and then in the side channel maybe there's another time and place where it's a different roles not relationship but like and then there's the figuring out and then maybe there's other things here too that's actually um not like feedback from the bottom up but beginners questions abductive logic applications adversarial or contrarian even questions that is always like what is active inference why does f matter um what

the fvp have to do with active inference what does evolution have to do with natural selection what does natural selection have to do with drift if those were not resolved then they're going to be some open ones in this area as well and i think there is also another analogy with sort of like

in a concordance with evolutionary theory and like Darwin's Dangerous Idea, Dennett in 95, that type of book perhaps has already or soon will be written for something like FEP because it has that same ability to like spawn an adjective

and then reintegrate the adjective back into the corpus.

So it was like, there was like evolution of this type.

And then people add like a modality or a subdomain or a new word.

And then it rejoins the main thread.

So we had like deep, affective, sophisticated, contrastive, dot, dot, dot.

But it's going to reintegrate because it will be versioning.

And that returns to like Blue's point about what is core, what isn't, and how will that change?

And so...

and then you just kind of close the loop with the snapshotting but the recognition of the process but we have to make the static modification in the niche but of course it's a process so it's really um interesting where we've gone today yes stephen m and then s


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yeah, just very quickly.

I think the point about contrarian questions is a very good one.

It's often philosophers' main method of figuring something out, beginning with the contrarian question that is uppermost in their mind, going out and trying to find the answer to it.

And certainly in this case, on my side, when I was doing my part of writing the paper,

I was starting with what on earth is this maths and what is the interpretation of these different components of it?

um and that was just for the for the maths when you get onto the sort of philosophy side the interpretation the dialectic i mean one thing i haven't said is that there are some quite skeptical portions of this paper you probably you know noticed when you read it and we tried to you know pull back a little bit but what we wanted to do was provide you all for figuring out

And you always want to try and do that in good faith.

You know, you always want to do it in a way that's not combative or dismissive.

You want to do it in a way that is designed to help you and the person that you're asking come to a consensus about the answer.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, Stephen S. Yeah, I really find this helpful, this gratuitous use of the term guide, because you chose that title, which may be

If you weren't doing a preprint, maybe people, I noticed people a bit more creative with the titles, which then that's maybe also a nice benefit.

But by going there, this discussion has been really helpful.

I often hear people when they talk about the findings from research that, oh, we're going to roll out a toolkit, we'll do a toolkit.

And then when they talk about a guide, it's really a sort of a guide to teach the toolkit.

But here, what in a way you're looking at, especially if you're getting into the more,

deeper tacit knowledge is what's the guiding principles to being a modeler what's it about being a modeler and that's where well these kind of conversations are useful but i think that the the type of stuff that's been brought up here are things where you know

they're not resolved down to a toolkit level, but it opens a question for someone to have a conversation about.

So I just thought I'd mention that and what your thoughts are about that challenge of someone becoming a practitioner rather than necessarily an academic disseminator.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's tough because I'm really not sure.

In part because all that I'm sort of trying to be right now is an academic disseminator.

So I would have to shift into a sort of different gear to think about what it would mean to be a practitioner.

I mean, I would start by asking you what you take being a practitioner to be and then see if I can resonate with something in that.


SPEAKER_00:
Well for me it's more contextual and it's more about being able to adapt and evolve based on a situation and often you find the practitioner work is when you're in a face-to-face performative context in a way where you have to perform

either the dialogue, I suppose, in science, when you're in the field of practice.

In other areas, it could be the performance of giving a performance, be it a performance as a teacher, it could be a performer, being an actor, being a workshop facilitator, being a therapist, being whatever that might be.

And I suppose that question about how something being a guide

toolkit or some way to access the sort of heuristics and ways of knowing which aren't even representational in the kind of the way that we can easily externalize so I suppose there's some of that there's the stuff that we can't take a perspective on directly because we can't necessarily encode it into artifacts and place them in our environment in words however

that knowing is a skillful practice that has been sort of cultivated.

So I kind of feel there's a need for that.

And there's a big move towards that now with the world trying to embrace transdisciplinarity, participation, complexity, where you have no way to make any sort of movement forward without the ability to find other ways to hold the meaning.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean?

Just to sort of piggyback on Stephen, I think if you want to try to draw a comparison, if you're a disseminator, the result can often be something like a desire line, a wearing in, a following.

And if you're looking at the generative model, you're looking at a densifying.

Out of foraging and then an accumulation.

And in that respect, it's quite clear what, from a practical sense, one's not better than the other, but one results in quite a different result than the other.

It's something to think about.


SPEAKER_03:
And then one other thought on this practitioner and scientist, though I hope we see a hundred times more and more different ways to learn and apply active inference, just total first thought, would be like when Stephen was describing a practitioner contextual and adapting on situations with really lower levels of control.

It's on a continuum, but like a crisis or a transition moment or an adversarial scenario,

has a lot of an implicit factor and it's not always as focused on like the coolest calmest most collected stigmergic artifact modification it's more like the firefighting was done appropriately in that scenario given what it was

And then the scientist generates niches like epistemic niche, laboratory niche, computer niche that allows them to generate scenarios where they can apply distributions.

And then when they apply the distributional methods where there shouldn't be a distributional method, it's going to be unfortunately a silent error most of the time because of how little paid attention to all these differences are.


SPEAKER_01:
So Stephen M. Yeah, this is really tricky to think about.

I mean, I think I agree that knowing...

ought to be considered a kind of skillful practice.

That was one thing that you said, Stephen, that I really sort of jumped out at me, in part as being not sufficiently emphasized elsewhere, certainly not sufficiently emphasized in the tradition of philosophy that I come from.

There tends to be a fairly clear distinction between knowing in terms of representational knowledge and

knowing how in terms of skill and there's not that often the consideration of the kinds of things we would usually consider representational knowledge as underpinning a kind of skillful practice but when i think about the way that

I'm thinking about philosophy conferences and the kinds of conversations that go on.

It's pretty clear to me that having a conversation with somebody else about a topic that is so sort of steeped in law and intellectual...

recognition and texts as having a philosophy conversation is, what it requires is a kind of skill, a kind of a smooth, a kind of automatically picking out the topics as you go along, not sort of sitting back and thinking very hard on your own before coming back 30 minutes later and responding to the things that your interlocutor has just said.

It has all the hallmarks of a skill as far as I can see.

And what happens is, well, the way that I have been brought up to view it is you do all your thinking at home or you do all your thinking in the armchair.

And then when you come out to have the conversation, you're ready with that skill.

Because you've done all of that slow, solitary work first, the kind of propositional or representational kind of work.

Then when you're ready, you come out and you practice everything.

discussing it.


SPEAKER_03:
thanks great point it's a lot like the uh representational dimension is kind of the non-linear knowledge model which is it cannot be conveyed in a linear sequence linear presentation in video and in writing is rhetoric and that was one of the most interesting areas um in the paper was like the claims justification the whole second part and i'm happy that we spent

almost all the dot zero in our conversation leading up to it because there's a whole paper and it sounds like it there's so much more to explore um but like the part about the rhetoric and the way that people not just have an edge in their knowledge graph their armchair knowledge graph or their

relational database, not just an edge between concepts, but actually when a question is raised to move to that answer first or the first topic that's mentioned.

Like if somebody asks, what is a Markov blanket?

The first noun, what is it going to be?

well for a cell or is it because of bayesian or what is the actual first rhetorical node that somebody gives and those kinds of knowledge like representations are really interesting too it's not even just that it's the most important thing because that's not how people always structure their speech so like

there's both sides we need the non-linear part so that we can actually build a bigger structure than just an oral script but then it has to be in that like run time that you kind of described at the philosophy conference it has to be presented in a linear way and if there weren't disagreements or um like contrasts in people's perspective then they would just be reading off the same book

so maybe we'd love to hear your thoughts on any of these ladder sections in four like which one of these areas of claims we won't stay long but just what of the areas of claims or the relationships between areas was interesting to you or like you learned while reading about it

because you had the justificatory links between dialectical categories with mathematical, empirical, and general.

So maybe just one edge or one section of those.

What did you find interesting?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, was that an open question or were you asking me?

I wasn't sure.


SPEAKER_03:
I guess to you.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I can definitely start with the first section, which was the mathematical to empirical direction.

And as you said, for each edge of the triangle, we were only sort of considering one direction, mainly for considerations of space.

What's most interesting to me about this is just that it is an established research field called computational cognitive science, when the specific maths that is being looked at is certain kinds of neural networks or other kinds of computational systems, and the specific empirical system that is being looked at is the brain, especially the human brain.

and what we really wanted to emphasize in this section was that the kinds of tools that have already been developed by computational cognitive science so that includes the models and the explanatory tools and the justificatory or inferential tools could be applied to active inference models as well so this was our attempt to say to the philosophers we already have some equipment

we can use when what we're trying to do is evaluate active inference.


SPEAKER_03:
So whether we call it deflationary or not, there's a lot of relevance in emphasizing which parts are specific to active inference and which ones aren't, like bringing action into the loop.

is not a novelty in the last 15 years doing bayesian statistics doing variational inference and so that work helps us really highlight the parts that do have unique and different interpretations like this is definitely one of um my favorite paragraphs i think that we've come across and gotten the highlight on the discussions like and then you even brought it up that it's actually in the distillation

not just implicit knowledge or notational connection, but a rhetorical element that arises.

And then also one with like educational and didactic implications.

So that's really interesting.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and I think when I was reading your paper, Steven, I noticed the number of times you had the word evaluate, evaluate, evaluate, which again is another one of those, does this pass, pass muster, pass a standard, pass what goes on?

and what gets held back, what gets continued attention, and what do we now ignore?

And that's why I like when you were talking earlier about, well, when we put a guide together, we just want to basically walk into the bar and make sure that the 98 things that we really can't pay attention to first, that doesn't pass.

What does pass are maybe these two first nascent ideas.

And so again,

You don't need to even hear this, but if you want a just a factory link, that is one right there in real time in terms of what carries on, what can we build off of and what falls away because it doesn't seem to pass whatever evaluative methods we've implied.

But then again, that goes to when do we start evaluating?


SPEAKER_03:
from the from the moment we started we want it to be something a little bit more creative and hold that thing open a little long before we jump to assessment okay so in the last just few minutes yeah stephen you want to give a response there or would you like to have a little bit of a closing statement


SPEAKER_01:
uh let me give a quick response which is just that i agree exactly with what you said dean and um yeah we wanted to show that some things could be evaluated very directly just by working through the numbers and that gives some directions for how other things could be evaluated and you're right it's like passing it's sort of how a philosopher evaluates a scientific theory as being sort of in a sense

first level plausibility or first level acceptability, how it passes that.

It's kind of a philosopher's technical term.

But I can sort of give a kind of closing statement that calls back to what you just mentioned, Daniel, that paragraph, which is just that the thing that I'm thinking about

most often when I think about active inference right now is the interpretation of P in the expected free energy function and the sense in which it can have

probabilistic interpretation as well as an interpretation of a kind of preference.

That is the thing which I really want to try and get to the bottom of, again, just by working with very, very simple models, try and throw some numbers around, try and intuitively grasp what that model can represent.

We have one in there with the example of the cat, but I want to try and expand it a little bit.

Yeah, I'm glad that you like that paragraph.

because it's the thing that is causing me the most, it's the thing that's itching the most that I'm attempting to scratch right now.


SPEAKER_03:
All right, so we'll each give a closing thought.

So just what did people enjoy?

What would they look forward to talking about next week?

So Stephen, select first.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, just thank you a lot for a really great, engaging conversation.

lots of insights um i i'm really interested in that idea of the the peas um so i think that's very interesting and i'd be interested in how that maybe applies both on the um on the sensory side and the action side so how much is the probabilities

and preferences for sensing as much as, or is it that one is more for sensing one's more for action, but, uh, very interested in all of that.

So thank you very much and, uh, look forward to more conversations.

Okay.

Dean or blue.


SPEAKER_06:
I'll go ahead.

Um, so thanks for entertaining all my interrogations.

I appreciate it.

Um, if you're going to come back next week, I would encourage you to check out, um, a tale of two densities because like on the tale of Steven with the P's and the Q's, I'd be curious to, to think about or to hear what your interpretation of that is.

And if you would, um,

maybe change or maybe you will, I mean, it's just a preprint, so maybe you have a burgeoning affordance to kind of consider that in your explanation in the beginning.

I'm curious, or if you think it's one of these superfluous extra components that is for the handbook for the recently deceased, not necessarily, you know, like the 13 steps of dying or whatever.

So I'd be curious to hear what you have to say about that.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean, anything?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's just that I don't want this to drop down to the sort of quantum level, but I think that when you're doing a guide, it's hard not to sort of try and juggle both the dynamic aspects of what you're trying to share and the stable aspects of what you're trying to share.

You want the screwdriver to remain robust and constant, and then you want it to also be able to

be manipulated in such a way that it drives the screw.

And there's a dynamic and a stability piece to this guiding that's really, really hard to, as you say, square.

I don't know that it can be squared.

I think they both have to be maintained.

And so my sense is that I...

I didn't know what you were going to do in terms of the guiding, but I think the way that you laid it out did slow things down, did allow the teeth of the screwdriver to get set.

And then you could actually do something dynamic with it.

So really appreciate that.

And maybe, maybe next week we can talk about when the screwdriver is used for creative purposes, other than driving screws.

Cause I think what the math says,

if we use the geometry and the statistics and the philosophy all in one concoction, I think that's the basis or the minimum that we have then to be able to do creative things and not just recombinatorial things.

So maybe we can touch on that.

I would be really curious to hear how you see this going off in creative ways without going, because the big fear people have is that just means destabilization.

where I'm saying it has to start from both stable and the potential to move.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Dean.

Stephen, any last thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Just to thank you all very much for engaging with our paper, for inviting me on the stream, for asking me really great questions and raising great points that just had never crossed my mind.

This is exactly the reason why I was hoping to do this.

I am going to try and come back next week.

I can't make any promises right now, though, because next week is a bit of a heavy week for us.

But just, yeah, the...

The prospect of going and reading that paper and then being able to respond in a more intelligent way to Blue's question is making me really want to do it.

Not to mention all of the other topics, which, you know, we haven't talked about yet for the rest of you as well.

So I will let you know during the week, but fingers crossed we'll be back again next week.

But thank you all.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Yeah, really appreciated everybody sharing their perspective and you're welcome back anytime.

So see you everybody.

Peace.

## 6WP7mY13lzc

SPEAKER_01:
all right hello everyone welcome to act in flab live stream number 37.2 it's february 9th 2022.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Feel free to visually raise your physical hand if you'd like or use any of our emoji affordances.

Check out ActiveInference.org to get updates on what the lab is up to and also get more information on how to participate or check out this CODA link if you'd like to see our past and upcoming streams.

We're here today in stream number 37.2.

It's our third stream after the .0 background video and the .1.

group discussion we had on the paper free energy a user's guide by man Payne and kirchoff from 2021 and today we have a few things written there's a couple sections of the paper that we didn't get to last time and I'm sure everyone has brought some interesting thoughts and of course if you're watching live please feel free to add any questions or comments into the live chat because we'll definitely have time to address anything there

We'll start with an introduction and warm-up.

So we'll say hi, mention anything that we're excited to talk about today, something that we liked or remembered or reviewed about the paper this past week.

anything that we're wondering about.

And as we just mentioned before we began, like what does a dot two for a guide look like?

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and I'm gonna think while others are speaking and then return to what the dot two can be and I'll pass it to Steven.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm in Toronto.

Stephen Sillett.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD around social topographies and how they can be used in community development and theatre for development.

And, yeah, I'm looking forward to looking at some of the implications of how this might be rolled out in different types of contexts.

I'll pass this over to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Dean.

I'm in British Columbia at the moment.

And as with all things guide related, I'm always interested in how we translate from the word to the deed, getting from a place of information that's curated to actions that are also maybe curated based on that bit of information.

And I'll pass it to Luke.


SPEAKER_02:
I lost my mute button.

I'm blue.

I'm a research assistant or research consultant in New Mexico, transported back to my grad school days.

I had like a mute button loss, a time warp all at the same time.

I'm excited to get into the sections of the paper that we didn't really discuss, like in particular, like

using mathematics to validate empirical claims or justify empirical claims.

And also kind of zooming out and evaluating this work from the perspective of a guide.

And like, I think about the Hitchhiker's Guide and like, don't panic.

And like, what are the things that we really like need?

What are the essential components of the FEP and active inference that we need to communicate to others?

And I'll pass it back to Daniel, who's going to tell us what a dot to really is.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, what it really has been is the far side of the bathtub.

The .0, we're kind of dropping into the skating rink.

And then in the .1, there's an opening and we explore.

And last week was an awesome discussion.

We got to speak with the first author.

And now we continue, but also explore.

recollect some of the threads that we opened and build inertia towards where we take it next.

And I think there's almost no genre more appropriate for a .2 than the guidebook.

Like you put down in Dean's car manual metaphor, like you don't hold that up when you're driving.

And so papers, similarly, they engage our regime of attention transiently.

You're not supposed to only be looking at the paper.

so we're going to put this paper down we're going to end this video eventually and then what will be left with us how will our generative model have been updated

so that our policy selections are different, whether they're mental action policies related to attention or metacognition, or whether they're physical action policies.

So I guess it relates to that quintessential dot two question of moving from the word of the paper that we're engaging in in our discussions to the deeds.

And what are those deeds?

And then it's almost like this is an action-oriented framing of a dot 2 or of just what we're up to today.

And then there's this

asynchronous or not temporally binding elements of, which is raised by the paper though, of what are the essential components of FEP and ACT-INF and also the differentiation perhaps between the conceptual and the pedagogical, like are the pieces that are the minimal kernel of FEP and ACT-INF, is that where we, is that page one?

on the guide?

How does education, which is going to be the trajectory of a learner, relate to the theoretical apparatus, which is kind of like a building or some sort of structure that doesn't necessarily have a trajectory-like format?

So maybe just to return to this question of the word and the deed.

In the dot one, we heard about what the target audience was from the author's perspective for this paper, which was, it's a special issue, it's a topical collection called the Free Energy Principle from Biology to Cognition.

And we heard a little bit about how the editor made a request of the authors to write this

special piece and they also summarized it in their last aim we aim to increase philosophical understanding of active inference so that it may be more readily evaluated so within the philosophical domain so that it can be evaluated but what other domains or

ideas are important here and then what are these actions so philosophers might be interested in reading this so that they can better philosophically evaluate but what are the idea to deed pipelines that we're interested in or opening up here steven and then anyone else one of the aspects that this this paper talks about is how much things can be screened off how much


SPEAKER_04:
It gives us latitude to separate out realistic empirical interpretations from the modeling of.

And I think that's the feature.

They also talk about, and I'd be interested in what others think about this, but they talk about the Markov blanket as giving this opportunity to screen or screen out what's inside and outside.

And I wonder how...

this idea of screening, because screens are not the same as a wall.

It's not walling off.

But as come up on the Twitter conversation with Kasper Hesp this week, this idea of leakage, like if I have a screen, I've got a blind here, as I described earlier, and there's some leakage through the blind, right?

But is even that idea of screening off a little bit passive?


SPEAKER_01:
curious about that a little bit dead anyway yeah if there weren't statistical dependencies between internal and external states like if there were two states that were just not even there was no path from here to there there wouldn't even be able to be blanket states partitioned out

So internal and external states are conditionally independent upon the blanket states using the narrow Pearl 1988 sense of Markov blanket.

But there is a channel, there is a path from the internal to the external states.

Again, otherwise they wouldn't even be part of the same click in that part of the Bayesian graph.

And then also, yes, Steven.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so this click, this question of how much we need to find purchase through that blanket and the screening off and how much we can get away with

more broadly thinking about the free energy principle and inference and how that can be stepped up and down depending on where we are in terms of empiricism and trying to make claims.

Themes that feature a lot in this paper.

And I'm sensing that because they're sort of arguing in a way that as long as you can get functional correlations

then how you get at them be that approximate isn't necessarily about it being the real world that gives you it there may be different ways to arrive at something

that's approximately useful.

And I think that speaks to dynamical systems over traditional systems in the sense that I can have a system which isn't the real system, but if my system flips or the regime shifts in similar ways to the target,

as opposed to it actually being it and having the right types of values in it, in itself, it's more about what's the way that I start to see my uncertainties flip from one belief to another.

If the way the belief updating happens is still approximately useful enough for something to happen that's viable,

then that is still okay.

And I'm wondering if that isn't possible in normal systems work, which isn't dynamical systems work.


SPEAKER_01:
look at the order and kind of trace the trails of the authors so in the early example we had just the case of perceptual inference which was first introduced in the exact base context and then we moved into the variational base caference and we had w world states unobserved

That's the actual temperature in the room.

X, observe data.

That's the reading on the thermometer.

So this is the simplest Bayesian latent or hidden state model.

So is there a Markov blanket here?

Asking for a friend.

No, because there's only two notes.

So there cannot be a partitioning between internal and external states conditioned on a third note.

It's kind of like the minimum two, but now we're taking it to minimum three.

You can't have a blanket, an intervening or an intermediating, or a state which makes two others conditionally independent unless you have three.

Three's a crowd.

Three's a party.

Now, in figure three...

there's the basic model of action.

So we still have the same definitions and meanings of W, unobserved world states, and X, observations.

Those observations are now being passed to the agent.

And indeed they were implicitly being passed to the agent above.

If there would have been a third node agent there, it could have been said that the X was a Markov blanket, but as it's exactly written, there isn't.

Now, here, what are the blanketing states?

X and Z. If you are conditioning upon X and Z, it makes W and the agents conditionally independent.

And this is sort of,

presaging the fristen partition on the markov blanket which is to split up the notion of the total set of intermediating or conditionally independentizing states you know markov to pearl epoch

and showing them in a way that's partitioned into incoming, from the Asian's perspective, statistical dependencies, which can be interpreted as sensory states or the observation of model data, and then outgoing statistical dependencies, Z, Z action you select.

And then those can have some influence on world states.

Yes, Steven.


SPEAKER_04:
You know when you say outgoing statistical dependencies, and that's also interesting because at some point the outgoing cannot be statistical alone because you don't have the same kind of information availability.

So it tends to be more using energy and sort of least action type approaches.

So that would be...

I'm sort of preempting that, but that's where it starts to split out later, but they don't get bogged down in that at this stage.

They keep it all in the sort of Bayesian environment.


SPEAKER_01:
Not exactly sure what you mean, since these arrows represent not mechanistic or causal influence, but just statistical dependencies in the graph.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah i was thinking more when that becomes action uh when it's then translated to be action so then um rather than sensory which has much more sort of informational content action could be seen as being more about what is more energy efficient or starts to look at more the shape of

the way that action happens.

I'm wondering whether that is needed to be concerned about.


SPEAKER_01:
If it were a software agent, then these are both informational, really.

And no matter what type of agent we're modeling, it still is just a statistical dependence.

Okay.

Then you brought up questions about energy expenditure during action.

And that's one of the pieces that is sometimes challenging to parse out, which is like,

First, looking at variational free energy minimization.

So this is on the perceptual side.

We're looking at the instantaneous fitting of a variational model of ongoing sensory information given the priors.

That doesn't mean that for, for example, an organism, it's the lowest energy possible interpretation of the sensory data.

And then when we bring action into the picture and look at expected free energy, neither does this mean that the Z that is selected is the laziest.

It just means that this G is being minimized and

So it's not the Gibbs free energy or the calories that are being minimized.

It's something informational that has to do with model fitting.

Yes, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, no, that definitely makes sense.

And one thing Carl Friston mentioned in the symposium we did is there's kind of two boundaries.

There is kind of two boundaries happening in terms of Markovian boundaries.

There's one coming in and there's one going out.

And the blanket's kind of got both of those boundaries happening.

So like you said, yeah, it's the way that inference happens to know what actions to take

is different, but the way that information is established

is for sure different going through each of those.

I mean, as it is with every mode of sensory data that comes in, because it could be vision, it could be hearing, it could be kinesthetic.

So you've got different types of input and you've got different types of output.

And this diagram at the moment is keeping both of those.

There's no idea of leakage or...

are those questions about how things leak across between it's like there's, there's two distinct blows going on, but that, and it simplifies it in that sense.

Um, yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Um,

we've seen other topologies of perception, cognition, and action, like an edge connecting sense and action states, or an arrow that's having a statistical dependency the other way.

Okay, but just to return here, yes, Dean, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
This is a question for everybody here.

So, Stephen, the first author talked about the fact that sort of the backstory of this whole guide thing was to, and I'm putting words into it, but I want to keep it reasonably short.

I talked too much last week.

he basically wanted to be able to remove some of the impediments and he pointed directly at some of the math that acted as a, maybe a kind of a, a bridge too far.

And so he wanted to make that a simpler, um, maybe something that's more user friendly and therefore something that people will take up or adopt.

And when you're putting on this, um, when you're putting up this slide here now, Daniel,

I don't know whether, I know it eventually will be translated into the math formalisms you just pointed, you had them up a minute ago, but I'm not really sure whether the evaluation aspect that philosophers

are going to then decide whether something is worthy of their continued attention or not.

I'm not sure if that, how does this critical path, critical and evaluation being related in this context, how does this minimize or reduce

the impediment nature of what the math is like if we're gonna we're gonna guide somebody through this and their and their one of their hopes is to be able to say okay well i'm not just making this stuff up there's actually some some way of being able to formalize this how does that through this kind of first step become

become easier I guess in terms of what the actual formula says because I know that when I first actually touched on the formulas myself

it didn't go back to a critical path.

Like there was no real physical example I could find in the world.

And I think maybe that's what helped me understand that maybe this thinking or this ability to think statistically, sorry, to think statistically, maybe that requires, as Carl also said, our ability to


SPEAKER_04:
do the math we have to be able to do the math and the math doesn't get simple so i'm wondering what people think about that okay steven if you have a direct response yeah yeah well i think that um in some ways this goes back to a little bit before where the math was it helps us see why the math was put in at certain points by going to even a stage earlier so i think there is some use in that because i think like you say um

there is a slight inflation in the way that the process theory then gets interpreted and if it's already locked in too much in what's given to us with all the math like well where did that math come from and and then that starts to get us involved in some of these earlier questions because what's interesting here is the the blanket i think of the blanket often as as a method for transfer

It's a mode for transfer, just a bit like lithographic blankets transfer from an analog roller to a blanket roller to a printed image and to the paper.

It's transferring.

Now, it also does mean that there's no direct contact between paper and...

paper and printing plate, right?

So it's screened off as well, but it depends which way it's gone at, you know?

And in this case here with these red circles, it's useful to think about, okay, well, there's something that's been inferred from the world, but that inference isn't directly accessible.

It's not, that observed data,

isn't coming in as data it's coming in as um what's inferred to be about what's out there which isn't the same as a signal so it's like how much is the agent able to have the environment transfer something onto them and transfer something onto the environment and how much are they screened off from

environment how much is the environment screened off from them i suppose that's that's something that relates to that hey thanks so dean you asked how does the yes you want to go for it first no go ahead and then i'll just follow up both you and stephen


SPEAKER_01:
okay so you asked how does the critical path the linear pedagogical path that is traced by this version of this guide reduce the actual perceived impediments in an audience specific or in a general sense so it definitely helps us see where math could or should or does or will enter the picture i think it sets up an aboutness of the math like what is perception about

This is a graphical interpretation, graphical meaning visual, but also like a network, Bayesian graph.

And so if you're concerned with a different connectedness of terms, this is not the math you're looking for.

But on the perception side, if this is kind of how you're setting up the template for what you're wondering about, like what's out there, that's what this first image shows with WNX.

what's out there and how do i act or how does an agent act that's the aboutness which is not unique to active inference that's control theory cybernetics etc um the stepwise guide element

reminds me i hope it's not unrelated in high school cross country the coach would say something like well the race is going to start and you got to get out there fast and then it's the middle is the part where you need to be running and going hard then at the end you got to push it and finish and run hard and everything and i was like you could have just said run the whole time was it not the same thing as saying run at the beginning middle and end and so but run really hard during the whole race i don't know coach

whole race is a long time to run here by breaking it into really specific stepwise changes to the math like a piecewise defined function there's an opportunity to pace and lead a learner and then to accumulate or pause for

divergence or prediction error that they're experiencing, like maybe before this first train stop, someone has a question about that.

Or maybe just graphically, when action enters the picture, somebody has a question about that.

Now we could be talking about equations, symbolic equations that describe the W to X relationship or the agent to Z to W relationship.

And then this paper is going to propose just one symbolic expression or several symbolic expressions.

that today we call active inference approach to addressing that question.

But it builds up the aboutness in a stepwise way that even though it is conceptually no different than just saying, here's the action perception loop and the equations, which is pretty much what every FEP paper does.

But by starting somewhere a lot more atomic, it allows the stepwise addition of the math in a way that's incremental rather than like, here's the apparatus and that leaves much of it implied.

Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and I wouldn't disagree with anything you're saying there, but I do think that there's a not-too-subtle difference between stepwise and then the kind of step function, the leaving of the critical path, and now seeing a set of mathematical formalisms around a statistical distribution, and I'm just wondering how that transition occurs, because it doesn't seem like there's a natural ramp from following...

something clockwise or counterclockwise to being able to change things into um alpha numeric um ratios which is essentially what the statistic when when it's written out statistically what that does right the sum and the and the and the ratio so if if if the impediment was some of the um

non-frequent math.

And I'm not critiquing in any way what Stephen's written out here in his guide, but it seems like there's still some assumption on the author's plural part that

you will be able to take enough from this critical path representation to see what it looks like when you're overfitting.

I like that there was a lot of explanation of what overfitting is.

And then there was Plunk.

And here's the formula that that overfitting

looks like in in mathematical form so it's kind of a big assumption that the person who's reading this is going to be able to make that leap go from this level of walking clockwise or counterclockwise to now suddenly being able to understand what all of those different symbols in that formula means i'm not i'm not saying it can't be done but i'm just wondering how

how as people who are trying to lay out something in a kind of step progression, how they assume that they can just sort of put holds into that big wall and people still don't have a fear of heights.

It's still better than not having a ladder, but it doesn't mean I want to go up 40 feet without safety, right?

Just because it's there.

And I kind of see that in terms of how the transition works between this form of representation and then what the representation looks like in the math.

That's a big leap, I think, for a lot of people.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
And one, I suppose one danger that's always present when naming things is they then move into this with the predictive processing discussion.

You know, how much can you name things as being data in these contexts?

So it becomes statistical, but like you say, there is effectively information coming in.

But data in some ways may be a bit of a tricky word to use because data kind of

implies an inherent um representational nature and they talk about this in the paper a little bit of that tension between something that's in is coherent enough and can be represented and something where you can't ever quite get at that the inference the predictive processing has to then leverage something like generative models using the body etc to even get at the uh

that that that that that um to allow that arrow to be something in a much more fuzzy way you know um and uh so there was always that risk of leading people astray even at this early stage so a few comments there


SPEAKER_01:
Dean you asked like how do we get from this graphical layout so we've taken the first bite which is this is roughly the correct topology for thinking about problems of perceptual inference and action inference that is if someone re imagines this

amazing but this is just the approach to perception cognition and action and impact that is a common kernel of a phrasing now let's just think about it as an example rather than just the um abstraction let's just say that we're interested in listening to a cat

then inferring what its location is so we're only talking about this simpler w and x connection first so here's what the empirical data are four two one and three you could have a model of decision making on x that just says the cat is always in the kitchen

Just, I don't care.

I'm okay with being wrong.

The cat's in the kitchen.

Or someone could say, the cat's always in the bedroom.

Or I flip a coin.

Or I go with what some other person told me.

There's many ways to make a decision about world states conditioned on data.

One principled approach, which they write here.

One famous method for solving this problem, Bayesian conditionalization.

So that's the question which is framed normatively here about what one ought to do is integrate their beliefs, which can be empirically grounded, that's parametric empirical Bayes, upon incoming data.

So first, in this case, the next little tiny step is we can use Bayes' theorem to look at inference on external states given incoming data.

Again, if someone disagrees with using a Bayesian approach, an exact Bayesian approach, that's the time to speak their piece.

This is a very simple example with like kind of the minimum two by two matrix.

If it was any thinner of a model on any dimension, like if there was only a kitchen, then the question of location inference would be trivial.

It's in the kitchen.

If there was only one sound equally, it would be a trivial problem because the sound would then be uninformative from an information theory perspective, which they're not bringing up here yet about location.

Then the next tiny step and then Dean is to go from the exact Bayesian approach

parametric Bayesian approach to variational catference, which is imagine that this was not just two by two table, but there was a higher dimensional state space of observations.

And so it's not going to be possible to just look at this in a spreadsheet or on a piece of paper, but it's actually a large model.

And so we need tractable heuristics.

And so that is the next tiny step from now we're going to take not just a principled approach to treating the W to X relationship, Bayesian perceptual inference, but we're going to go beyond that and ask what's a tractable and reasonable approximation, variational inference.

There's other situations where maybe there's another tractable approach like MCMC.

Markov chain Monte Carlo.

That's another approach, which we've talked about in other cases.

That's the pointillism sampling-based approach.

It works really well for certain problems.

It doesn't work as well for other problems.

And so that's the next little tiny step.

We're going to go from this setup of perception to using Bayes' theorem.

You could do otherwise.

And then from using exact or parametric empirical Bayes to using variational Bayesian approaches.

And again, you could do otherwise.

Dean and then Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and again, all I think I'm pointing out is that for some, it is a tiny little step.

But I don't think it's a ramp going from one version of representation to four square version of representation to formulaic version of representation.

I think for people who see the math maybe as an impediment to their further continuation of using the potential of the free energy principle, maybe they aren't such small steps.

There certainly aren't ramps.

in terms of how we interpret each of those three particular ways of representing information.

There's no ramp.

There's an actual transition moving from what you've got on the screen now to the 60-40, 50-50 way of being able to interpret that way of representing the information to the one that has an equal sign.

They're very, very different, right?

I mean, I understand the relativity piece, and I see that carrying throughout.

This is what relativity looks like this way, and then this way, and then this way.

But I think the struggle for people who are putting guides together is the assumption that what's little for you is little for me.

It isn't always that way.

I don't know if we can fix that here in these labs, but...

I don't think it's something that we should assume is necessarily one small step for humankind.

Because I think the reason why the authors were asked to put two years worth of work in this in the first place

was because the math is acting as an impediment.

Now, do you start with the math?

Because I agreed with Stephen last week when he said, this is the direction we took.

We decided to slow things down, not simplify, but slow things down.

So I really appreciate why they've done what they've done.

But if they knew going in that they're going to have to go slow,

then they're probably going to see whether or not that bump, as we change representations, is actually relatable to the previous version or form that the relationship was presented as.

And I don't know that people necessarily do it.

Like, Blue's going to have a say on this too, but she mentioned the arbitrariness of something that doesn't update.

And so it doesn't retain its form.

And should we just assume that we all saw the morphology in the same way?

It's tricky.

I'm just going to leave it at tricky because I'm not sure anybody that's putting a guide together necessarily has the perfect way of being able to deliver it.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, thanks.

Blue, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
So something that I think is interesting is the mathematical interpretations have like philosophical underpinnings almost, or maybe it's the other way around.

So when you're looking at like, for example, this difference between a probability distribution and a preference distribution.

Like if the cat is in the kitchen 75% of the time, you can just assume there's like the underlying assumption that it prefers to be in the kitchen most of the time, right?

Like, so because that's where the food is or whatever.

So, and similarly, like in homeostasis, if I'm at 37 degrees Celsius, that's my temperature.

If I'm there 95% of the time, you can assume that I have a preference to have a body temperature of 37 degrees Celsius.

I think that there's that underlying connection, but it gets really complicated when you try to extrapolate to something like cognition.

there's like, I prefer to be rich.

I prefer to have 90% of the money in the world.

For example, like you can say like, I want all the money.

Like you think about something like that, but then there's so many complicated, like do I really want all the money?

No, because then everyone else would be homeless and impoverished would be horrible, right?

Like, so you don't really want all the money.

Like there's, and then if I say, if I prefer to be rich, but I'm stuck in an impoverished situation, you can assume that there's like a learning gap

between how do I earn money and

being in the space where I don't have any money.

Like I don't know how to have money.

Like there's a knowledge level.

So when you bring cognition into it and like you ask people like what their preferences are, like I prefer to live by the beach, but I live in New Mexico.

I mean, we have lots of beach, but no water.

So there's like, you know, there's, I don't know, there's the preferences and then the probability, but is there some kind of like cognitive dissonance?

Like you think we think what our preferences are,

or maybe not where our probability distributions are.

Like I prefer to be by the beach, but 90% of the time, I prefer to be by the ocean, but 90% of the time you find me in the desert, that there's like, there's some cognitive dissonance going on there.

And so I think that the mathematical interpretations have a lot of philosophical implications that maybe, you know, we need to think about more.

Like when is a preference distribution and a probability difference

distribution different, and why are they different?

What is going on when the preferences are not the probabilities?


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Blue.

Yes, this will take us soon to the tale of three-piece.

Stephen, first.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, very good points there.

When you said, Daniel, there about the exact base on the world,

It goes into the variational base, which in some ways is it starts to hit the Markov blanket and start to give time steps as it starts to go through into the generative model.

you then got and as was useful from our um again the symposium with carl kristen he talked about you know the starting point often for active interest is the generative model you know how do you get at the generative model so the general route is that in some ways this exact base is almost needed in the modeling sense to give you what we think we know the world is when we're setting up our

model or our experiment of people doing something where we're going to see what the results are so it's like the agent can't know what w is they can't know what the exact base is but like with the cat experiment sorry the cat matrix there okay we we could arbitrarily put one in

that we can say we know as objective observers.

It's going through, goes to the agent, and then the agent does something.

And as Blue said, sometimes that what they do isn't only in response to what's coming in, which is quite often not.

It's not just, I've seen food, can I eat food?

much food as possible there's this well what's the consequence of my actions going forward maybe a lot of times we then start to get into this higher dimensional stuff where the circle that you put in there going into w there's that red circle on the left which so it goes into the w is what is really of concern you know the humanities are around what's what's that about

Right?

And normally the generative model work that is done in active inference is the circle on the right-hand side.

How do we predict the way beliefs are being updated?

And what's the way the beliefs, because it's normally coming in that direction, because you can sort of control, you can do an exact base.

There's the one place you could theoretically set your experiment with an exact base is W.

It's kind of hard to put exact values on an agent unless, of course, it's a robot potentially.

So I think there's something quite interesting there about how much is this

And it's a practical, instrumental tool, right?

How much is this about the way that modeling happens?

And how much and the maths to make that happen?

And the philosophy is made that and how much then is this broader, and it may be that it gets recapitulated, depending on which

hearts we simplify or allow to be more complex or want to get a purchase on out of those circles.

And maybe you just explain why you put the circles where you put them just to see if I'm getting your rationale.

But I think that was kind of useful to put them in.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm just highlighting the directedness of the statistical dependence.

This circle of action policy influencing unobserved states

We've seen it in the partially observable Markov decision process as where?

That's B. W changing through time is B. That's how hidden states change through time.

State one, state at time one, state at time two.

Then Z influences B.

here in this simple only four nodes so if you only get four nodes you draw the dependency that way like my action to change the thermostat in the future will change the temperature when we can unpack it a little bit more and move it from this sort of minimal cybernetics or control framing into some of the little bit more built out models we've looked at that is where policy selection

influences B. And so, yes, there's enormous concern over how our actions influence things that we can't directly observe, save for by proxy information incoming back to us.

And that is not a unique problem to active inference.

Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
I think

I'm going to circle back to what Blue was saying, because I think she's hit on something really critical.

The when-ness of this, I think, is what I won't say was the thing that Carl started on when he took his first nascent steps into trying to

put something that we can hold on to, something that we can look at philosophically and mathematically.

I don't know if he was thinking about oneness at that point when he started down that path, but I think the more we talk about it, the more we realize that

As a, for example, in a guide use, I think a person who reads Stephen and the other author's work have two questions.

The first one is my use of time, the number of minutes I have to commit to reading the guide before I can then say whether or not certain impediments have been removed.

Well, at the same time, and this is what I think active inference does, it also allows us to invert that first accounting of what we are doing with our time, invert it from use of time to time of use.

So if I do commit to reading this guide, what's the shelf life of that?

How long am I going to be able to take my takeaways and actually be able to apply them to different concepts?

And then there's a fleshing it out part, which I think Stephen's kind of talking to, which is, so when we take all of this information and we embody it, what does that feel like?

What does that read out in terms of our behaviors, et cetera, our reactions, our responses?

So I think ultimately, if we're looking at the when-ness of this, we have to start talking about heuristics.

And Stephen specifically spoke about that.

I think I'm paraphrasing him, but I think he said we were concerned about whether starting with simple doesn't also have a cost.

We know that it has a benefit because it doesn't overwhelm people.

But if we are going to look at simple rules like heuristics, does that also have a cost?

Now, he didn't answer that.

I was just rewatching the 37.1 before we came on today.

But I think that's something here that Blue has now touched on, and I think Stephen is touching on as well.

If we're going to put a guide together,

When do the rules fall out?

Do we assume that they fall out just by picking the guide up?

Or are they something that the reader or the user manufactures after having the experience?

That when-ness, I think, is what this active inference stuff is touching on.

And in some cases, it feels pretty ruddy arbitrary.

It's hard to tell the when of...

The heuristic, do I start with the rule as my priority, or am I really trying to update, and I'm trying to come up with something that really applies at some point in the future that I haven't arrived at yet?

And I know that sounds kind of not answering anything, but even with the statistics, it's hard to figure out what each agent is going to do

depending upon what their bias is.

Do they want to start with the rule or do they want to develop one as they go along?


SPEAKER_01:
And as the Bacillus Axillus in 34, Axillus bacterium, showed, exact base doesn't mean you get it exactly right.

It means you're following a process and with maladaptive priors, even accurate information coming in can result in a maladaptive decision-making.

So this is not...

Panglossian or Pollyannish, just because there's an approach doesn't mean that it succeeds.


SPEAKER_00:
Perfect, right.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So, Stephen, then Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so two points that sort of speak to that.

Well, I'll say the second one first, because it was in mind, is

When we see the modelling, we often see, say we talk about the bacillus or we see the way that modelling happens, high-order agents such as humans tend to find that the W is fixed as a, like the cat is either purring or it's meowing, it's in the kitchen, it's an exact, or it's in the bedroom, right?

So it's a kind of defined...

Exact Bayes kind of context.

And then that allows the other parts to kind of still find some very interesting and tractable useful trends, right?

So as it goes through.

now when it goes then the other way is okay how do you get into something which isn't exact base and you tend to see it turn into the swarming of voxels those small you know um lorenzo tractors or bacillus so very very very simple a gentle um scenarios with very little

degrees of freedom.

Because, and this is in a way trying to address that challenge of, well, you know, what if you don't know if it's in the kitchen or the bedroom is in the doorway, and it's, it's wandering around.

And there's the time, the time in between getting sensory information.

And my the action

is, you know, isn't in step.

There's a lot more bleed out, you know.

And that becomes this kind of how much is the temporal, I saw this word from Casper Hess, leakage.

Because there's a leakage out of that sensory, I don't want to use the word input, but the statistical dependencies coming in and the statistical dependencies going out.

There's a leakage going on.

which makes the modelling kind of challenging though at some point it becomes okay well it's overwhelming right we might philosophically say somehow we're able to do something like that and our biology has enabled us to overcome that challenge but to actually put it into a

model like the one on the right top right there it starts to become and in a way maybe that's where effect comes in as maybe okay that that may be also true for us that's why we need something like affect

to hold together this sort of fuzzier kind of knowing which can't be resolved in that such a solid way so that's the first piece the second piece very quickly is you put the you know that these um that the the red circle that you put next the x there um so in some ways that that is what's like while it's sort of we're inferring w what we're really doing is we're inferring

We're either inferring the circle there that comes in to the X, or maybe, and let's assume the arrow that's going into the agent is what's coming out of X, or is coming from X. So that's, in a way, the edge, isn't it?

That's the kind of boundary that's being, the beliefs, when you say B, the B is about that, not strictly about W.


SPEAKER_01:
There's a belief distribution on W and X. W is latent, modeled, unobserved states, and X is modeled, empirical, observed states.

Right.

Okay, Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So just to kind of riff off of what both of you guys were saying, maybe this is tangential, but when you talked about leakage, Stephen,

it reminds me of like the information partitioning that we discussed with Majeed Benny and how there kind of always has to be some kind of leakage.

Like if you have a complete information partitioning, you're actually like,

in a vacuum or a bubble, like you're existing, there has to be some kind of leakage across the partition all the time.

Like, and I've come to realize this, like we have to be sharing information with people that are, you know, how do we form a Markov blanket?

How do the four of us come together and form this live stream today, right?

Like we're sharing information, even though there's a Markov blanket that exists between us.

And for some of us it's thicker and thinner.

like Daniel and I will be often like doing the same thing at the same time like like even like you know separately um just because we we work together so much but um

this leakage is there.

And then it also made me think about the maladaptive behavior that Daniel was mentioning.

And so when you have this, like, we always wonder what is the cause of this maladaptive behavior?

And this is something that we were discussing maybe a couple of weeks ago with Jason, you know, what is the explanation for maladaptive behavior?

And it always makes me think about the scale, right?

Like in the situations that are utilitarian, like, you know, maybe someone sacrifices themselves

for they jumped in front of a train to stop the train to save the 300 people that are on the train.

And so there's the maladaptive decisions do occur, but perhaps it's at like a societal scale or like in a body, one piece will die off to save another piece, like even in the brain.

like the formation of like the glial scar, I think of that, like which it's like essentially like it puts a hole in your brain, but it's to protect the rest of the brain from the cell death that's happening in that center hole.

And so, you know, there is this information leakage and even maladaptive behavior that I think are scale dependent, scale friendly.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Blue.

Dean, and then we'll move to another section.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yeah.

I don't know if we're at an inflection point with this, but I do want to bring this up again.

I think that the leakage speaks to another metaphor that I brought up way too many times last week, and in the point zero, which I think there is a filtering piece to this.

I mean this morning I put the raspberries in the sieve and I assumed the raspberries would stay and the water would pass through and there were parts that I didn't need like I wasn't trying to make raspberry water I just wanted to eat the raspberries and I think that if we understand that there's two a minimum of two aspects to when we're talking about active inference I think we do ourselves a favor

And I think we do ourselves a favor for writing guidebooks about active inference and free energy.

So I think the guidebook for the guidebook, if there were some pillars that we could put a guidebook on, here would be my suggestions.

First of all, there is going to be, because we have a Markov blanket, we have a separation.

that differentiation and that integration are going to be inherent in however we observe something and then respond to it.

Second thing that I would suggest is there's a certain blind spot removal piece to this.

And I mean that in the context of, say, something like change blindness because of over-attending or under-attending, where we talked about overfitting or failing to explain, that change blindness now becoming a greater awareness availability because we don't necessarily have to lock in prematurely or wait too long.

There's kind of a sweet spot that active inference is trying to say exists.

It's not perfect.

but it's better than not having a sweet spot.

The other thing I would say is if we're ignoring the foraging aspect of this, if we expect that the framework is going to be another frozen meal, then you're going to get the quality of a frozen meal.

If you're willing to forge around the perimeter of the store, you're going to come away with a whole different experience.

It's more time consuming, but in the end, it's like learning to fish.

It's a whole different way of trying to process those uncertainties, right?

So I think at the end of the day, what pops out or when we decide that we can actually say somebody is using active inference, whereas before they weren't, I think what they do is they come up with a new sense of what rules are.

which are being updated, which are being modified, which are being iterated and sometimes even being extrapolated, we have to really focus on what that means under particular circumstances as we move from place to place.

So again, I'm not sure

Maybe that's not being fair to the people who wrote a 60-page guide for philosophers.

But I think if we're going to look at the foundational things that are going to be able to tell whether or not we're actually doing and using active inference, I would think that at a minimum, those four things are going to be present.

Starting with the filtering thing, because again, if it's not a minimum of two,

I think we over-reduce.

We put a frame around it, but we don't actually know what's actually a gradient descent and dynamically stable within that.

So just something to think about if we're going to write guides.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.

Okay, Stephen, specifically on that, and then we'll go on.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, just referring to this idea of screens, and it comes back to the idea of screening off or filtering, I think that the X and the Z here, there's a question we often, in this particular context, they are talking a lot about screening it off, and it seems to be, whereas in other contexts, say Axel Constant's work, I feel like it's trying to extract as much as possible from

the informational potential in an environment.

I think that's important, isn't it?

There's a very different... I've worked... I actually used to work as a print broker, so I actually fire up these...

big presses and it takes a hundred a thousand copies to get the magazine actually starting to print properly like the rollers and the blanket has to get inked up and everything you've got all this waste eventually you actually get something that looks good and now it's running so you've got a thousand wasted copies basically you're trying to extract as much as possible from the inked up prints print head print cylinder right this is on a big press now in that case then you're trying to get as much information basically across into the paper

Now, there's other cases, though, you can imagine where it's, I don't know, someone's taking a video and there's bright lights going on and there's, you know, you're trying to filter out.

Like we say, you've got bright light, you know, you're looking at the sun, you've got to filter out to see anything.

In that case, you're still trying to get your sensory data in, you're still trying to work on the action policies, but both X and Z, in a traditional blanket,

it's a dead thing, you know, but how much is X and Z, you know, how much is that a living kind of process at certain times that is moving?

I mean, you could say it's doing a bit of everything, but how much is it trying to screen out noise and bringing, and how much is it trying to extract, you know, from Shannon entropy and stuff like that?

So, you know, I thought I'd mention that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it makes me think of, like, being on the phone with somebody and it's like you're both trying to pull as much information out of that limited channel and put as much into a limited channel and so, um...

Let's go on to justificatory links between or among dialectical categories.

So we'll do some slide play.

We have three types of claims.

Dave, I hope I'm using the word appropriately that there are domains of claims.

Mathematical, read, empirical,

blue general green okay so no um commitments but can somebody just like give a specific concise example of where we see one of these cross category statements

can be in any direction amongst the three where's a case where somebody uses a mathematical the first part of their sentence is mathematical and then the second part is empirical or vice versa where's a situation where the first part of someone's sentence is mathematical and the second part is general so

I'm sure that many have been said even today, but let's try to get a few really specific examples so that people can just learn to identify these kinds of sentences, and then we'll be evaluating what they mean.

So Blue, go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
So nothing that's been mentioned today, but the p-value of 0.05,

you know, demonstrates that whatever my claim is and my experiment is significant, right?

So that's something that all the time you see the statistical, you know, justifying the empirical and less so.

I think we're coming away from the significance of the p-value in scientific literature, but you see that a lot.


SPEAKER_01:
So where would we put statistics?

What domains does statistics jump among?


SPEAKER_02:
So statistics to me is math.

Like statistics is the sentence that bridges, that's the field that bridges mathematics and empirical claims.

Like, so when you make the sentence, my P value of 0.05, P less than 0.05 demonstrates that whatever my claim is, my empirical claim is significant.

So for me, statistics is that bridge between math and empirical claims.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

yes totally agreed we looked at these two categories of ant and we saw this one doing it six times this one did it two times we did some math on the numbers six and two you can't do math on ant you do math on the numbers six and two and from that mathematical claim

We're going to say something about those two categories of ants.

So yes, mathematics going to empirical is a lot like statistics.

Okay.

What about empirical going back to mathematics?

What is a specific natural language expression where somebody begins, where the warrant of the rhetoric is empirically driven,

meaning based upon observation, and then the consequence of the argument is mathematical.

How about because the organism is maintaining body temperature homeostasis, empirical,

it is the case that it is doing predictive processing or active inference.

So here, now, there's so many ways to even enter here, but this would be like from results.

That's the hallmark of starting in empirical is you're starting with something that is almost either trivial or just simply a fact or observation about the world.

So from results to what?

Some sort of statement about, now what's interesting about the way that the authors did it here is they have no, none of the three cases

have mathematics in the second position.

And that's kind of like the XKCD comic where mathematics is like, oh, I'm way over here, I can't hear you, the fields arranged by purity meme.

Because mathematics is almost framed as like internally coherent, and then information comes out of mathematics, but because it's theoretical or abstract,

There is an internal logic in mathematics called proof, and then there's very little need to have something enter mathematics, which is why we'll see as we start to flesh out this shape.

Steven?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, as you're doing that, I'm curious what you think about something like gambling.

Say someone is betting on horses.

There's statistics of the horse gambling, and then there's their motivation for gambling.

So in terms of the empirical, you can see, okay, the behavior is fairly consistent, certainly over a type of gambler at horse race.

The math can be established, but then there's, I don't know whether it goes into the general, what's people's motivation for the teleology, but maybe I'm jumping the gun there, but am I on the right lines there in terms of how would you put that into this scenario?


SPEAKER_01:
Can you restate it with an antecedent and a postcedent?

Just a specific rhetorical nucleus?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, so there's... Because X, then Y. Oh, because there is a group of people at a horse racing track, and because we know that these horses have performed...

in a certain way over previous races, we can predict the probability that the horse will win or be told to people to win as being X. The motivation for people to make that inference about and the behavioral choices is maybe more general.


SPEAKER_01:
But that seems to be more- Yes, we'll get to the general edge because it's very connected to math.

Okay, Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
No, I was just going to say, I like the word results there, but I think what it's implied is that there were a certain number of observations taken that then moved the formalism to something specific.

Am I just confirming something, or am I putting more in there than needs to be?


SPEAKER_02:
I had a really similar question.

So when you're talking about going from empirical to math,

To me, you brought up the idea of a probability density or a non-equilibrium steady state, and that's immediately what came to my mind.

So I don't know if that echoes what Dean just said.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it does.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's get at the distinction between general claims and mathematical claims.

So math is sometimes seen as general, and when ideas are framed mathematically,

indeed there's a lot of overlap but the authors do separate it out it's in section 4.2.2 so what would be like an example of going from a mathematical to a general because math then general or because general claim then mathematics well you can you can talk about the rate of the rate of the rate of acceleration due to gravity


SPEAKER_00:
and then make the general claim that if I go from this height to this height, I can expect to hit the ground at a certain rate of speed or something, I would imagine.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, great.

I'm going to also pull out just two examples from...


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, from the paper.


SPEAKER_01:
So here we go.

So we're in 4.2.2.

So there's gonna be two examples given.

So again, we're looking here at math going to general, and then we'll see if we can run it back.

So how can mathematical claims justify general claims?

Ramstad et al.

assert, the FEP is a mathematical formulation that explains, from first principles, the characteristics of biological systems that are able to resist decay and persist over time.

First part of the sentence, mathematical.

Second part, general.

It rests on the idea that all biological systems instantiate a hierarchy

a hierarchical generative model of the world that implicitly minimizes its entropy by minimizing free energy.

I almost see the reflection in that sentence that because of the hierarchical generative model, which is a general claim, though a formal one, then there is a mathematical implication.

So maybe we can put this Ramstad 2018 here.

Okay, and then here's the second or a second example that the author has raised in the paper.

Axel Constant's contribution to this topical collection uses a mathematical claim to make a general claim.

On the basis of a numerical example, he argues against the claim that minimizing free energy entails life.

Rather, he believes the converse is true.

Life entails minimizing free energy.

We read and loved that paper.

And that's very much related to the quote, like one ugly fact destroys a beautiful theory or something like that.

Now, is an example mathematical or empirical?

If it were just on the basis of a family of equations, he argues against the general claim.

But then again, isn't even the family of an equations an empirical

observation from the domain of math but we'll put it in the section that they had it so in these cases we're using specific math examples and that was sort of the provocation of 34 and axel's paper which was like i did a math example so it's kind of resting on both the empirical and the mathematical i did a math example

and now i'm going to make a claim about a general topic which is the relationship between free energy minimization and life so that is certainly moving in this direction whereas um so because math can be abstracted and generalized there's often similarity here because math rests upon specific examples

Even if some examples are more general than other examples, it still can be said that they're empirical.

Not exactly in the way that cat location measurement is, but still it is the case that math produces results.

There can be a results section in a math paper.

What about this third edge?

What's the relationship between general and empirical?

And let's leave math out of it.

Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
So this is something like.

I think about like what Dean was saying because acceleration to due to gravity is, you know, negative 9.8 meters per second squared.

When I drop this Apple, it will fall to the ground like that goes maybe empirical to general.


SPEAKER_01:
When I when I drop the Apple.

um because when i drop the apple it falls to the ground comma gravity exists in the whole universe that was quite a jump well because apples fell in not down that's flat earth because apples fell in gravity is everywhere

Okay, that's one example.

So then I was thinking of like a sort of ants evolution example.

So the general to empirical would be like, because of the way that evolution by natural selection is, ants optimize task efficiency.

And then the other direction would be like, because in my experiment, 30% of the time ants were observed to be doing this, selection has been acting on ants.

So these are very interesting because are there some edges that we rest upon more?

Like what if we could just number these edges, one, two, three, four, five, six.

and then annotate, and people could have different perspectives on it, but we could annotate papers in different areas.

And okay, if you're just doing one, one, one, one, one, one, one, one, one, it's like a one note paper from a structural rhetorical perspective.

Under what situations is that preferable, not preferable?

Are there certain edges that are weak?

Are there pairs of edges, like a chord that we want to play together?

Just like the Ramstead, it was like sort of forwards and backwards.

Law of the jungle, law of the pack.

From the mathematics to the general, and then instantly a grammatical reflection from the empirical into the mathematical.

Okay, Stephen, then Dean.


SPEAKER_04:
So one question first, I just asked, empirical could be seen as is that exact base?

Empirical means observed.

Observed.

So the exact base, if you're just taking however you lay that out, if it hasn't been computed beyond observed.

Okay, so effectively that's true.

Okay, that's the first thing.

And then general...

in most senses, is what we might call inflated or higher dimensional.

So we go, generally speaking, the models are empirical from observed observations into math, into generative model, into some general pattern of action selection.

However, it could be possible, but generally it's intractable for complex situations to go from general to empirical observations.

and then try and get the math out, which is kind of what Alex is saying.

It's like there's a general principle that empirically plays out, but good luck finding the math to show it outside of a bacteria.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
So I find it interesting, Daniel, that you

Just to keep the conversation sort of alive, you talked about the edges of those three circles.

And I think that the task of being able to find examples of those bi-directionalities, again, goes back to that question of, so what are the rules?

And how fluid are they?

And as we're moving from one node, so there's a change, the moving from node to node, we're building that relationship.

We're building out these rules.

Is that one of the great byproducts of being able to maneuver and manipulate, not getting stuck with only a sense of unidirectionality?

or oneness?

Does this reinforce the idea that if we're going to actually really be able to demonstrate the use of active inference, for example, as an instrument or a tool to be able to gain a greater awareness, are we really then talking about how we not just find examples of rules, but actually form them?

Because that was the exercise that you just went, you just built a whole bunch of rules.

I know we've laid them down on the slide as examples, but those relationships now are, they're not even bridged, right?

They've now got some sort of a pairing effect.

So is that, I'm looking today back to the, and then what happens, what I'm looking today for is, so we guide our way, we guide our way to what?

Is there now an awareness, a sense that we didn't have before we went through that effort?

And is the thing that kicks out rules or is it just examples?

What do you think?

I'm asking you, Daniel, because you did the most of this work.

Do you see the rules or do we just see the examples?


SPEAKER_01:
I just think about how in a nested cognitive model, the outcome of one layer is like the inflow of another layer.

So even a rule can be a rule in one layer or application, but yet it's also an example of a rule.

mathematics and general claims tend to be more rule-like.

But again, even rules are examples.

Whereas empirical, it's always the exception that proves the rule.

Like it's the exception is the observation which transcends rules because if it happened, it had to have occurred.

And so the empirical to me is like examples, right?

when you're in this domain.

And then movement away from the examples in the scientific empirical sense pushes us into the rule world.

So here, this red line is going to be more example-like.

And so in that sense, with the caveat, again, that even rules and generalizations are examples of.

But in the scientific empirical sense, this is more like an example.


SPEAKER_00:
Can you hear in your own explanation the sort of justifactory link between example and rule?

Do you hear yourself justifying the difference between how we might look at math in general as being different than the empirical?

That's all I'm trying to bring out.

And again, it's a not... It's not... There's nothing... I mean, it makes perfect sense.

But I think if we're going to find...

If we're going to find that somebody used a guide and what is the result of that, it's going to be that people have a better sense of what the rules are and what the examples are and what the relationship is between those two things.

That would be goodness gracious.

I mean, if I'm talking to anybody between the ages of 22 and 62, if we could get there, holy mackerel.

Thanks, Steven, in terms of, in terms of opening up our understanding of things.

Right.


SPEAKER_04:
One thing I think with what you're saying that Dean is, um, which is because it does become interesting.

And, uh, uh, something Daniel mentioned when we have multi-scale, the actual nature of the rule example actually can shift.

And as teleologies shift, that I think is kind of revolutionary in a way when we start to think about there's a variation in the nature of what rules are present.

So the sort of rules around what it means for me to do something in my environment, my cells individually, I can't play that game.

My organs can't play that game individually, right?

So there is this challenge, right, of integrating, or maybe this is the idea of, okay, well, as well as saying what's happening, where is something, or what temporal and spatial scale,

does it hold?

And I think that may be something that's kind of interesting is where, so generally speaking, people go to the racetrack and, you know, they behave in certain behaviors at the scale of their part in society.

But they, and we have empirical data to support that.

However, at the biological level,

It may be something to do with adrenaline rush you could talk about.

You could talk about the fact that they just happen to have a nice sandwich bar and someone enjoys getting the food, right?

They don't even like gambling that much.

Whatever it is, or wearing a funny hat at Ascot.

So there's something there that could...

How do we, I wonder that multi-scale question, because I'm very caught with the idea that you've got Axel Constant taking very, very small, you have this incredibly small world being addressed with active inference, and then we have quite, sort of, you could say gross,

examples at scale which ends up revealing a lot you know at larger scale um but uh i wonder what you think daniel about how what what happens and that that reflects what daniel i think was saying about nested systems and

they're sort of informing each other in a way.

Like if I think I'm going to win some money on the races and I better get myself sorted, I might sustain my stomach a bit more so I've got a better glucose level to make a good choice, right?

So suddenly there's two different levels coming into play or just different scales.

So I don't think that's confusing things, but I think it does make the modelling question more

Because active inference is ultimately a modeling process, which is trying to get at, I would say it's trying to either get at the general or to predict an empirical, if I'm looking at this diagram, but maybe I'm mistaken there.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, where is active inference?

in this is this the trace of active inference is this the map but then we play on this territory what is the adjacent possible and so we can ask first where's active inference here and when is it here and then what next dean


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is where I think it's in the relationships and how we decide to parse those relationships.

And it seems rather arbitrary.

And I think it's one of the reasons why we can always disagree on when the rules are in effect and when they're not in effect.

I mean, it's happening up here in Canada.

We've got all these rules in place and then people just decide to pull up big trucks to the border and go, no, we don't like your rule.

Right.

And so now there's being Canadian.

Now we have to figure out how we're going to deal with that because we don't have any guns.

So I guess we're going to have to disassemble all the trucks or something by hand.

But the thing is, is that if you actually look at this, active inference is in the relationship.

And I think it's and then and I think to Stephen's point.

if we think that a rule applies without limits, that's the scale-free part of it.

From a mathematical standpoint, we can find cases where that's true.

But then there's a very scale-friendly part of it, which says, this rule doesn't seem to make sense in this specific situation.

And that's where Axel came forward.

He essentially said, I'm sorry, but... And so did... I'm sorry, the...

There was another author we had very recently who agreed and said, it was Majid.

Majid said, look, there's a piece to this that says there's something that's local and proximal and specific, and why are we pretending like that fits the same context as scale-free?

So,

Again, I think I don't see that means that active inference is useless.

I think what it means is it can tell us when we can differentiate and when we can integrate.

That's relational.


SPEAKER_01:
So one thing this made me think of is that reading a paper on free energy, free energy principle, active inference.

Look at the roadmap.

There's no dialectic

within a domain the claims are listed but it goes immediately to the relationship so it's like minimum two domains okay now it makes me think about the structure of scientific communication so in the results section of the paper well so the introduction might have a lot of general and empirical claims

selection acts on ants and look at their mandibles and we know this about niche construction and look at how they do it so that is like a very introductory piece there's not often formalisms in the introduction of the paper so that sort of blue arrow general and empirical is very introductory in its scope then the results section of the paper

is like Blue mentioned, it's about like empirical and math.

We saw it do it 11 times and here's the p-value.

And then we did this and we calculated the model.

And so it's like, it shouldn't generalize in some senses.

And then in the discussion,

there's probably all edges in play, but especially math to general, because it's now been generalized beyond the mere empirical.

Because we saw a p-value in the difference between the nest mates of this type and that type, it does say something about evolution, or because there's something happening at an evolutionary time scale, it's consistent or inconsistent with our mathematical summary statistics.

Yes, that came from empirical, but that edge is more

in play dean and then in simple simple terms that's how and when we fit phit the rule and that almost it does return us to the third p um but i think it's um so we'll kind of close this section on the 2.4 whatever it was with the uh links amongst the dialectical categories

active inference as a transdiscipline, all of these are often in play.

And it's almost like if the paper would have just been lists of empirical observations, there'd be nothing contentious because it wouldn't make any general claims.

That would just be called a data set.

If it were just general claims, it would be just philosophy.

And

That's not to say philosophy is easier or simpler.

It's like it doesn't trigger anyone's domain crossing alarm.

But like mathematical biology, that does raise people's alarms.

Or generalizing from math, you're saying that because of the free energy minimizing that there's a general imperative for information foraging?

Or...

relationship between the general and the empirical.

Of course, always fraught in empirical science.

Okay, you measured in that laboratory study with those undergrads and that stimuli, and you're gonna say something about aggression?

So it's just very interesting because active inference does lay claim or at least lay play to all these areas that,

it raises alarms on all sides.

But how do we take that alarm pheromone and attention and then just align it with something that's going to be a public good rather than just let it fizzle?

Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
That's very helpful.

And the nature of action and the idea of teleology, as soon as that comes in, I don't know if you can avoid being in the general.

Now, maybe active vision that's just doing a thousand-dimensional interpretation of a data set, you know,

stick with empirical math you know it's either recognizing a photo it's not recognizing a photo during some deep deep deep computational processes but action and particularly then action policy and then teleology and and would you say that would you say there's general claims or is where where would teleology fit in here


SPEAKER_01:
teleology is never directly measured is that fair to say so it can it can always it can be it can be in green but it cannot be blue one can say i observed sorry blue but i chose the colors for a reason too

One could observe the animal trying to swim to the surface, and you can say, well, the teleology is obviously not to drown or something like that.

But that's actually structured as, because I empirically observed the swimming behavior, I am going to make a claim about the teleology.

So I would say teleology is in a general case...

Even another spin on this one would be empirical is like X. This is the data that we're actually observing.

General is unobserved.

You can't observe things that are general.

You're only observing what Blake calls the minute particulars, W. What is math?

Math is, in the examples that we looked at, it's like the process.

Oh wait, active inference.

It's a mathematical process theory.

So math is a process of inference that yes, connects to generalities.

And this is not hard and fast.

I hope it's not being interpreted in the most rigorous way, but it does generalize

because it has to be like the intermediating blanket so let's pull this w and x back in here all right so here we have the empirical states here being observed that's our data okay and then here's the things that we would like to generalize on

And then this gets to Dean's question about how do you go from this to equations?

And here's math as our sort of blanket in the middle.

That's when we actually do, whether it's variational base or whether it's exact or whether there's some other mathematical approach,

It's how we're going to go from these generalized or hypothesized things that we didn't observe.

How are we going to connect that domain?

And so it's almost like a little boomerang.

So there's probably a lot more to explore here too, Dean.


SPEAKER_00:
I just like how this has come together because math, as we said, well, as I mentioned before, I think in the author's mind, the motivation moving forward on the paper was math could be a vehicle and it can move the process along because it is a process or it can be an impediment.

The other thing that's really interesting here is because it's in the middle, isn't math got a lot of rules in it?

I mean, come on.

Right?

So, again, I don't think we're contradicting ourselves.

I just think we're asking, so again, what do we allow to pass through the sieve?

And what do we hold back?

And then what assumptions do we make about the sophistication?

What's the minimum amount of sophistication around the math process that one must have?

Dr. Carl Friston said...

You must have a good grounded sense of what the math is if you're going to go forward.

He didn't couch his words.

He said, if you want this to become a vehicle and not an impediment, you're going to have to get familiar with the math.


SPEAKER_01:
And sometimes, oh, the math is not the territory.

Important contribution in memes for sure.

If the debate were about

whether territories were maps it would be the silver bullet to simply claim that the math is not the territory but it's like right and we want the map so that we can take action and be on our road trip or whatever so it's the math is not the territory while it's the conclusion or the um second part of the rhetoric

For some, especially philosophers, who might be interested in what is really out there, because the math is not the territory, comma, then what?

That's like the dot two of act-inf, which is instead of just debating, well, yeah, well, because of homeostasis, what can you really say about teleology?

And because of allostasis, does that contribute to a new understanding of niche construction?

They're all important questions, right?

but then where do we go when we put the math is not the territory as our antecedent rather than our conclusion rhetorically, Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

And like when you put here, so,

First, the math, I totally agree.

I was thinking that a vehicle, I was thinking it also takes a different, so for instance, say I have a million dollars, it gets picked up, it's counted, it's picked up in a car, taken somewhere, and then it's counted as a million dollars.

The bit in between, it's not math, it's just stuff, right?

But in this process theory,

In a way, the math is enabling, and it could be an entropic process, it could be math in maybe some sort of virtual numbers way or noise way, but the math is the vehicle for the data.

There is no data, there is no banknote.

There is only a process which enables the general to the empirical, and the empirical in this context is a modelled empirical.

In a way, what we're saying is we're going to take most of the models that we see.

There's a very simple general idea about behavior, say in Ryan Smith's idea about how the heart behaves, how the gut behaves, something about how access consciousness or access awareness is achieved, some general thing.

And then we basically do what we might call a modeled empirical.

You could flip it around the other way and you could have...

Okay, well, in the real world, we could have a high dimensional empirical outside there.

What's the general W?

What's the general X internally?

What's the general, which is what we use as our heuristics?

you know, which could be kind of interesting as well, which is maybe more in the action, because this is coming in on the sensory, right?

But I think this is quite helpful.

Would you say that's true?

It's a modeled empirical, what we get on the, in terms of how we work with it in the active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, looking back,

on it is there anyone who disagrees that empirical is always as modeled like it's kind of funny like now i want to put a little red guy always intervening on this edge little blue guy always talking about specific examples of math and generality and then

know the the generalization is we use the the um you know in equal variance t test so we generalized to connect the empirical and the math dean i i really didn't want to go there here but i have to i was way too excited last week when i had a little thought bubble and said wouldn't it be cool if my if michael


SPEAKER_00:
or sorry, if Steven Mann and Connor Hines, if we could get them in a room and instead of them talking about what they know, get them to go through this process, because that's essentially what we want to do is we want to have that little guy

pop out as opposed to the one who knows so much in a dense way about their math or so much in a dense way about their philosophical guide.

Because that's when the true grasp of what the potential is.

And it's not about always having the right answer.

It's coming up with the best answer in that moment, right?

And if we could get more of those kind of situations,

I think people would actually, I think people will actually come away feeling even more confident because that's what this is about.

It's about confidence developing, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
One thought on that is like, it's possible to stay purely internal to math and that's the internal logic of proofs.

It's also possible to stay internal to general claims and do philosophy.

is it possible to stay purely within the realm of empiricism in the trivial case yes if you're just aggregating data sets and never interpreting them yes but empirical in application must either connect to a general question like you know again we observed the ants and now we're going to talk about evolution so that's still qualitative

but it's an edge.

And then it rests on math when it's more statistical and on generalities when it's more conceptual.

But it's just sort of interesting that the internal logic of empiricism is basically just data integrity, but it's like pre-interpretation, which is perfect for it being X. Whereas there's a whole guild structure and discipline

around internal mathematics and internal generalizations and philosophy and so it's like i and i also really agree with that having them i thought you're gonna say just get them in the same room and then just talk about food or music or something like that no but i i know what you mean have them and just like we're all learning by doing in this space

And to say that this is a lifelong journey would just be a total understatement.

It's broader and deeper than that.

So how do we recognize the complexity of this arrangement as well as the adjacent possibles?

Are there ways that it could have been made?

Other end states that we could have reached?

bringing in any number of fourth points to make a tetrahedra, any other number of orders of paths that we could have done to reach this point.

Like if we had started with these little dots and then later added the arrows.

And how did we start this whole thing?

With examples of each edge.

So getting to the super like fractal multi-scale level where, and we didn't even add any formalisms or mathematics here.

but we could have done some pseudo code or some pseudo equations to really start to link this and to lean more on our mathematical leg.

And that's the whole thing that you just said about confidence, Dean, which is like, this is the space that we're going to be bouncing around.

And you can ignore statistics and you can just have an emotional response to p-values and stuff like that, but you will need that as part of the journey.

We can't just be like the post office vehicles that don't make left turns.

We have to make all of our tools available at the team level and then trust that with distributed cognition and with guides and wayfinders and peer facilitation that we can...

make it work, despite how vast this area is.

So, yes, Stephen, as we go for our final commentary.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think you made a good point there.

I am with that green arrow, just one last thing with a green arrow you put there.

Could that be more implemented implementable?


SPEAKER_01:
um like it becomes more implementable as you go that direction um away from the math uh with a mixture of general and empirical uh just curious so the arrows yeah the arrows i mean again it's open to interpretation in other ways it could have been done i was thinking what links up math and empirical they're both more numerical that's the bottom edge okay then then um what

then what makes math and general similar they're less example-like and then what is the similarity between empirical and general so what is not just pointing what's the arrow that doesn't point to general but what's the arrow that points between general and empirical and what distinguishes mathematics from general empirical it might be its formalism but


SPEAKER_04:
general is it well i'm thinking implementation or maybe this does get into teleology like it shows you more but the empirical is what's actually happened so like like i always this is an example is the um the accountant said to us once it always stuck in my mind is you know i said this before what is an organization doing what's they about he said don't tell me your mission don't tell me your vision show me your budget show me what you're doing or show me where you spend your time

So in a way it's like that, what's the empirical as well as the, that goes to the general to show me, well, that's, that gives an idea then of something that can be done as opposed to words or even a mathematical, well, words can be like a mathematical formula in many ways that help tell people what you want them to think, but maybe not what is going on.

So anyway, I like those three arrows.

I think it's pretty useful.


SPEAKER_00:
any final comments in the last one minute dean and then blue so real quickly i think that a lot of times conferences people go and they want to talk about what they know but i think that this example today was an example of where you come in not necessarily knowing but discovering

I think it's another fine example of what we're talking about when we're talking about active inference.

If I caught Steven Mann and Connor in the same room, the place that I would want to begin is, what don't you know?

How would you guys attack this from not your strength, preferences, probabilities, and fit, but from what you don't know but is still in the room?


SPEAKER_01:
and i think that's very complementary to the to the more traditional conference way of disseminating information there's my word for today and then even socially at the conference people connect with the people who they do know and that's the little click network instead of connecting with people who we don't know and so it also ties to hopefully some of our values too so blue any last thoughts


SPEAKER_02:
Just I'm just thought of complexity science and the interdisciplinarity and the real value that goes into co-learning or working outside of your comfort zone, because really, like, that's where where the growth happens.

So I like those ideas a lot.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Working with people, you know, can have amazing pragmatic utility.

and it must be balanced with the epistemic and with expanding our horizons and perspectives as well so yeah totally agreed well another fun one can't say we prepared too much but i think in the end it went just fine so thank you all for joining and for participating and we'll
