## skcKoCcAQJI

All right. Hello and welcome everyone. It's ActInfLab livestream number 46.0 and it's June 10th, 2022.
Welcome to the ActInfLab everyone. We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
You can find us at links here on the slide. This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.
Head over to ActiveInference.org if you want to learn more about livestreams at the lab or other projects that are ongoing.
All right. We are here in the first discussion, the .0 for background and context in stream number 46.0.
We are learning and discussing the paper Active Inference Models Do Not Contradict Folk Psychology by Ryan Smith, Maxwell Ramstad, and Alex Kiefer.
And the video, just like all the videos are, is an introduction and a contextualizer and an appetizer for some of these ideas. It's not a review or a final word.
We're going to say hi and give introductions. Then we'll be covering the roadmap and abstract claims and aims.
And then we'll head through some of the core sections of the paper and just get some of the key arguments down.
And during the .1 and the .2 in the coming two weeks, we'll have open space for asking a lot of questions for those who want to participate live and ask questions as well.
So on we go. We'll start just by introducing ourselves as much or as little as we'd like.
And if we want to mentioning something that we're excited about in the paper, like what brought us to want to contribute to this .0 and all start.
I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California, and I think the title says it all, though there's still more to add.
And it speaks to many of the hottest and brightest debates in active inference, which is the rubber hitting the road with mind and brain and body and psychology and previous and different conceptions.
I'll pass it to Dean.
Thanks, Daniel. I'm Dean. I'm up here in Calgary.
I think, well, a couple of things. First of all, one of the first active inference that I was on was a paper that Ryan had written.
And so I was kind of impressed with that paper. And I knew that if I sort of invested some time in this one, there was stuff that I would become aware of previous.
And the primary thing I came to was looking at active inference from the decisioning and the movement standpoint.
Sort of seeing that looked at from a higher order and the lower order type of processings.
And that when I, by the time I got into the paper and started looking at the mind to world and world to mind piece and, and, and seeing where the potential connectors were between sort of coming into it, not necessarily knowing that there would be different things of active inference.
Much like I didn't realize there was an extended active inference until I read Axel Constance paper.
That was kind of helpful. And I'll pass it to Jacob.
Hi everyone. I'm Jacob. I'm a student from the Czech Republic.
And I'm excited to reduce my uncertainty about the new kind of formulation that was, that was introduced in this paper,
or at least it was the first time I came across it in the active inference literature.
As you mentioned Dean about the different higher order and lower order descriptions and how they conceptually map to the different mathematical, mathematical formulation,
and also to the psychological ontology and overall just discuss what that, what that means and what it might mean for other applications as well.
And I'll pass on to Ryan.
Ryan Smith.
Yeah, thanks. So I'm Ryan Smith.
So I'm a research associate professor at the Laureate Institute for Brain Research.
You know, so I'm the first author of this, this paper.
So, you know, obviously I was sufficiently excited about the ideas to write about it or sufficiently motivated at least to try to clarify some things that I am, you know, from my perspective are sort of common misconceptions.
And yeah, I mean, you know, I'm, I'm probably more gonna sit in the background here.
I'll just be here to, you know, answer questions or clarify anything.
And, you know, if something comes up where something in the paper wasn't, wasn't sufficiently clear, because I didn't, I didn't do my job well enough.
So, um, yeah, so I appreciate you guys being willing to talk about it.
Thanks.
Well, the overall comment was we really appreciate the clarity of the argument and the writing and the weaving together of the the math and the formalisms with the argument, the rhetoric and the ontology.
That's that's prime time.
So we'll just jump right in.
And of course, anyone is welcome to share their comments.
So, Dean, would you like to help us contextualize with a big question?
Yeah, so I think that there's some questions surrounding and I'm just going to take some of the important quotes that I lifted from the paper, the concern that active
Inference models are in folk psychology because they do not explicitly include terms for desires or other cognitive constructs at the mathematical level of description.
So given that distinction, that there are active inference models of motor control, which need not have desires that are folk psychology and active inference models.
So if you have desires within folk psychology, then three is that I was going to be on structure.
Dean, could you, I think when you're talking, you like turn away a little bit or move back, it kind of cuts the audio.
So maybe, yeah, we'll try that.
Okay, continue from the given.
Thank you.
Okay, so given the, there's a distinction and active inference models of motor control, which do not have desires under folk psychology and active interest models of decision processes, which do have desires with psychology or so it's argued here.
Then the worry is that if active inference models can explain cognition without appealing to constructs can be mapped onto the common sense notion of desires, not to explain what that is, then this could be seen as threat or intuitive folks I call
of ourselves as agents such a situation would also pressure the traditional belief desire intent model of folk psychology that is prominent in philosophy.
The BDI model is a model of human agency that explains what it means act intentionally.
So for me, I was introduced to the BDI model.
Yes, great.
And, and one way that I kind of saw this big question, even pulling back a layer is like, is active inference, recontextualizing, reframing, augmenting, building on what is already familiar, in a sense, though there are many folk psychologies, and I think that could be something we go into.
Or is this the displacement of some cherished framework for some other construct, and the way that people speak like I want the cup of coffee or something like that.
Are we going to need like a different word for an active compatible folk psychology and linguistics.
So, Jakob, any thoughts on that?
Well, I guess, one question I perhaps had was like, this, even this formulation of the, of the initial, of the initial statement, like given this distinction of motor control active inference and decision processes active inference, then we have this, then we have this issue.
Well, one thing that I was a bit uncertain about was whether this distinction was made to fit the distinction that's within folk psychology, like there is some kind of ontology for motor control, and an ontology for decision processes.
So, therefore, we try to split active inference into these two parts, or whether there is actually, whether these, this distinction follows directly from the, say, mathematical formulation of active.
Great.
Great.
Well, I think, I think, I think, I think one thing, one thing to, you know, to clarify, I think, I think the way that this kind of given the distinction followed by then here, I think, could be leading to a little bit of a misunderstanding, you know, so the, the idea that there's a concern about, about a threat to folk psychology comes not from that distinction.
It comes from the fact that there's, at the mathematical level of description, it doesn't look like there's anything in there, that that's, that's desirous.
Right. I mean, that's where the worry comes from.
It doesn't really, the worry doesn't come from the distinction between motor control and decision processes.
Right. The, the, the distinction between motor control and decision processes is actually one thing that by making that more explicit, it actually helps to resolve the concern or, or it shows why it's not really a concern or that part of the concern stems from a failure to make that distinction explicitly.
So, so just to kind of clarify the, you know, so I think the order of the, of the thought process here is a little bit different than, than the way, the way it is in the paper.
Thanks.
Thanks.
Helpful times.
And we'll clarify and, and go through the argument in order to.
So, briefly, just the aims of the paper as they present it are to provide a brief review of the historical progression from predictive coding to current active inference models.
And show that despite a superficial tension when viewed at the mathematical level, the active inference formalism contains terms that are readily identifiable as desires and related cognitive constructs at the psychological level, which is downstream of that clarification of the distinction that Ryan just mentioned.
And then they discuss the additional insights offered by active inference and the implications it has for current debates about active inference.
Any other aims you'd want to add Ryan?
I think this is fine at the moment.
I mean, I'm sure things will come up.
Great.
And then claims.
Jakob, could you read the claims?
Yeah.
So, firstly, that the apparent problem posed by purely doxastic looking constructs simply is not a problem.
There do not appear to be cases where the phenotype consistent prior expectation in DAI, often called prior preferences, will ever conflict with or make distinct predictions than a traditional folk psychological account in which beliefs and desires are integrated to point intentions.
The second claim is that what we have referred to as DAI, the partially observable markup decision process formulation of Actin, is a corollary of the FEP and it can be implemented using prediction error minimization.
But there are many other aspects of the FEP and many other theories that fall under the umbrella of predictive processing.
And in sum, there are beliefs and desires in the active inference framework.
Thanks.
And those are just a few claims that we pulled out, but many other declarative sentences will also be claims.
I wouldn't necessarily call those the primary claims of the paper.
I mean, there's certainly statements that we make, but I think the idea that there isn't a, I think the idea that the apparent problem isn't a problem.
I think that's a claim.
I think that's a claim.
And that it doesn't, that there won't be a conflict with an account where you're combining beliefs and desires to form intentions.
That's true.
This idea about what falls under the predictive processing umbrella, I would, you know, I mean, I wouldn't necessarily say that's something we're arguing for in the paper.
It's just, it's just something that matters when you're trying to correctly frame this kind of debate because, you know, predictive processing is just a very generic term, right?
Like, like it doesn't refer to any particular mathematical formalism.
It just refers to a really broad idea that in some way the brain is doing some sort of predicting either with respect to resolving problems in perception or problems in decision-making and motor control.
So, so there really isn't, there's not enough, there's really just not enough mathematical specificity associated with predictive processing as a term to really even test any predictions that it would make.
Right.
So, I mean, I mean, what you, what you need to do is pick, you know, whatever specific mathematical formalism, what actual hypothesis you're talking about, and you evaluate and test claims with respect to that.
Right.
So there's, there just aren't, there just aren't clear, like what even, it's just a pretty good processing is just too general and vague is the point.
So, you know, we can only really say, look under, under the current models used that are called active inference, right?
So these, you know, partially observable market decision process models, you know, that, that minimize expected free energy as a way of making decisions, right?
Those, those arguably count as one particular, right?
Theory or, or class of models under the predictive processing umbrella.
And we can evaluate claims with respect to that model.
But, you know, what's true of that doesn't need to be true of, you know, the other, you know, 20 things out there that might, you know, might also fall under a predictive processing umbrella.
So that, I mean, the main point is just, we need to evaluate, you know, claims and predictions and things like that with respect to a specific model, not with respect to a kind of vague general category of models.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
So just rapidly through the abstract.
Active inference offers a unified theory of perception, learning and decision making at computational and neural levels of description.
In this article, we address the worry that active inference may be intention with the belief desire intention BDI model within folks psychology because it does not include terms for desires or other cognitive constructs at the mathematical level of description.
To resolve this concern, we first provide a brief review of the historical progression from predictive coding to active inference, enabling us to distinguish between active inference formulations of motor control, MAI, which need not have desires under folks psychology and active inference formulations of decision processes, DAI, which do have desires under, or sorry, within folks psychology.
We then show that despite a superficial tension, when viewed at the mathematical level of description, the active inference formalism contains terms that are readily identifiable as encoding both the objects of desire and the strength of desire at the psychological level of description.
We demonstrate this with simple simulations of an active inference agent motivated to leave a dark room for different reasons.
Despite their consistency, we further show how active inference may increase the granularity of folk psychological descriptions by highlighting distinctions between drives to seek information versus reward, and how it may also offer more precise, quantitative folk psychological predictions.
Finally, we consider how implicitly condensate components of active inference may have partial analogues, i.e. as if desires, in other systems describable by the broader free energy principle to which it conforms.
Here's the roadmap.
Here's the roadmap.
So, the dot, zeros, all of them in the world, wouldn't be enough to hit every stop.
So, we will go through roughly in order of these sections.
And the section titles are listed here.
But Ryan, what was the thought going into the ordering or the structuring and why there was such a comprehensive historical and preliminary consideration section?
Ryan D' I mean, a lot of, you know, I mean, the vast majority of these sections are just kind of building up background, right?
Ryan D' I mean, sufficient background to kind of see, right, where the, you know, both, I think, historically where, you know, potential misunderstandings might come from, you know, and also just enough of the, you know, providing enough of the formalism, you know, one part of the formalism that's kind of built on another, right?
Ryan D' To see why the, you know, to see why the apparent problem just isn't there, right?
So, I mean, the vast majority of these sections are just preliminary, just kind of building up so that the reader has the information necessary to understand the argument.
I mean, only the last couple of sections there really are the meat of the argument itself.
I mean, so, you know, for example, just section two, you know, the R, what we just said from predictive coding to active inferences, just kind of highlighting how,
Ryan D' You know, these initials of Asian brain as implemented through predictive coding was, you know, purely a model of perception.
Ryan D' Right, so then, you know, so then when people, but a lot of times you'll see, especially in the, you know, older literature and some philosophy literature, you know, predictive processing somehow both refers to predictive coding, but then also is talked about as though it's
Ryan D' the same thing as active inference.
Ryan D' You know, or there'll be these kinds of ideas where if you just extend predictive coding as kind of a
Ryan D' The way it's talked about as a kind of way of thinking about what the whole brain does, you know, then all of a sudden, you know, controlling the body ends up also just being something about predicting what the body will do.
Ryan D' But, but, and especially when described that way, right, it sounds like something like desire and motivation and goals and things like that are just kind of completely out the window and it's very hard to make sense of what how a system like that would even work.
Ryan D' Right, and so it's and and part of that, I think, is because there's, you know, some, you know, some, the way that certain things are written and some of the literature can be a little bit confusing or it's not too, it's not too.
Ryan D' Hard to understand why you know these sorts of you know these sorts of misunderstandings could that you know could happen.
Ryan D' But but but the but the you know section to do that was really, really is to show how you know initially right when you're trying to move from predictive coding again which is purely a model of perception.
Ryan D' It's not about decision making it's not about action selection, you know it's not even about motor control right it's just it's just a basian just a theory of how the brain can do approximate basian inference and perception.
Ryan D' You know how that was initially just extended to say hey like if the brain works this way, then you know how do you, how do you get a system that actually controls the body.
Ryan D' Using the same generic architecture right and so then you know the story that crawl first and you know and and you know some other people.
Ryan D' started trying to put together was the story about how you can use predictions you know descending predictions.
Ryan D' If weighted appropriately right as a way of essentially setting the target states of the body.
Ryan D' Right like like like it's just kind of you know the way you see it talked about is.
Ryan D' You know I predict that my arm will be here, but really it's down here, but if I weight that correctly then it'll kind of like.
Ryan D' You know you'll kind of control the set point and reflex arc to you know so the arm kind of moves up position.
Ryan D' Right but but that's just a theory about how you can use a descending prediction signal to essentially act as a motor command signal.
Ryan D' Right there's nothing in that at all that that's deciding what that prediction ought to be right there's nothing deciding what that what which motor command.
Ryan D' Should should be the one right that's getting sent down in in a you know in the with the form of a prediction.
Ryan D' Right so so again so even there it's just a theory about how you can use predictions as motor commands.
Ryan D' Right like there's no the very big distinction between that and whatever the system.
Ryan D' Is on top of that right this deciding okay what motor command, but what motor prediction right do I send.
Ryan D' And so just making you know making making that clear right because around 2015.
Ryan D' There was this big shift right from these from these act where from active inference being talked about as a.
Ryan D' I just kind of a motor control process right like a like a story about how you can extend predictive coding to.
Ryan D' You know also do motor commands right like.
Ryan D' From that to you know these larger more comprehensive decision making models which are the current right on vp's.
Ryan D' And those you know which was what we aim to show.
Ryan D' Very explicitly you know have something that.
Ryan D' You know in the mathematics.
Ryan D' It just does right it specifies the goals of the system.
Ryan D' And it's pretty hard to get around the fact that you need something.
Ryan D' A system needs something like goals right because it has to evaluate somehow.
Ryan D' Why one decision is going to be better than another.
Ryan D' Right, the only way I can really do that is with respect to how likely it is to get whatever the system wants.
Ryan D' So so it's just I mean in my you know in my view it's it's very difficult to see how.
Ryan D' How you could ever get.
Ryan D' A system to be able to evaluate one action is better than another without having some sort of target state.
Ryan D' And, and so you can call right like the target states and active inference a type of prior belief.
Ryan D' But at the end of the day it's functional role is to specify what what observations are better than what right.
Ryan D' So I mean you can really think of active inferences as using this kind of trick in a certain sense right of specifying desired outcomes in the form of a probability distribution.
Ryan D' Because that helps keep everything fully fully fully bayesian right.
Ryan D' But it's not it's not it's not playing functional role belief right it's encoding you know higher probability just means right like the better more rewarding outcome.
Ryan D' So, so a lot of it is just.
Ryan D' You know kind of working step by step through both kind of the historical progression, so you can see where the misunderstanding could come from.
Ryan D' And then also through the current formalism, so that you can see exactly where those where the you know the goal states are encoded in terms of something with the form of a probability distribution.
Ryan D' Thank you.
Ryan D' The keywords are active inference, poke psychology, predictive processing, Bayesian beliefs and desires.
Ryan D' So now we're going to jump in and some of the slides have a lot of text topically arranged, so we won't need to read all the text on many of the slides.
Ryan D' But especially if somebody wants to pull out like one of the highlighted sections, and like bring it to our attention that would be awesome.
Ryan D' So, and also Ryan thanks a lot for that great historical overview and I think there's there's so much more to be going into about what happened before 2015 and what happened in the last seven years.
Ryan D' In fact, I think you covered many of the key points in what you just described here, which had to do with the development of predictive coding framework into understanding brain and body.
Ryan D' Is there anything that anyone else wants to add about these points?
Ryan D' Great.
Ryan D' Then, all discussions and dot zeros are like a two way street, where some people with active inference familiarity are learning about new ideas and frameworks, and also people who might have familiarity with a broadly used area outside of actin are learning about actin.
Ryan D' So, for both directions on that freeway, it's important to understand what is the target non-actin framework that's being juxtaposed and found concordances with active inference.
Ryan D' So, the article is addressing the worry that actin models may be in tension with the belief desire intention model.
Ryan D' And there are some consequences to that worry.
Ryan D' In other words, given some priors, it's a founded worry.
Ryan D' Would anyone like to summarize what the belief desire intention model is?
Ryan D' Thank you, you should Daniel, because you, I think you put this slide together.
Ryan D' Ryan, what led you to select the BDI model?
Ryan D' And I wondered about almost this tension or paradox with like, it's folks psychology.
Ryan D' It's about what the people think.
Ryan D' But we're going to do a citation and one specific academic acronym for what people think.
Ryan D' So, is this like the main game in town for folks psychology from an academic perspective?
Ryan D' Or what is the BDI and what led you to select that rather than like a small portfolio of alternate folks psychologies?
Daniel Kahneman Well, I think that the, you know, belief desire intention model is just a very kind of, you know, generic, but also, you know, widely known, right?
Daniel Kahneman Like account of you know, trying to capture folks psychology and you know it's it's kind of the
Daniel Kahneman It's a it's a it's a major
Daniel Kahneman Sort of target of a lot of discussion within you know, like philosophy of mind.
Daniel Kahneman But I mean it's just very generic right I mean it's just this idea that you know what what are the what are the necessary ingredients to make a decision?
and well, I have to have some beliefs about how the world is
and I have to have some desires about how the world
I would like it to be.
And my intention involves integrating those two things.
And then if all goes well in terms of translating intentions
into controlling the body,
then I'll act out something according to my intention.
I mean, simple, like the dumb example
that you'll often hear is just something like,
I desire some ice cream.
I believe that there's an ice cream truck
down the road, given those two things
and necessarily those two things, right?
I can inform and form an intention to go,
walk over to the ice cream truck and buy some ice cream.
So, I mean, the question is how else,
are you gonna explain why I went over to the truck
to buy the ice cream?
I mean, that literally just is,
that is the general sort of thing
that when we're reasoning about other people's decisions,
other people's behavior and we're trying to figure out,
okay, why did this person do what they did?
You know, if we're assuming it's a voluntary action, right?
If we're assuming it's not because like their arms spasmed
or, you know, because they have some like really highly ingrained habit
or compulsion or something like that, right?
And then we're talking about voluntary behavior.
That is just the way, right?
That we tend to reason about how people do what they do.
You know, either when somebody does something
that we think is weird, right?
Then usually we have to explain that in terms of, okay,
well, they just believed something that was incorrect, right?
Or they had some really funny desire, right?
That I don't really, you know, it's tends to be, you know,
one of those sorts of things, right?
And I mean, I don't know a lot of other, you know,
separate folks, psychological models that would entail anything
different than this, you know, at a very generic level.
And it's also exactly the sort of thing, right?
That people try to contrast active inference with where instead of,
you know, beliefs and desires coming together to form intentions,
instead it'd be something like one kind of belief and another kind
of belief come together to form an intention.
And what would you get for a lot of reasons is, you know, confusing
and rightfully so when it's presented that way.
Thanks.
Yes, that's a good question.
So, Ryan, when we've had some conversations with other authors
and other papers where we've talked about the scale three formalism,
and we've also talked a little bit about the sort of scale friendly times
when you have to find that history and that context, which you just mentioned,
was sort of the generic, generalized sense that the BDI umbrella provides.
You're not saying that scale free quantification and a generic way of modeling
something are the same thing.
But what I think, I'm like, without putting words in your mouth, are you saying
that the scale freeness as it moves to something more scale friendly sweeps up some
of that generic big tent idea or model and now moves it along?
It allows you to sort of parse and be specific and precise, but also be able to generalize
as you move through those, you know, quantifications of the distribution and density and such.
Because that's kind of what I was reading into it.
I just want to make sure that I got it.
I was kind of, maybe you can help me clean that up a bit.
I mean, I really don't know that anything that we're saying really depends on or even gets into a lot of those sorts of specifics.
I mean, really, really all we're saying is, is that, you know, if you want to take a model, like the current active inference
formalism, the current kind of like vanilla formalism, right?
So in terms of interest to standard one level POM DP or, you know, if you want to scale it up hierarchically,
it doesn't ultimately matter.
It is if you want to use the vanilla active inference framework to actually model some sort of voluntary decision process in a human, right?
So, I mean, a lot of my work has to do with people, you know, modeling behavior on decision-making tasks, right?
Often have to do with, you know, the person, the person has the goal of maximizing, you know, how much money they win or, you know,
maximizing some sort of social rewards, something like that.
The idea is, is just that when you're trying to, if you're going to take an active inference model and you're going to use it to model,
successfully model actual human behavior when they're making decisions, then,
there's always going to be a mapping between the different elements in the active inference model of voluntary behavior that,
or the, whatever the prior, you know, prior preference distribution is, you just check that so that it just goes to the level of reward associated with different
situations.
You know, so, so there's really nothing about any scale or anything like that.
This is much more generic.
It's just, if you're going to use active inference to model voluntary choice, then it will always have something analogous to a belief and a desire,
because that's just what you need, right?
Like to model, to model voluntary behavior.
It's true that, you know, that's probably if you're, if you actually were going to try to capture something,
kind of like more of the actual architecture in the brain, as opposed to just this kind of like voluntary decision process aspect.
I mean, I'm sure there's a lot of kind of hierarchy below that under the hood, right?
That's translating more abstract policy selection processes into whatever the dynamic signals are that, that end up controlling,
you know, moment by moment muscle movements and things like that.
But the point is, is the below, below this kind of top level where you're doing policy selection.
Yeah.
At that point, you don't really need the desires anymore, right?
You just need the policy to specify whatever the motor commands are going down that can take the form of predictions.
So, so I don't, I don't know if that helps, but it's just, it's just that there's a certain level in any kind of hierarchy of a model that's going to actually be applicable successfully to
human behavior and at the level of policy selection.
Prior preferences will just include the desired outcomes.
They'll just encode the goals that the agents trying to reach and the policy that's chosen will be evaluated as being the most likely policy,
because it's the thing that's predicted to have the highest probability of getting the desired, you know, generating the desired observation.
If I may also comment on that, and I'm not sure if this is answering your question, Dean, but the way I thought about it when I was reading the paper,
was that part of the reason why the belief desire intention model kind of works, works well for, for mapping the active inference ontology to the folk psychology ontology,
is because it's because it's a discrete model in that it separates these, these different, these different parts.
And, and I think that also might've motivated the choice to consider mainly discrete POMDPs and describe the decision, this decision active inference in that, in that way as well.
Because then this discrete model can be more easily mapped to say the discrete model of the POMDP that's described like a, like a factor graph.
I'm not sure what, I was wondering how this would map to continuous tasks as well.
Well, I mean, I mean, I think the, I mean, part of the, I mean, you know, part of the, part of the reason why you need something discrete, right, is, is because actions are discrete, right?
I mean, there's either policy one or there's policy two or there's policy three, right?
So those, those just are sort of necessarily, right?
I mean, you get, you know, continuous state spaces work well or are appropriate, you know, at lower levels in a hierarchy, you know, when you're talking about kind of dynamics and motor movement, you know, dynamics in the set point of some reflex arc or, or when you're trying to estimate something in perception that, you know, just, just as a continuous quantity, right?
Like brightness or, you know, orientation or things like that, but, but at the level of, at the level of decision-making models that are necessarily, right, discrete.
I mean, I mean, there is, you know, there are, there are kind of hybrid models, right, that are out there in the literature, you know, like Thomas Parker, for example, you know, has published several papers using these sorts of models where the, the kind of policy at the higher level, which is, which is in a discrete model,
that generates, right, some observation that then sets the set point, right?
For some continuous, for some continuous lower level model that then, you know, can end up in a, in a way that's kind of like this kind of replay of our story, you know, like move the eyes around the cod to different locations and things like that.
So, so, so I, I, I kind of think that, that the, the discreteness is, or the, the, the reason why things move to a discrete space architecture is just because of like the necessary, what's necessary with respect to a model of policy selection, because it is kind of all or none.
Just to keep the .0, 0-ish, we're going to move a lot faster through the following slides.
And there's many important questions in the chat and, and also arising.
So we're just going to carry on more rapidly so people can pick up on these key points in the 0 and we'll have a lot of time to explore soon.
time to explore soon. Section two from predictive coding to active inference traces the history and
the development from various fields and just one sentence here that Dean and I both highlighted on
and then Dean I'll let you describe the button was that crucially for the purposes of this paper,
the first generation active inference was not a theory of decision making. It did not explain
how we decide or plan where to move our body it only explained how body movements can be executed
using the predictive coding apparatus once a decision has been made. So how did you connect
that to the bottom right? Yeah so if you're on a if you're on a some sort of a website and you have
to pass through to something my question was based on that statement when the expectation is to know
that you've actually crossed a threshold you've moved beyond one page and there's an expectation
that there's something that you validated or confirmed or whatever is the feedback that you
received does that have how how does the person who's actually expecting that they're on the other
side what kind of feedback mechanism do they need to for that confirmation is tactile feedback enough do
they need some sort of a visual confirmation as well like what is the what's the is there because
we're talking about thresholds is that different for every single person or is there sort of expectations
built in depending upon the kind of situation that you're dealing with um I do know that with
but the idea that like changes are saved or links are copied sometimes the click isn't enough to give
people confidence that in fact that process is carried through. I mean I would I would say that I
mean a lot of those questions are really empirical empirical questions as opposed to modeling questions
um you know I mean I mean in terms of in terms of how you would model that sort of thing right you
just specify what observations count as tactile you specify what observations count as visual
and and uh you know what ends up being thresholds for sufficient evidence and things like that just
just have to do with the way that processes just have the dynamics naturally you know unroll in the
model under whatever the model parameterization is you know so so um you'll hit a threshold faster if
the mapping between observe whatever observations and states is more precise um for example um I mean
there's uh you know in relation in relation to that when we're doing policy selection right we also have
to check and see whether things are actually going as we expected them to go you know under a choice of
policy right so it's possible that you choose policy one and you start to get the subsequent observations
and they don't actually match what you expected you know given that you had chosen policy one um you
know in which case um you'll update your beliefs through perceptual inference and that might influence
how you act going forward um so so but uh the specifics about you know what's enough and whether it's visual
or tactile or tactile or anything like that I mean those are those are really just empirical questions
um that would have to be answered in studies as opposed to something about model choices
okay so there was really not a good enough thing when you did the dark room aspect of it like the
risk that you were prepared to take on right like somebody was prepared to take on the risk because they
really urgently wanted the ice cream versus the person who was like
yeah I'm I'm agnostic right so that's maybe that's kind of what I was
this was on the second reading of your paper right so I was kind of now backfilling from further down
in the paper so well I'm into that yeah we'll go in the order because we're mentioning things that we
haven't brought up yet but let's continue on and we'll return to that and Ryan I also agree that in
any specific case it's going to be a model parameterization some of these are very difficult to
answer in the abstract model selection setting um here the distinction between motor active inference
and decision active inference is introduced and um I'll allow Jakob to just convey one pass what is
the difference between motor active inference and decision active inference
um so I'm not sure whether I can uh say much that hasn't been said yet but in a um briefly the motor
active inference is does well as already mentioned it does not consider desire desires in the in both the
active inference and folk psychological sense uh as um was then connected in the in the paper but uh also
it is my understanding that the motor control version of active inference is modeled uh continuously like
the models of uh of the movement of individual muscles which does not entail decision making so it's modeled
with um in continuous time rather than in discrete time and the decision making uh acting as uh Ryan already
said as well uh is all about decision making so it describes the discrete process of decision making with uh
prior beliefs and preferences and it can i and it can be modeled at different different um
levels of cognition as well which is one thing that i'm still a bit uncertain about how we can move
through these different layers while still keeping the same mathematical formulation uh but i think we'll
probably get to that in the other slides yep we're gonna continue with this um distinction of
m ai for motor active inference and d ai for the decision active inference
m ai for the decision to be a little bit more um here we're showing some key sections from the paper
and uh some citations uh i think we will continue on without going into this in depth but it describes
some of the specific model quantities that are being described in active inference formalism and we're
going to come to them when we look at um some equations in the coming slides
um in section three preliminary considerations uh two broad points are uh introduced and we might show
a second one on a later slide um
how can we think Ryan about what is said here that decision making ai models are largely taken to describe
sub-personal non-conscious processes um and also it was asked in the chat not that we have to address
it now by duvid um has active inference produced a single reasonable model of a qualia so when we're
thinking about this first broad point that was made here where is experience and what is the distinction
between the personal and the sub-personal in dai um well i mean so there's a couple different questions you
asked there and i don't necessarily i think they're synonymous so you know when you said i think the
first question you asked was something about um uh has active inference provided some sort of uh explanation
or or model of um of qualia that would be satisfactory um in the strong sense so in the sense of in the sense of
qualia as an explanation for like the hard problem of consciousness then i think active inference is
in the same place as anyone else and the no one has a good explanation for for you know how to deal
with the hard problem of consciousness right i mean like massive literature out there but um i think
everyone thinks it's just as mysterious as ever um so so no right i mean on the other hand um i mean
you know myself and others you know have published multiple papers showing how you can successfully
use active inference models to um to model conscious access processes right so the distinction between
when the brain is representing something unconsciously versus when it's representing something consciously
um you know in that it can you know self-report right what it's representing um can use the information
to make voluntary choices um and we've shown that those sorts of models are able to um you know reproduce
uh like empirical results in like eeg studies and fmri studies and things like that um that and that
also can make novel um neurophysiological predictions um some of which seem like they um you know in some
subsequent work uh you know have um like empirical support for those predictions um so so in terms of
providing a um you know uh uh what seems like a useful account of the the processes associated with what
people self-report that they consciously experience um and and the brain basis for that i think active
inference has the at least the starting you know the starting um the starting point for for being useful
and explaining those sorts of things but you know why one little posterior inside a model versus another
posterior in a model actually corresponds to like the experience of red versus blue or something i mean
no i don't i think active inferences is um not any better than anyone else you know any other model for
that question um the um the i guess the second thing you know that you asked had to do with um it's
kind of like related question of you know why it's the case that one level has to do with a conscious
process for his unconscious process and um um the best i've really got there and you know what what
falls out of the models that we've um you know shown really just has to do with temporal scale
um you know so there's there will be a certain level of temporal depth in the representations in
a hierarchical model that um that integrates enough and represents regularities over a long enough
time scale that it can contribute to you know sort of prospective um um it will be sufficiently compact
to generate things like self-reports right so i mean think about how complicated and temporally
extended um reporting and choosing to report something like you know i see something green and
um right i mean it's a very complicated temporarily deep um you know type of policy to select and it
requires integrating a bunch of information from stuff at lower levels that's happening over faster
time scales um so at a minimum right you just need to be at a level of representation where the
regularities are sufficiently uh sufficiently long and um especially temporarily deep and have access to
all the relevant information you need to integrate to be able to generate um reports like that um
whereas whereas much of the other kind of little pieces in the model right like uh you know the
generated um say like expected for like variational free energy gradients and things like that that
you know people might call like surprise right i mean no one's claiming that and often they will not
relate in any way to people's conscious reports about feeling surprised because conscious reports
about feeling surprised will have to do with representations of surprises in states right as opposed to um
you know some sort of prediction error like uh you know gradient minimization process thanks
um also in section three there are several clarifications um and some seeds that are planted uh
namely if computational and folk psychological predictions converge and no other available theory
can account for behavior equally well this could entail the mathematical structure of dai
as more than a convenient tool instead that it corresponds to the true information processing
structure underlying and enabling folk psychology and related abilities and this is really nicely put here
that the crucial point remains that one should not conflate mathematical and psychological
levels of description however dai models might nonetheless offer more detailed information about the
true form of folk psychological categories and processes and then they add that their aims are to
demonstrate that there's a clear isomorphism between the elements of dai models and those of the bdi model
and then show how provided one does not assume probability distributions in computational models must be identified with beliefs at the psychological level
there will be no tension between dai and bdi and that comparison or juxtaposition is clarified by separating
separating mai from dai like has been mentioned anything else before we start to jump into some of the formalisms and keeping all of this in mind
i guess i um i had one question on um on the on which um ontology we're working with when we say there's an isomorphism between the elements of
dai models and those of the bdi model um because i think there are multiple ways to interpret this
uh one one thing that i'm wondering about is whether this means that we can basically construct a mathematical
formulation of the of the bdi model that is like a subset of active inference or maybe uh maybe there are certain
certain elements of the bdi model that aren't necessarily encapsulated with enacting that weren't
discussed in this paper and what uh that would um mean in terms of formulating this mathematical uh
mathematical formulation of of the bdi model so i mean what the isomorphism just means is
tell me the description at one level and i'll be able to translate it for you very quickly and
directly into whatever the description is at the other level in both directions right i mean so it
just means you know tell me tell me what you know tell me what it is that you want you know if i say
do you want ice cream or do you want a pizza right tell me tell me that you like if you tell me that you
like you want pizza twice as much as you like ice cream then it's very easy to just put you know a four
you know in the you know in the in the distribution in you know in the preference distribution over the
observation of pizza and the two for ice cream and then soft max it and log it right and then like you
know there's that's the description right so just in a very direct way just encodes relative desires for
one thing versus another you know tell me what your beliefs are right i mean do you believe that pizza's to
the left or to the right i can put that in as the different categories of hidden states that you're
going to infer a distribution over right so like it's just the point is that in either direction
right give me the full psychological description i can translate it very straightforwardly using the
same elements every time as being desires or beliefs um you know give it to me at the uh at the
mathematical level i can translate that into description in terms of beliefs and desires
right i mean it's just it's just one to one um i can't think of an example offhand um where um there
would be any kind of like mismatch or an ability for one to um account for the other but um you know
it's kind of hard to prove a negative right so i mean maybe you can give me an example but i can't
think of one awesome jacob yeah i was just gonna say that i can't really think of an example uh right now
um i i just found i found it really interesting with the usage of uh of just the word isomorphism
because that like as you as you said it's just a bidirectional subjective map so it's basically
equivalent it's just set in a different way so i can imagine that uh meaning that we can basically
instead of the wikipedia page for the bdi model uh using all of these terms uh um like believe desire
intention it could just be a set of active inference equations and that's the bdi model because it's an
isomorphism right i mean literally your your beliefs are just your cues right and your uh and your desires
are just your uh you know p of os right i mean in i mean in the you know the way that we've uh you know
we and others have tended to write it now right it's to literally just explicitly to say like that
desires are um or the preference distribution is p of o given c right where c is just a matrix that
defines your preferences right so i mean it's a lot clearer to do that um than to just just leave it
just p of o right i think that's part of the confusion is is that uh it's not clear where the
preferences come from but but they're just it's just because they're conditioned on this other thing c
and c can be fixed or learnt but that's the basis of the calculation there um yeah here we get into
section four variational and expected free energy considerations and in large script we see the
variational free energy equation dean what is the skydiver doing and during the one and the two
we'll unpack more about the exact terms and and what is um coming into and coming out of this equation
but just as an appetizer here what's the skydiver doing well now they've got the author here i i just
put through that in there because i like the the i don't think it's a metaphor but the analogy of of how so
how do you respond when you jump out of the airplane and you know your parachute's not going to work
do you uh do you go ahead first and really attack it or like what now what are you doing in terms of
what your expectations are so maybe maybe that that that was a good analogy ryan maybe but what like so
what were you where were you going with that because yeah well i mean i think the point the point of
those sorts of examples are just uh just to um sorry to put this to to show why it's not um it's not
really correct to think about the um like prior uh you know this prior preference distribution even
though it's you know it's again it's cast as a prior belief right um it's not really appropriate to
think about that as a as a um a belief per se right i mean the um or an expectation at any at a
psychological level description um so you can and the way to contrast that right is you can say look like
the person in a model where they don't want right to fall to the ground and die right that would be
your near yeah that would be your pfo right it's your preference not to have the observation of hitting
the ground and dying um but what you act right is is your q of o given pi right it's what do i expect
to observe given that i choose this policy versus that policy right so that's the that's the you know
the beliefy part right it's what i expect given that i do this or that and you know how close is that to
how much does that diverge from what i what i want right which would be your pfo um so it's just a
it's just a clear example of how your you know your belief the expectations and your desire the
expectations come apart right and that and it just doesn't work conceptually to think one is uh think
of one as like the same kind of uh uh kind of thing as the other yeah i i just saw it as if i'm not
going to get a soft landing how big of a crater can i can i create something well that's that then is
going to be packed into your preference distribution right right you would have some desire for you know
to make a big uh you know conditional on you're going to die right like you know you'd prefer right
to make a big crater than a small crater and that would still just go in your pfo right so yeah yeah um
yakub um i was just wondering um and this might be me uh thinking thinking too
too deep uh or not too deeply about the equation uh rather but in this in this formulation where
it's a variational free energy for each policy f of pi um does that does that imply when in the
last sentence on this slide that uh free energy is a functional of beliefs and a function of observations
does that mean that the free energy is essentially a function of three variables uh but in this case we are
only uh writing it f of pi because uh it's always it's it's clear that it's a functional of beliefs and
observations um or should we think of it more as just a function of each policy um i mean the way it's
written here i mean i think that the most straightforward way to think about it is i mean it literally just
means that um using this equation you will calculate a different f value for each policy
right i mean that's really it like you just there will be you're going to be computing some some
variational free energy value for each policy and that's going to make up a distribution over policies
um and um and uh i mean the the tricky thing i guess here is is that um you know this isn't about
this isn't you know f of f of pi here isn't about making decisions right this is just about you know
something like evaluating evidence for um you know for various policies one because you you can't you
calculate f when you already have the observation right so you can't really do this perspective
decision making thing with f um so this is just basically a way of describing how um how under each
policy your beliefs will change um or wouldn't change right under you know when you get conditional
on each new observation that you get um and um and so it's not uh yeah so all it denotes really is
is just you know you have a value of f for each policy and that makes up a distribution
and that takes us to g expected free energy the letter after f and as shown here not sure if there's
another reason for why it's um g um this is equation 2.6 from the active inference textbook just for
reference with some other versions of how g is framed um g is a prospective value and they write
decision making does not only require beliefs about past and present states it also requires making
predictions about future states and future observations this requires taking the average
i.e expected free energy g of pi given anticipated outcomes under each policy that one might choose
and there's um a lot to say on expected free energy what is just one short note that somebody could add
or ryan why was it placed here
um i'm not sure i understand that question
um like why why is why is expected free energy required why is variational free energy not enough
i mean expected free energy is just is just what the system is trying to minimize when it's selecting a
policy right so i mean it's just trying to i mean in this i mean this decomposition right here is often
called like the risk risk plus ambiguity decomposition but um i guess uh i like i think that i think that's
showing the um you know the risk term the risk term here provides a nice kind of intuition for um for
again the separation between beliefs and desires and active inference because um you know you're you're uh
so the the the term underlined in in red then right so the kale divergence between p o given pi and p of o
right i mean that's just saying that um you know how different are the observations i expect given that
i choose a given policy and you know how different how how different is that uh how different do i expect
that to be from my uh my preferences or my desires right pfo um so the the closer those are together right the
the more uh the more similar i expect the observations to be under a policy to my preferred observations the
smaller that's going to be and so if i'm trying to select the policy that minimizes uh g right then that
means i'm going to select the policy that's going to get me as close that's going to get me as close to
my preferred observations as possible right so literally just is that kale divergence literally just is
trying to choose the policy that brings beliefs closest to desires
and then what does the blue term mean
uh that's just an entropy term right so i mean it's just basically saying that the
is what drives information seeking or part of what drives information seeking it's just uh
it's just yeah basically the agents choose you know driven to choose policies that also are going
to generate um more precise expected observations observations that are going to disambiguate states more
more easily great um here we'll explore it more in the dot one but there's a description of the
posterior probability distribution over policies p of pi and an expression involving the softmax symbol
with the sigma we'll return to that later but this is just so that we can cover like the key experiments and the simulation results today
um this is also one other uh area of formalism we can explore in the coming discussions about precision
and the relationship of um beta and gamma and what the convergence towards means but we won't go there
there is precision parameter in this model
let's go to the dark room problem and many lines of pdf screen and ink has been written on the dark room
in the active world since um perhaps friston et al 2012 and also outside of active and um they write
in a nutshell the concern is that if agents only act to minimize prediction error as opposed to acting
under the impetus of a cognitive desire like state then they ought to simply seek out very stable
predictable environments such as a dark room and stay there
would anybody like to add anything about this dark room problem or what is the relationship between
doxastic and cognitive ontology and active
i mean are you just asking what like what those words mean or what like how do you how do you use these words
i mean i mean doxastic is just a term that refers to you know the leafy you know like epistemic sorts
of things right so so a doxastic ontology would be an ontology that includes beliefy things right
whereas whereas uh you know cognitive just refers to yeah being like targeted towards something right
like something about you know desires or um um you know something things you want versus don't want
things you like versus don't like right so um it's just uh you know when we say it's apparently
purely a duxastic content ontology it's just saying it might look as low superficially like the um the
ontology proposed in active inference like the things that exist in active inference are are purely beliefy
and that's all that means great and it's applied in the setting of this dark room um for the following
two slides dean help us understand what concerns are addressed and what the child on the top right of the slide is doing
yeah well so i'm not going to go through all all of the text but essentially this was my introduction to the dark room
problem because it was kind of the opposite of all my experience which is that i tend to find people that were curious
and we're trying to move away from information um leveling offers or being static to information gain so
first of all i had to learn what what the what the argument was about why people would actually
who are normally social why they would move away from that social realm and into this sort of dark space
um and then secondly it was i was kind of trying to tie it into the idea of the refrigerator and where it
is and and until you actually and danny dani you and i talked about this a bit the pragmatic piece of
until you actually open the refrigerator door which is on the kind of the next slide you don't really i
mean you can have a belief that there's something of value in there but it can turn out that when
you open the door or or monty raises the curtain the thing that you were expecting uh turns out to
be a value but not necessarily of that thing that you were you were setting yourself up to believe and so
that that young individual spitting the coin out um maybe i guess i was just trying to be a little
bit facetious there that it holds value but it doesn't hold the same kind of um tasty value of
as say having a lick of an ice cream cone so again it was it was trying to move away from the idea that
the beliefy stuff alone is satis satisfactory or necessary i i always get those two mixed up but i think
i i was just trying to reinforce the idea that you kind of need to have both so that you can compare
and contrast so that you get a sense of what a person or what an agent is doing as they're getting
past some of those shrouds or some of those um non-observables into the observable state
thanks we'll keep going um
this is unpacking some of the concerns about the apparent pure doxastic belief oriented ontology of
act imp so ryan described earlier like is it about beliefs colliding and if so if it's purely doxastic
then where is this um desire and um
is there anything else that anybody wants to add here
i would maybe um comment that i think this also relates to uh your um to the earlier thing that was
discussed how this confusion might stem from people um misinterpreting or um miss uh confusing the
terms predictive processing and active active inference um and i feel like this addresses it as well where
if we just if it's only beliefs uh then there is obviously a concern that once we're in a dark room
um we uh can't because uh if we're only in the regime of predictive processing there is no way for us to
move to a different state or there isn't the the formalism that that describes planning in action um
um but as i guess we'll get to in the other slides when we do include this planning we suddenly have
desire-like terms appearing within the mathematical formulation as well
great yeah and i want to be i want to be clear it's not like they're thrown in ad hoc right they emerge
naturally as like necessary components of uh of any kind of you know like using this sort of framework
or building it out to involve planning so it's not uh like they emerge naturally and necessarily it's
not a it's not because someone's just kind of tacking them on great um and this is referring to that
minimization of g uh the minimization of g drives the agent to seek out observations that will reduce
uncertainty about the best way to subsequently bring about phenotype congruent or preferred outcomes so
that's the information seeking another way to put this is that under dai an agent doesn't simply seek
to minimize prediction error with respect to its current sensory input it seeks instead to minimize
prediction error with respect to its global beliefs about the environment which entails seeking out
observations that are expected to generate prediction errors such that uncertainty is minimized for the
generative model as a whole and another aspect of this type of global prediction error minimization
process is that it pertains not only to beliefs about states in the present but also to beliefs about
the past and in the future and so this is leading to one of the claims which is that in addition to
desires dai captures folk psychological experiences associated with the drive to both know about one's
current states and learn what will happen when choosing to move to other states among other parameters in a
generative model let's go into this generative model and come to the darkroom simulation itself
um and we'll unpack it more uh in future times but the prior over policies e of pi they write that um when the agent repeatedly
chooses a policy this term increases the probability that the agent will continue to select that policy in the future
at the level of the formalism this corresponds to an agent coming to expect that it will choose a policy
simply because it has chosen that policy many times in the past this can be thought of as a type of
habitization process but it doesn't have any direct connection to preferred outcomes because e of pi is not
informed by other beliefs in the agent's model so here's the partially observable markov decision process just
one representation of it and e is sort of floating there influencing but not being influenced by
and we had some interesting discussions which we can return to another time about how we might be able to assess
whether somebody is engaging in a behavior because they simply have habitually engaged in that behavior but they
understand the actual mapping of how policies um relate to outcomes or in another case where somebody might be
engaging in a behavior not because of habitualization but rather because they have um some sort of
deviation from the appropriate mapping between policies and outcomes and maybe there's other ways
so i thought that was very interesting how even within the same sort of sparse and first principles model
similar behavioral outcomes might be observed on like a behavioral manifold and then different kinds of
perturbations or evaluations might reduce uncertainty about what is giving rise to those conversion behaviors in
in that case um okay dean with the ice cream truck and the eye no i'm gonna i'm gonna wait because i think
that's i think this one in the and the next one are better to take up in a one two part because because
if if ryan can come back there's some good questions i want to ask him about those two sections because
this slide and the next one are kind of anti uh dark room and so i want to kind of pick his brain about
what you know how we can sort of convince people that that that dark room problem is for such a small
subset of the population that majority of the stuff that we're talking about here is done in in sort of social
settings and social context and there's a third party sometimes it can observe an observer and what role that
plays in trying to figure out what's what's going on here as we move from the from the idea of
decisioning and and so forth so i'll wait great so here's part one of that and here's part two looking
at uh social learning theory a little bit but let's go to the figure and to the simulation uh this is
figure one simulation of an active inference agent deciding whether to eat some ice cream and um
um there's various ways to go about describing it but one of the key pieces if anyone can give a remark
about what is occurring here is that there's three cases that are being compared there's a no desire
case a weak desire reflected by this p of o and a strong desire case where the ratio between the two
alternatives between um wanting the ice cream and or between the ice cream state and the no ice cream
state is a sharper distinction in this second row so there's a case in which ice cream is in the fridge
but where the kitchen is currently dark and so the agent doesn't know whether the fridge is to the left
or right so it's like a tea maze setup with three possible cases one where there's no preference for
observing ice cream or not a weak or a strong preference for that um and then under these
situations we can ask about what happens in terms of the action as well as the um beliefs and valence
updates what else would you add about that ryan well i mean it's a good point you know the point of
this is just to show um well i guess mix couple you know i mean so dean mentioned the um you know the
issue with the dark room right i mean as you said i mean as you said i mean this is essentially just a
a particular very similar to to like a teammate's right i mean just putting a putting a different sort
of semantics on top of it but the you know but the idea is just that um it's just set up to show that
you know even without any kind of desire right just just resolving uncertainty um the agent will be
driven to leave a dark room or do something to get rid of the dark room um so you don't need a desire
right but but in fact any realistic agent is also going to have desires so um so in the case where there
are desires then so there's two different reasons why um no active inference agent will ever um stay in a dark
room or be motivated to stay in a dark room like in all cases it will have a motivation to to leave
so i mean the point is just to show right in some explicit simulations that um generically right like
the this kind of dark room problem um just will it will just never apply um to to active inference um
again this dark room thing only applies if you assume the thing is just doing something like predictive
coding but then somehow also assume that it's making decisions um um but that's not active inference um
because it's not a theory of decision making
awesome
um here is some description about the strength of the desire could have been shown before the figure but
we wanted to introduce the the simulation setting and as described there is um a desire as well as an
information seeking and i believe that's the two reasons why the agent will escape the dark room and
there's there's other escape hatches depending on how one constructs their model um potentially like a
hierarchical model might have a slightly different um explanation for why an agent does or doesn't stay
in the room but even just within this single level model there's an information seeking as well as
um a preference realizing reason um any other comments here
okay dean just a quick thing maybe right in the island i'll put you in the island go for it yeah
uh so maybe ryan just just a just a quick this last last couple of senses however preference
distributions are set to zero oh i'm sorry i'm not still on the previous slide daniel sorry can you go
back one yeah go for it okay so however if preference distributions are set to zero as in our no desire
simulation such as the no outcome is desired over any other net and active informations will nonetheless
be driven to choose behaviors that will maximize information gain okay that'll make sense that's
just the background this is the part i was curious about while this might reasonably be considered a
motivational influence it is prima facie less plausible that it should be considered cognitive
and may therefore be better seen as a type of doc sac pastic drive here the formulas may therefore
help us to recover and potentially nuance the folk psychological distinction between desire and
curiosity these types of drives seem to differ fundamentally i i agree with you but i was
wondering if you could maybe explain why that should be something that we should keep separate the idea of
desire and curiosity i know you go into explaining it a little more into the paper but
why why did you want to point that out to readers well i mean i think there's a couple things i mean
i mean one i think that you know these things are both driving you know decisions about what to do
right so in some way they motivate they both motivate behavior right but but at the same time um you know
and i think uh this is something you know that alex keeper and you know pointed out when we were writing
this as opposed to just you know so it's not just me um but you know pointed out that um you know there
is this kind of um fairly clear difference um between the um this uh you know curiosity or epistemically
driven um sort of behavior um from the kind of desire driven behavior and the the the kind of clear
differences is that the um this epistemically driven motivation isn't um it isn't driven toward anything
right it doesn't have a target it's not trying to get one thing versus another um all it's trying to
do is just um you know just become clearer about what's out there um essentially right so so the fact
that it lacks a target um is really i think what makes the what makes the distinction clear um but
the i mean beyond that i think motivation was just a was just to show that um you know like just to
you know generically right like the belief desire intention principle doesn't really um doesn't
really say anything about uh you know types of types of desires there's nothing really explicitly just in
that very very simple um um way of way of um describing the framework that that separates out uh
information seeking from from reward seeking right um so you know so you could right if all you're doing
um is trying to you know compare active inference to um to you know the vdi model very simply stated
then um then this is able to kind of nuance a little more right like different different things
that that um might look like you know cognitive motivational kinds of things but but there are
separate those um um on you know why why decisions are made for one thing versus another that are more kind of
tied to beliefs in a different way um you know that being said i mean at the same time i think that um
you know like full psychology more um more broadly i think i think uh very intuitively and naturally um
does you know recognize the difference between things like curiosity right and things like and
things like reward-driven behavior right those are concepts that we have just in our natural kind of
folk psychology um you know so active inference just captures those right i mean i am yeah i talked about
this um just as an example of you know how how intuitive i think in like natural um this sort of
aspect is um you know and i just like think of like most of the behaviors that say like my little dog does
um you know if i look at if i look at what my dog does 90 of the time it's way more information seeking
than it is reward seeking you know she searches out for some food a couple times a day but i take her
in the car she's pulling left and right to see what's out the window and how that changed all the
time you know any little sound perks up looks right none of those things are reward driven they're all
just information seeking um so i mean very very clearly that's a big part of um you know what drives
us and other animals to do um so so the point is just to just to kind of show that active inference
captures that in a certain sense it adds some granularity to um to at least what the bdi model
says but but um in that case the bdi model is kind of too uh too coarse-grained and i think normal
folk psychology doesn't include those things already great um also to be returned to dean
yeah because ryan just basically answered it all these two images are basically doing is separating out
the the sort of goal directed from the curiosity which is you know the the image on the right is
basically a documentary about the franklin expedition where they were going out to the event horizon but
they never returned so did they have a goal probably but was that their curiosity being carried out
so i think we i think we got to be able to make sure that we appreciate both so that's all i wanted
this makes me think like um are you driven to watch the sunset over the horizon or are you driven to
find out what's at the end of the rainbow and what's over the horizon and that's the sort of like
infinite open-ended curiosity drive beyond the horizon versus the preferred specific state that one
can desire in terms of their um observations and reduce the divergence there but cool um
wishful thinking we'll come back to we're just leaving notes so that we can um
have more to discuss later because these are all like there's such vital threads um ryan and maxwell and
alex because they um touch to our day-to-day experience in a way that few other um frameworks and
and even papers within actinf do so affect and the role of affect and precision curiosity these are all
just like terms that touch humans um one thing that i you know that i think is probably worth
just touching on i mean again something maybe you guys would want to talk about in the future you
know maybe when i'm not around the other uh any other sessions not sure but um you know uh so there
is a probably a distinction that's worth keeping in mind between curiosity per se and um and goal
directed information seeking um i think some of the you know examples you guys have mentioned have
been more kind of along the lines of one versus the other i think it might be good to just just keep
that distinction clear that um you know and and vanilla active inference um it is really something
more just kind of like curiosity you're just kind of like independently driven just kind of you know
look where you're going to gain the most information um whereas you know the construct of directed
exploration um you know and in reinforcement learning and um and what also you know often something that
can emerge i think a little more clearly in like sophisticated active inference um is um you know
is information seeking specifically or you know in the service of knowing you know how to get your coal
um you know the the the curiosity version that we're showing here um it has the effect of helping the
agent get to what it wants um but the but the drive to seek out information isn't actually itself um due
to the fact that the agent thinks it will help it get its goal um you know it's just driven to seek
the information independently um whereas um whereas uh in in other yeah like in sophisticated inference um
the the agent is actually doing something more like i'm gonna look over here because i think looking
over here is actually going to help me get to what i want better right so this is kind of strategic
information seeking and that's that's a little different than just like intrinsic curiosity so um
it's just something to keep clear that's quite interesting it kind of ties a braid back
but let's explore that later um here we have a nice uh clean representation of the summary of the main
argument their proposed solution is somewhat deflationary in the sense that it simply argues
that the functional role of desire not the experience of desire is straightforward straightforwardly present
in the dai formalism and then in more detail they argue that and they provide four points which it'll
be great to go over with with the authors based on those considerations the apparent problem posed by
purely doxastic looking constructs is simply not a problem there are beliefs and desires in the active
inference framework um perhaps we could have uh explored this more with the formalism so we'll bring it up to
talking more about f but won't go into it now we'll return to the letters later and then the appendix is
uh very informative uh very informative there's a description of all the states and the factors that are used in the simulation
and in the model stream one which is by the way ryan it's um our our most popular series was model stream one
it was it was uh it was a fan favorite but um it's some similar concepts and matlab scripts so the appendix
describes how the figure one results were generated and maybe we'll see if anybody can run that and
execute it we can play with a few different things and take some of these qualitative linguistics and even
mutate the simulation a little bit see where that takes us we'll close out with our usual closing slide
um so who would like to take the first last word
yes dean then yeah yeah first of all thanks for uh shepherding us these three cats through this uh paper
because there's an awful lot of stuff to try to cover in a pretty short period of time and it was and it's
easy i think to sort of go i don't want to say tangentially but go deeper into some of the parts
of the paper because um uh for me it was one of those ones where i would go back and have to reflect
on something after i read a section and then try to fit it into the larger picture that was
ryan i think the paper did a very good job of sort of ordering through what you
were trying to say in terms of the reassurance of how the the quantitative
uh and the and the modeling of the psychosocial could be seen as working with each other as
opposed to though this doesn't answer what this other thing questions but it does cause this is
this was a paper that for me i won't speak for the others but i had to read the section and then try to
plug it back into the overall narrative that was being told and again i think part of that is because
the the translation from the stuff that's typically seen as the quantitative part is hard to move into
the qualitative part i think that's that's a challenge for anybody that tries to move back and
forth between those two things but uh yeah i mean in terms of in terms of making a case and and providing
what i think people need to sort of see the two in the same light um thank you appreciate it sure i'm
happy happy if it's helpful rocket yeah i think um in it uh i guess there are two points that i like to
touch on firstly i think i thought it was very helpful to map these folks these concepts that
everyone even though everyone uh i guess that's the nature of psychology that everyone will have a
slightly slightly different um probably distribution on of what they these terms actually mean but i think
it's in just learning about active inference it's helpful to link the math mathematical formulation and
even just the active inference ontology which itself can be very cumbersome at times to these very um
intuitive concepts and i think as we're getting we're starting to explore modeling within the active lab as
well i think it's really it will be really helpful to use this isomorphism between active inference and folk psychology to explain
the the behavior of agents within these models and not beyond a dark room problem when there is some unexpected behavior of an agent we can directly look at okay how
how how did um this tensor change its values and describe it with this uh folks like a psychological ontology
so i think personally that's uh the most exciting thing about this paper for me um yeah well here i mean if
I mean, if that's the kind of thing that you're interested in, then I mean, that's kind of the whole motivation of, you know, for instance, like computational psychiatry, right, which is like the area that I currently work in.
Right. So you take, for instance, clinical populations where people may behave in unexpected or ways or ways that don't necessarily seem like they're all that adaptive.
Right. Then you can just fit these models to their behavior and you can figure out, OK, well, what is making their behavior abnormal? Right. Is it is it something about an overly precise preference distribution or is it something about, you know, the belief that states states transition to to into volatile or uncertain way or, you know, things like that.
So I mean, it is the yeah, I mean, the kind of, you know, the major point is you can use these models and empirical studies to figure out what the mechanisms are that are leading to healthy and unhealthy behavior.
And.
And that can give you kind of guiding information toward, you know, design better treatments or, you know, trying to measure these things in a more quantitative way, things like that.
And and the and the and just as I've said, I mean, this is all using using tasks that, you know, that involve some kind of goal, right?
Like seeking some kind of reward or social approval or, you know, whatever it is that, you know, humans seek out.
You could do that, right, unless you have a straightforward way to map the formalism, each element of the formalism to, you know, the reason that we think people behave in the way that they do.
Right. So, so on.
So I guess I'm just saying if that's an interest of yours, then I would think that you would be probably a fan of a lot of the lot of the computational psychiatry literature more broadly, both, you know, both the active inference part, which is a lot of what my lab does, but but also just the broader computational psychiatry community that uses reinforcement learning and diffusion models and all the other, you know, all the other classics that are out there.
Cool. And it opens it up to what organizations want and what the cells want and all these other transpositions.
Well, Ryan really appreciate that last minute belief or desire combination thereof to join us.
It certainly helped resolve our uncertainty a lot.
And it's a great conversation in the coming two weeks.
We're going to be with hopefully some more authors and more lab participants.
And just I'm looking forward to taking some notes.
Thank you.
See you all soon.
Bye.
Bye.

## JPsdk7pVa1I

Hello and welcome everyone.
It's June 15th, 2022 and we're here in Actimflab livestream number 46.1.
Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.
We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied
active inference.
You can find us at some of the links on this slide.
This is a recorded and an archived and transcribed and edited and published livestream.
So please provide feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following good video etiquette
for livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about livestreams and a lot of the other projects
that are happening in the lab.
So we're here in Actim stream 46.1.
And we're in our second discussion of the paper, Active Inference Models Do Not Contradict
Folks Psychology by Ryan Smith, Maxwell Ramsted, and Alex Kiefer.
We're going to go, I expect, in many fun and interesting directions today.
So thanks everybody who's joined the panel live.
And also for those who are watching live, thanks for adding your comments in the live chat.
We'll begin with some introductions.
And then I believe that will introduce many interesting areas we can continue from there.
So we can start by just introducing ourselves and then passing it to someone else who has
not yet spoken.
And we'll close with the authors who are here.
So I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California.
And the .0 was very interesting with Jakob and Dean and Ryan.
And it raised many questions that I was excited to discuss today.
Just to provide one would be perhaps the relationship between formalisms of any kind and natural language
and just regular concepts that people have.
How do we draw the connection or evaluate connections that are drawn there?
And I'll pass to Ali.
Questions I'd like to ask if they're not available.
What?
Oh, sorry, Ali.
Wait, wait.
Sorry, just the audio is set up a little bit differently.
So if you could just start, you can just reintroduce, but go for it.
Thank you.
Okay.
Is it okay?
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you.
All right.
Yeah.
I'm an independent researcher from Iran.
And as I said, I also have a couple of questions I'd like to ask.
They're not addressed during the discussion, especially when we get to section nine of the paper.
And yeah, I'm very glad to be here.

And I'll pass it to Dean.
Dean.
Good morning.
Good morning.
My name is Dean.
I'm here in Calgary.
I really like this paper, which I kind of indicated in the last live stream.
My curiosity, because I really don't know, is because of my background in education.
When I'm looking at that sort of qualification, quantification piece, and I'm thinking about
the desires as something that we can see as 0.1 and 0.9 as a distribution.
I've often thought of some of my previous conversations around things like Likert scales.
And so I know this paper doesn't address those things specifically, but the idea of being able to
translate into sort of a numeric form has always been interesting to me.
And that's something that maybe today, or maybe in the 0.2, we can think about the implications of
that.
And I'll pass it to David.
Hey, David Kelton here.
Thanks for having me on my first time here in active inference.
I go by Duvid as a streamer.
I'm a civil engineer by education and practice.
So I have background linguistics and physics and psychology.
I spent many years in yeshiva rabbinic study, and I've been a practicing Hindu.
I'm more on the mystical side of consciousness, been studying it actively streaming for a few years,
but also the mathematical materialistic side.
So this paper was very interesting, especially dealing with the sense perception related to motor control,
which my perception of dualism is something that the material does actually control.
So I like the model.
I like the paper.
I was interested in looking at some of the more philosophical and even mystical precursors.
What could actually be explained?
What are the assumptions being made in this paper?
It's definitely a good start.
Thank you, Duvid.
And to Alex.
So feel free to give any introduction and then provide any context on what brought about the paper from your perspective.
Yeah, thanks.
So I'm Alex Kiefer.
I'm one of the authors on the paper.
I'm affiliated with Monash University and Jakub Hovi's Cognition and Philosophy Lab there.
And I currently also my main sort of gig is at Versus Research Labs in LA.
So we've been doing some really interesting research there that plugs into active inference, among other things.
So as far as context for the paper, so this is this issue of how and whether active inference and theories in the vicinity,
like predictive processing and all that, how those things map onto folks psychology.
It's something I've been interested in for a long time before I spoke to Ryan and then Maxwell about this paper.
And I won't try to give Ryan's side of the of the back story, but basically he was, I think,
planning on drafting something along these lines for independently.
We got in touch through Carl Tristan, I think.
And, you know, it was pointed out that I was drafting something on the same thing.
And then I ended up just hopping on board to work on certain sections and to sort of help carry through the argument.
So that's a little bit of background.
Awesome.
What sections we can look at the roadmap did you work on?
And also if you have any thoughts on this overall structure of like what sections did you include and why did you order them in that way?
Yeah, I mean, I guess, I mean, really, we share credit for it, for all of it.
Like it's there isn't anything, you know, I, I, we, we contributed to the, to the whole paper.
But the sections that I was more, that I leaned more on maybe, and that I contributed more to,
were the thing about quantifying the motivational force of desires, section seven.
And then we also had a bunch of back and forth about the last few sections, free energy principle and direction of fit.
Yeah.
So, I mean, Ryan being first author definitely, definitely did a lot of the writing.
So, but those are the sections that I, that I had more, more to do with directly.
Awesome.
And then just one more question, Alex, and then we can go back to our open list of topics.
What would you characterize the big question of the paper as?
What do you think would bring somebody to this paper because they were wondering X?
Yeah.
I mean, so it's pretty, I think it's pretty clear in this, in this case, right?
Fortunately, it's pretty easy.
It's just the question is whether the active inference formalism, particularly a certain strain of that,
the sort of the street decision, decision model, flavor of active inference is, is consistent with,
or compatible with folk psychology and the VDI model in particular.
Great.
Okay.
And then also, what would you characterize the VDI model as?
And then we'll open up for more questions, but just to get some of the prerequisites.
And you're right that it is great that it is clear.
Many papers have much more esoteric big questions.
And this one is very like down the middle.
Yeah.
Yeah.
One thing I liked about, about working with, with Ryan is that he, he sort of wanted to just make the title of the paper,
or a declarative like sentence that says, this is what we're claiming.
And I really liked that.
I'm trying to follow that in some of my work.
But the VDI model, I don't think I have a whole lot to add here either.
It's just the idea fundamentally that beliefs and desires interact to form intentions.
And that that's, I would, I guess maybe also that, that that's a legitimate way to explain behavior for some class of systems, intelligence systems, people, agents.
All right.
Awesome.
So Ali, Dean or Duvid, if you have any questions you'd like to raise at this time, otherwise we'll go into one of these pieces we've raised.
Yes.
Duvid.
It just, I'd never heard of Hilton or the folk psychology BDM model.
Is that a prominent model you purposely chose or could this be, you know, fill in for basically any non-scientific or introspective or even dualist model for, for consciousness?
Or is it specific, this Hilton model?
And are you claiming that it fails as a materialistic model?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So I think, I think part of the reason we referred to the BDI model was to just be, to sort of bracket for the purposes of the paper, although I'm happy to discuss it here.
A lot of questions that minorize about folk psychology and what exactly is meant by that.
So if we just say we're talking about the, the idea that beliefs and desires interact to form intentions, then that's a clear target.
And then of course there are many different conceptions of, there are many, maybe there are many different folk psychologies and, and, and views on, in that vicinity.
But like, I guess, yeah, the BDI models is sort of maybe supposed to be like an essence that you can distill from any of those different perspectives.
Now, maybe that's not true. We can talk about whether the BDI model is really common to different conceptions of folk psychology.
Cause I, I, you know, I have to think about that. I, I kind of, I, I kind of assume that it is.
I'm curious about the materialism dualism issue. I don't see, I guess, directly how it plays into things at this level of description, because I guess we're not claiming necessarily that beliefs and desires are material or not.
But, uh, at this stage, but anyway, happy to get into that.
Yeah. Feel free to unpack that, David.
Yeah. I mean, I mean, just classically, uh, you, obviously people have had minds for, you know, as long as human existence, you know, maybe if you believe in Julian Jaynes and evolution, that there was an origin to, uh, uh, consciousness in the mind.
At some point, but, uh, you know, historically, uh, most of the Western tradition up till a few hundred years ago, believe that these things originated, uh, from a non-material source, you know, whether it's, you know, soul, however you want to explain it.
Uh, but, uh, you know, as the controller from the, uh, Greek model of the soul, uh, ethos, uh, logos, pathos, or, um, any model that, you know, so beliefs and desires that the, that would be the controller that would, uh, be decisive in these, uh, cognitive functions don't arise from the material.
So, uh, if you have a materialistic model where you're saying that these things do in fact arise from the brain, um, you could say that, uh, you know, the ancients were just incorrect, either, either in ascribing non-material origins to things that have material origins, or you could say they were completely incorrect in, like, in a limited perspective, that there is no such thing as belief or desire,
or there is no such thing as a, as like a unified, um, I, so as a way of you meant Hilton has some sort of material division, even Freud, like even, even going back to Freud just a hundred years ago, uh, the question of the psyche and the subconscious, uh, you know, whether that has material origins or not is unclear.
Right.
Yeah.
So, so I guess, I guess, uh, my perspective on this, I'm, I'm sort of a methodological materialist about these things.
Like, I think that you can, uh, in so far as, so in terms of like the scope of this, of this kind of explanation that we discussed in this paper and, um, active inference in general, um, uh, works with, I think, I think any, anything that you can explain about the causes of, of intelligent behavior, um, I think you can probably put a material, uh, gloss on that.
Um, but I, I, I, I'm not personally, I'm not really committed to the claim that you can explain everything about people, uh, in terms of input, output mappings, you know, but, but in, in so far as you can conceive of some function, whether cognition, perception, whatever, as a sort of input, output mapping in space of behavior, then I think you can explain it using these frameworks interpreted as descriptions of brain processes.
Um, so it's interesting that you kind of contrast, or that you suggest that maybe there's an argument for eliminativism.
If, if you were thinking of mental states as having a, a root or a source in something non-material, maybe then if you reject that idea, then you'd be prone to limit, eliminativism.
But, um, so I'm very much, so coming back to the idea, I'm, I'm, I'm starting from a sort of methodological materialist standpoint, but I'm definitely not an eliminativist.
I actually, the one thing I wanted to get into today is I really don't understand, um, I don't understand how eliminativism is a tenable position with respect to folk psychology if you're a materialist.
Um, because I think that there's just, well, I'll hold off on getting into that, but, um, I think, I guess I'll just, just one last comment on this.
I think the question of whether beliefs and desires and intentions and other mental states have any non-material aspect and the question of whether they exist and whether they should be eliminated from our ontology are, are distinct.
Hmm.
Thank you.
I think this is a fine place.
We'll have a lot of time to explore other avenues, but it would be awesome if you could describe the limitivism.
And also, um, there was a quote in your paper where it says, if the worry is founded that there's a tension between active inference and folk psychology, specifically the BDI model, it could be taken either to imply that active inference models are implausible,
implausible because reasons, or if, and to the extent that the models are successful to imply that desire should be eliminated from scientific theories of psychology.
So what is a limitivism and how did you interact with that topic?
Right.
So, so limitivism is, uh, as we're using it here is, is, and I think this is the mainstream sense is, is just a view.
Well, I guess, okay.
The most general version of the view with respect to anything is just that, that, that thing should be sort of eliminated from serious discourse or serious theory, uh, maybe scientific theory.
Um, and I mean, the, the, the idea that the church lands have in defending eliminativism about, um, folk psychology is that it's, it's like a failed theory.
So basically the idea is if, you know, theories, I suppose, um, survive on the basis of their predictive and explanatory power and, and, uh, some other criteria, you know, theoretical virtues, um, the ability to evolve and explain new anomalies, apparent anomalies that crop up.
So the church lands basically think that, uh, folks, psychology has failed this test.
Uh, so the theory of folk psychology has been falsified and we should just move on.
And that's, that's, that's, I would say, you know, to be sort of, uh, um, precise that's, that's a version of eliminativism applied to mental states.
Um, but that's the view that we're really talking about here.

Yes.
David, please.
Yeah, I guess there, I mean, there's different schools in, in eliminativism, but, uh, if you want to take that to consciousness studies in totality, or questions of free will, or, you know, like I mentioned the ancient, uh, dualistic understanding of, uh, uh, consciousness.
Is you could take a limit of some to consciousness in totality that the, the man is a mechanistic computer.
And even, uh, you know, as, as a mystic, I would argue possibly against the strong interpretation of active inference.
That's a atheistic, eliminativistic model.
And you might not, you know, for philosophical reasons, not want to be a limit of this, uh, and therefore try to defend it.
Uh, but, uh, then, you know, what are the mathematics?
What are your claims actually say?
Uh, but yeah, I mean, the strong levels say that, uh, there is no, uh, there is no belief.
There is no desire.
There is no unified.
I, and, uh, we're just, uh, automate time that, uh, uh, has some sort of threshold interaction, uh, with the environment and whatever.
Perception or a head that, uh, you know, we have voices in our head that, uh, might make us think that we're conscious beings might make us think that we have self, uh, control or, you know, beliefs or, or even free will are essentially illusions of the mind that have nothing to do, uh, with our actions.
I could just, how do I do follow up?
Is it the author's privilege?
Well, great.
Um, yeah, I would just, I, it's a good question.
Well, how consciousness fits into this picture.
To this picture and I, I'm not sure whether, whether the version of a limit ism that I took myself to be targeting here includes consciousness or not.
It's mostly been a view that's focused on the idea of discrete mental states that play these functional roles, beliefs and desires and so forth.
So, um, yeah, I definitely think there's further questions about that.
Um, uh, and I can see, yeah, I can see how you might interpret active inference, not just active inference, but almost any way.
Um, almost any mainstream sort of, um, you know, theory and like neuro psychology and that vein as, as implying a form of eliminativism.
If you think that these mental states are, uh, by definition, um, not material or not entirely material, but, uh, again, I'm happy to get into that further.
Hmm.
Yes.
Um, the, uh, the idea that any kind of modeling.
By making it specific.
By making it specific.
Is approaching or on the road or slippery slope or already reached the point of eliminating the need for appeals outside of that description.
It's also possible to consider that an entire category air and say, we're describing.
Brain processes, which is, I believe what you said earlier, and no description of a sunset.
Is the territory of the sunset.
Math is not the territory as we hear often.
And so how can one be a limit of this about a process with any kind of description?
Whether it's predictive processing or active inference or any other kind of model.
Um, yeah.
I raised my, raise my hand here.
Um, I'll just raise my actual hand.
Um, yeah.
I mean, another thing that.
Just know what you just said that I should bring up here is that, uh, I mean, strictly speaking, I suppose, active inference isn't committed to these being directly descriptions of brain processes.
They're right there, they're sort of computational models of decision making processes with beliefs and all that.
And of course, if you take the, there's this whole background of the free energy principle and all that, that links this to physics and the physical, physical nature of systems.
Uh, and I tend to read these models as pretty transparently mapping onto brain processes, but, uh, it's not necessarily the case that, that you need to be committed to that interpretation of these processes as material processes.
Um, when you use active inference to describe some system at the psychological level.
And there's of course still a lot of question about how the psychological description maps onto the physical description, which I have views about, but it's an open question.
Awesome.
Uh, Dean and then Ali.
So in the paper itself on page seven, I think there's a paragraph that kind of refers to all of this that we've been talking about.
I'll just quote it the relationship between conscious and unconscious computation.
Therefore remains an open question.
That said, some specific DAI models have been used to describe higher level cognitive processes that can generate conscious beliefs and verbal reports.
And then it says where the authors are in these cases, the inferential prediction error minimization process can still be seen as sub-personal or unconscious, but the resulting beliefs and decisions themselves are assumed to enter awareness.
As a general rule, however, sub-personal processes in DAI should not be expected to map one-to-one with consciously accessible or personal processes.
Great.
So I've, I've copied that up on the slides and Dean, what do you think that spoke to, or what made you want to share that?
I just think, I think, I think the first author and the, and the other authors were essentially saying, let's make sure that we don't try to conflate things here that we've, we focus in on what we're trying to do here, which is point to the potential of these formalisms explaining something.
If a person can self-report, if they can't, there's still aspects of this that might apply, but I think, I think they were just trying to clarify exactly what they were pointing to and not pointing to.
And Ryan Smith has made clearly a line of research as well as multiple live streams and exhortations on social media about this distinction that one can take a cognitive modeling approach of report behavior.
Did you see that or not?
And that can be very clearly, although subtly distinguished from the actual awareness of seeing something.
It's not the same thing to have report behavior as it is to have the experiential underpinning.
They're potentially adjacent questions, or there's a space that they're linked in a meaningful way, but it's quite possible to blanket literally one's uncertainty about the question of experience, even in a visual or multimodal way.
From the question of, well, let's just say we had the animal or the computer program in the chair.
And now we're making a cognitive model of its report behavior.
Different question than can the report behavior model be one of the same as what is actually happening?
Because there could be an interleaving stage where they just choose to lie or all these other kinds of interesting things happening.
Ali?
Ali?





Ali?

Ali?

Ali?

Ali?

And just as a brief side note, I think the term folk psychology here can also be related
to the distinction made by Wilfred Sellers between manifest image and the scientific image of human beings.
And the manifest image being our understanding of ourselves as personal and social beings.
And obviously the scientific image speaks for self.
So I think the term folk psychology can possibly be equivalent to this manifest image of ourselves.
And yeah, that's just a side note I wanted to share.
How do you see that, Alex?
Yeah, I think, I mean, I'd almost agree.
I would just say maybe, I don't, I don't think I would say folk psychology is equivalent to the manifest image, but I think it might be a part of it, which is probably nitpicking.
But there just might be more to the manifest image of ourselves than just folk psychology.
But anyway, I basically agree.
Yeah.
Hmm.
Hmm.
Yes.
The, the question, yeah, Dean, anything you want to bring here?
No.
This reminds me of with the conversations we've had on linguistics, how there's one view on language as a entity, like out there, body of knowledge.
And then there's also the person's self-constructed sense of language.
And they only have a partial subset of the words or they use them in a certain way.
And there's an analogous distinction where there's folk psychology, the academic field of, versus people's inner sense.
And how do people generate their inner sense of manifest image, if that's appropriate?
And how can that be connected and mapped to, again, any descriptive model or disciplinary or transdisciplinary model?
Alex, and then do it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, so I really should take the opportunity to say that my, my conception of how folk psychology works is like thoroughly Sellars, Szilarsian.
It's like, I think he got it exactly right.
So basically, and it's been a long time since I've tried to recite this, but basically just the idea that there's sort of verbal behavior, right?
That people enact and engage, engage in.
That we end up sort of associating with other things that are going on internally.
And that through this sort of process, we end up sort of inadvertently in the course of evolutionary history at some point.
There's this whole Szilarsian myth about this stuff.
But basically, the idea is that folk psychology sort of arises and introspection, things like that.
And I may be putting a bit more into Sellars than he actually says right now.
Again, it's been a while, but basically the idea that introspection and our sense of self-awareness and stuff like that sort of could have developed out of first outward behavior.
Right.
And then we sort of become sensitive to correlations among these outward signals and that develops sort of an inner sense in that way.
So, but the idea, the fundamental idea that's relevant to this discussion, this paper, I think,
is that folk psychology is just the name for this sort of thing that naturally developed in the course of human history.
I got to say, of course, there isn't just one folk psychology, right?
For one thing, people speak different languages.
But I do think the piece of it that I think is pretty safe to say is true, or I think, and that we meant to capture.
This is my take on why we were using the BDI model.
Is that, I mean, pretty much anyone, this isn't entirely true.
There are different, you know, dialects and things.
But basically, if you want to understand why somebody did something, you can say, oh, they believed X and they wanted Y, right?
And they intended Z.
And that's the level at which I mean to sort of endorse folk psychology.
It's just I don't see how that sort of psychological.
And I got to say, it's not for me.
My motivation for sort of wanting to defend folk psychology isn't really anything to do with introspection or consciousness.
It's just we obviously use these terms to explain behavior and we do it very successfully.
And so I don't think it could be the case that these terms fail to carry information about the states that people are in.
So, you know, this is why I don't quite get the limit to this argument.
Anyway, that's gone a bit far far field from where we started.
David?
And then anyone else?
Yeah, I think, I mean, as a say, a spiritualist, the limit of this argument is saying that's the natural conclusion of what you're saying.
And you're drawing from the dualistic tradition when you use these terminologies.
So, you know, say that all of the thousands of years of Western tradition that believed in the soul.
And then you want to borrow the terminology from a materialistic point of view.
It may not be accurate and follow the evidence.
And I think, you know, Jerry Fodor and the modular mind or Benjamin Lieblitz experiments that, you know, what is active inference actually saying?
It's a threshold that is reached that causes activity.
And, you know, like Lieblitz famous experiments where the threshold is reached and it could be measured in the brain before the, you know, called the active conscious part of the person recognizes it.
And if it was like a modular mind that you have multiple conflicting parts of the person that could have beliefs and motivation.
But what we would call the, you know, the module of the mind that creates the narrative for us is only one of those.
And that's just what active to the person.
So when I interact with myself or you interact with another person through language, you only have access to that one part of the brain that creates a narrative.
But, you know, the, you know, the, you know, more recent experiences demonstrated that that's not likely the part that controls action.
And, you know, active inference didn't exist then.
I mean, Bayesian mechanics did, but you're saying it's, it's a threshold and there's all sorts of things that cause a person's threshold to be reached.
And active inference could potentially model that.
And then if you, you know, even you put in your paper that you could include things like, you know, if you want to call beliefs or desires as higher order rules.
So even at the point, there may not be a mechanistic understanding of what's the origin or how these higher order rules operate, but it would be some sort of, you know, free energy principles, some sort of mathematical reduction of a threshold being reached where the sum totality of conscious and subconscious factors cause the action.
And even the person, ourself through introspection, isn't going to have full access to that.
Okay.
If I can just respond here.
I think first of all, just to be respectful to my coauthors, I should say, because I might get into my own views here, which they don't necessarily share that at all.
But I should say, I think this paper is really targeted at explaining the connections potentially, or clarifying the connections between folk psychology.
Whatever it's, whatever its implications, right?
Even whether, whether folk psychology carries implications of soul type things because of its roots, maybe it does.
But anyway, it's, it's trying to clarify the connections between active inference as just a, as sort of a formal theory of decision making and folk psychology.
I don't.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
Maybe there's still an issue there.
If you, if you really think that folk psychology, that the terms, very terms of folk psychology carry dualistic implications.
And if you, and if you think that active inference carries materialistic implications, then there's still a problem, I guess.
I guess.

I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
Maybe there's still an issue there.
If you, if you really think that folk psychology, that the terms, very terms of folk psychology carry dualistic implications.
And if you, and if you think that active inference carries materialistic implications, then there's still a problem, I guess.
I guess.
I'm.
I don't, I don't really know if I, if I agree with either of those, but.
Yeah.
I mean, I, I don't, I guess I don't see how, the, I don't see how active inference as such implies anything one way or the other, the other about whether there are.
Non-material origins to, to behavior.
It's, it, I guess.
Okay.
I can see.
Let me try, let me try this.
See if I can.
I'm just trying to see if I get your argument, David.
David.
So it's like, we're saying that active inference, or let's say active inference as a framework says that this is how decisions happen.
You do a.
Search over policies, which are these discrete.
Things.
And you figure out the expected free energy, which has to do with comparing sensory data to expected sensory data.
And I guess if you think, you think all of those components are pieces of a material thing.
Right.
They're, they're all beliefs or desires or something like that.
Which you take to be.
I mean, actually, I think I can answer this.
Sorry.
I realize I'm, this is not, I'm not doing the best job of this right now, but at least I'm getting, this is difficult.
It's, I'm glad you're bringing this stuff up because this is actually, this gets quite challenging.
But I think.
So, so active inference is this theory of, of, well, DAI is this theory of, of discrete decision-making that appeals to this, you know,
to these distributions or things that are like belief distribution, right?
Belief distribution and a desire or preference distribution.
I don't think it says anything about where the preference distribution comes from.
And in particular, I don't think it says that it doesn't come from the soul or, you know, or some, some deeper thing.
So that's, that switched from me trying to rationally reconstruct your argument to me trying to rebut it.
Sorry about that, but I'm just trying to make some progress.
Let me try to walk through some of these steps.
Cause I agree.
It's an important distinction.
So the focus of the paper, the regime of attention of the paper, very clearly written to remain on a line because there's many open threads related to, for example, different cultural folks,
psychologies, various folks, psychology models, various metaphysical claims.
The paper was focused on identifying one possible area of incompatibility, which would be the relationship between the BDI model entities, the nodes in the BDI graph and assignment of terms for specific parts of the active formalism.
And identifying that will come back to now, then, as has been pointed out today, one could ask if folk psychology carries a dualist implication in the sense of there being material and non-material types of things, whether implicitly or axiomatically or historically.
But if folk psychology has a dualist implication and active inference carries a purely materialist implication, implicitly or explicitly, then there could be another battlefront of tension, which would not be based around mapping the nodes in the BDI model to the nodes or the formalisms in the active formalism, which is like a theory-theory ontology map question.
But this would actually be a metaphysical incompatibility.
And then, Alex, you walked through some steps that said, if active inference is a framework that says this is going to be a model of how decisions happen, there's a search over discrete policies, there's the calculation of variational free energy and or expected free energy.
And then you added as part of a material thing.
So, then, it is going to be incompatible with anything in material.
However, one could also simply say, actinf is a descriptive framework saying, here's how I will model how decisions happen.
As a search over discrete policies, and as the calculation of FE, then there might be one, two, three, four kinds of things in the universe, or it could be anything.
But this is where the materialism enters is actually as a clause in the assumptions of that string, rather than materialism arising as a consequence of the neutral, descriptive, formal basis of the framework.
What do you think about that, Alex?
Alex Kahneman Yeah, thanks.
Alex Kahneman Thanks, Daniel for articulating that so well.
Alex Kahneman I think that's basically right and just as a specific example.
Even if you even if you go so far as to think that you can map this formalized formalism onto brain states.
Alex Kahneman You don't have to think that brain states get their status as desires or beliefs just from their material constitution, right?
And you could, if you believe that free will arises in microtubules, for example, or something.
I don't know how that works that that theory, by the way, I don't mean to disparage it either.
I just I don't know how it works.
But I'm using it as an example.
Alex Kahneman Maybe you think that free will kind of somehow bubbles up through this free will at smaller scales or something, right?
Alex Kahneman So I just don't think that even if we take this as a description of the brain that we're committed to anything so heavy as materialism.
Daniel Kahneman Thanks, Alex.
David?
David?
Daniel Kahneman Yeah, man, I appreciate your research.
I'm not here to like debate dualism here.
I just think that if we could recognize what are the assumptions or axioms.
So you have questions.
And that's why I like your focus on on motor control connected to sense perception.
So if there's your perception of a unified eye, and even you know, like Daniel and his research on answer something like that, that, okay, there's, you know, David, Alex, you know, Daniel, all the panelists, Ali and Dean, that that are talking to each other, we might refer to ourselves as a name.
David?
Daniel Kahneman But is there a unified eye?
And, you know, so okay, that's an axiom that is based on a dualistic tradition that may or may not be accurate.
And if you said, well, there's a sum total of forces that are limited through the free energy principle that we refer to as unified eye that makes decisions.
But that's more lexical misnomer.
And even if you think Daniel's research and answer something like that, that a question like, is there a unified ant that avoids death that tries to survive?
Why does the ant have some sort of will to live?
If I argue that that's also non materialistic, the ants will to live, or that there's a unified force.
So I mean, you could have a materialistic explanation like higher order rules, and just leave it that I believe that these higher order rules stem from genetics, or some sort of, you know, parallel, I call it ant, reverse ant or morphomorphization of machine learning where an ant has some sort of will to survive.
And therefore, you know, if you try to step on an ant, it's going to move the other direction, or something like that.
But is there actually unified force in the ant that is telling it to survive, that causes it to act in a unified way?
Or is it just, you know, the free energy principle in a reduction of all of the various sense perceptions?
And, and, you know, so we are using these axioms from a dualistic perspective, you know, like specifically called the unified eye, that makes more sense as a non material force, that chooses the eye that's not my body chooses to make this action.
And so if active inference saying no, it's a sum total of sense perception, some sort of higher order rules that are acquired through a combination of genetics, and
other, you know, machine like processes, that, that we use the language description as I, but you know, the mathematics is really saying that's not really accurate.
And Alex, to you, and I'll also just recall, way back when, in 222222, when we discussed your paper, Psychophysical Identity and Free Energy, which very directly tackles this question of identity, materialism, physicalism, various other processes, just want to drop that note, and feel free to reply to it.
Yeah, that's great.
Yeah, yeah, the reason I get so excited about this stuff is that I care about it. And I definitely don't take like a sort of default materialist position on this stuff.
So I guess, I mean, overall, David, like my view here is sort of about the self, and, you know, the self and the self with a capital S, maybe in some like, you know, Buddhist type traditions, I'm actually a fairly far on the on the mystical end of the spectrum myself. And, and for that reason, I don't expect, I'm sorry, this is maybe not addressing what you said in all its nuance. But basically, the gist of how I see this is, you shouldn't expect it to be a
You shouldn't expect that thing, the really special thing that we don't want to eliminate, you shouldn't expect it to show up in our descriptions of things, because you can't describe it anyway, it's transcendent. So, you know, even if the brain is identical with the mind, insofar as we can describe the mind, the mind isn't identical with the mind insofar as we can describe the mind, right? It's the, it's the thing, it's the big self that we can't ever pin down with words.
And actually, out of respect for that thing. I am happy for it not to show up in the descriptions that we give of how this how the material stuff works, or even how how anything works, right? Because insofar as you can reduce it to a description, it's not that thing.
Thanks, Alex. And to kind of add some thoughts there, the paper clearly delineates two variants or applications of the active inference formalism, which is MAI, motor active inference and DAI, decision active inference.
And the two theories differ in at least two important ways, or two, two, these two applications of the frameworks differ in at least two important ways.
The first is the phenomena that they are targeting to describe, whether discrete decision making and planning behavior, or whether motor behavior.
And then there's the question of discrete and continuous modeling.
And so for reasons of biology and historical precedent, the motor models have come from the continuous category, while many of the decision making models, which often map onto things that are legitimately categorical in the world, like a T-maze, or a planning or sentence generation task, has a discreteness or categoricalness to its basis.
And that made me think about linear regression, as I really like to think about, because in the history of linear regressions, no one said, you used a linear regression to model the stimuli intensity and the behavioral response.
So you think people are a linear regression?
And this is another mathematical formalism that, in some ways, although I'm happy to also update my model on this, is able to be interpreted, but not the only interpretation, as having an equal epistemic claim to the territory as a linear model, because they're formalisms.
And the least squares error in the least squares, which fits, which is not the only norm one could choose, but whatever function is used as the imperative to fit that linear regression could be playing an analogous role to the calculation of variational free energy.
It could be purely understood as a modeling heuristic that's used to make statistical comparisons within a model.
And then also the linear regression framework can be used to make discrete decisions, like breakpoint regression, where you can contrast two different alternative models.
And you can say, is it more consistent with one regression, or is it possible that there's some breakpoint, a two-parameter model that we're going to identify?
And so I try to always be thinking, like, we're on the freeway, and here's the action framework, and here's the linear regression framework.
And if there's going to be some claim about active inference or free energy principle at all about what the formalism means, I always like jumping from car to car and thinking, would people, or do they, or have they said that about linear regression?
And if they can't, there better be a good reason why they can't.
For example, people who are committed to taking an interpretation of the territory based upon anything of the act-inth map, do they think that that is something that's true of all different statistical modeling frameworks, and they'd apply that to a linear regression?
Or is there something different in the active inference formalisms that legitimize or warrant that kind of a interpretation beyond the linear regression?
That was the first point.
And then the second point was about Alex very beautifully said with, like, not expecting the transcendence and that which cannot be named or however we want to think about that space to appear in the imminent and in the specific realizations.
I think it's very important that the axioms are stated in self-contained scientific argumentation and rhetoric.
Although unstated axioms come in at least two types.
One are the secret axioms that you made and snuck in.
Like, we didn't mention this issue, but we're going to use it as if it was an axiom in our deployment of a broader argument later in section nine.
Alternatively, an issue might not be addressed because the argument is agnostic or orthogonal or blanketed with respect to that axiom.
Like, you didn't mention what color shirt you're wearing because not you're going to use it and slip it into the argument later, but rather that the argument being made is uncorrelated or is not related to the shirt color.
So, I think that the potentially even aware avoidance of the metaphysical baggage precursor exploration in this paper is not to say that the issues are unimportant, as various other work by all the authors actually speaks to,
but rather that this can be understood as a specific sequence of thoughts and rhetoric and symbols that update belief on the relatively narrow, although still quite broad, question of whether the concepts, categories of B, D, and I can map to aspects of the actant framework,
just like the linear regression slope, could be mapped onto the concept influence of X on Y.
Not that that still wouldn't have some ability to be critiqued in the future or nuanced by future modeling, but you could say the linear regression model is not inconsistent, does not contradict, not that it proves, but it does not contradict folk regressionology.
So, active inference models do not contradict folk psychology.
Linear regression models do not contradict or negate folk causal inference.
Anything that's going to break beyond that epistemic map is going to need to make a special case beyond people have interpreted this way or somebody who wasn't paying attention might make the mistake of believing X.
So, sorry for the extended piece there, but I think there's so many important aspects that this paper either guides us on and also takes us to a vista of.
Dean?
I'm not going to be able to articulate it as clearly as you just did, but here's my thing.
Dean?
So, coming at the paper with my background, my question ended up being, so if we're going to compare something that adds two things up, a belief and a desire and out pops an intention.
Dean?

And then last week with Alex on or with sorry Alex with Brian on here, we started moving to the idea that with expected free energy, the ability to see the discrete the difference between the ambiguous and the risk was a difference.
Dean? So it's not an not an adding up to come to some conclusion, it was an actual knowing that we want to try to move things that are apart closer together and so.

From the standpoint of writing the paper now the question is, can those things work in concert can can one approach which says these things add up.
Dean? And then we behave accordingly work at the same time as this other way of quantifying which says there's a variational part that we're trying to minimize and there's an expected part that we're trying to juggle as well.
Dean? And so I think when you get to the closer to the end of the paper and you talk about the world to mind and the mind to world, that isn't necessarily always additive, that's still a differential, but I don't think you as writers of this paper disqualified what's going on with the well, we can add these two things together and this is what pops up.
Dean? All I think, and it's said through paper many times is under these particular types of sins, the difference seems to seems to also determine what degree of desire or belief or dox, I can't say doxacity might pertain to that expected free, free energy, sorry, expected free energy.
Dean? Difference. So again, that's not as eloquent as Daniel or you can describe it but from somebody who's way down here and just trying to make sure that in my own head.
Dean? That image right there that's up there where suddenly the circumstances have changed and I've gone to a desire that says, well, I can't change gravity so when make the biggest crater I possibly can.
Dean? Instead of the outcome which I'd like, which is to continue to exist. Maybe my entity, my identity now is how big a hole in the earth I can make. So that's a difference as opposed to an adding up.
Dean? Thanks Alex, feel free to respond and also we'll look at expected free energy and the simulation. It'll be great to explore those.
Dean? Yeah, cool. Yeah. So I think I got the point about halfway through I'm seeing where you're getting at. It's interesting. So I think, I mean, the first first my first answer was well.
Dean? Okay, if we, we shouldn't think of belief plus desire equals intention as literally involving a sum.
You know, since I've been doing a lot of a lot of writing code lately is for work and I'm and I would think of it as like, well, we define the sum operator for belief and desire as just the thing that active inference does, right, essentially, right, basically, belief plus desire means take the KL divergence.
But a more informative answer is, I mean, if you want to think of it as a mathematical type operation, like a sum or a difference, I think you're right, being that it's much more like a difference. It's much more like intention equals desire minus belief, right?
So it's like you have your model of the world, you see what the difference is between the belief and the, and the, sorry, between your model currently, sorry, you have your model of what you want the world to be like, rather, you see that what the difference is between that and your model of what the world is like.
And, and that gives you the expected free energy. But I know you said we get to this in a second, Daniel, but I think you could pretty much literally see this in the expected free energy.
In the KL term there, right? So yeah, so you could expand that. So Q of the divergence between Q and P, you can you can write this out in a way that's, you know, where you're subtracting one entropy from another, basically.
And so you can see it as literally a difference. So if you, if you want to map it onto the difference concept, then it's pretty straightforward.
And that's one feature of the logarithm function as a modeling heuristic, not metaphysical truth that division is a division of different terms.
Different terms like their ratio is related to the subtraction of the log of the ratio.
So there's various reasons why like log likelihoods are used. And it's also a core function that's deployed in the KL divergence, as well as entropy terms.
And then just, yes, do it, but just to get through the variables here, it's written out in the paper, but a KL divergence is describing a divergence, not a distance between what are on the two sides of the double line.
And this is the Q variational distribution of observations over time horizon, conditioned upon policy, which serves also very important function heuristically, especially in the discrete case.
And the divergence between that observations, and the divergence between that observations conditioned on policy and the posterior distribution on observations through time.
So just that's what's in the KL term. And we explore this also more in the dot zero and we can return to it as well.
But just wanted to clarify like, and contextualize this to some of our early discussions, like this is the Y equals MX plus B of this framework.
And the least squares is like fitting the minimum of something. And so again, to go beyond the interpretation of linear modeling here, not that this is a linear model, requires sometimes describing this,
describing either the specifics of this, either the specifics of this model and how it differs, or taking a vast or potentially extremely untenable position about the naive interpretation of variables in arbitrary equations,
which I think is fair to say is an untenable position, which puts the onus of people making metaphysical interpretations or claims about this line into a place where the specifics of this line must be addressed.
Dean, and then David.
Just real quick, I think, for me, it's hard to determine whether or not a relationship, or a diversion, or the difference is material or not.
And so for me, sometimes that just depends, sometimes I can actually see the edges of the relationship and sometimes,
it's very, very fluid and it's hard to determine whether or not there's something material about that.
And that's actually baked into this formula too. So I don't know what others think about that.
But I mean, there is an aspect of this that is written in, but I don't know if we can actually lock it down and say that that thing that relationship there is actually material or not.
So...
Thanks, Dean. David?
Yeah, I think the activity, you know, just looking at it as a statistical model could be used to model any higher order rules with a feedback mechanism, whether the origins of them are material or not.
So we don't have to, you know, go in America around talking about what's the origin of these higher order rules.
And I was just thinking the, you know, the phenomenon of folk psychology applying to humans and the belief, desire, intention model.
If we were looking at a simpler model, you know, like, obviously, you know, Daniel studied ants, but at what level is there sense perception and motor control?
And does that need a controller?
It was just a pure feedback mechanism like action, reaction, and their decision is made based on higher order rules that, you know, I don't know if you consider an ant if you just simplify it like eat, survive.
And even, you know, if an ant doesn't have reproduce, if even you eliminate like an ant colony where only the queen reproduces and possibly in humans, you could say the only difference between a human and the ant is you add the reproduce, but you have these higher order rules of basically survive.
And, you know, maybe that's maybe there's only one higher order rule, or maybe you want to give a whole bunch of higher order rules.
And then you define that in your free energy principle, like, okay, so you have the sense perception, and then you have the movement.
And, you know, so how you define the variables in the feedback mechanism, you know, the active inference, mathematical framework could model it no matter how you define it.
And, you know, this thing also, I mean, you obviously were focusing on humans, but it might be more simplified to focus on, you know, the most simplified species, even plants, maybe that they don't have a survive instinct that they can, I mean, they have some sort of
survive instinct, but like, you know, insect that could try to survive, if I try to squash an insect, it's going to move in order to try to survive.
And that's a clear example of sense perception, the insect senses me, you know, trying to trying to kill it, God forbid, and then moves out of the way, what exactly caused it.
And so you're just going to hypothesize, well, of course, it has some sort of survival instinct.
And the sensory perception feeds in to its motor control movement, versus if it's just seeking food, or like a Maslow hierarchy of needs.
And, you know, I like the terminology, you know, anthropo, if we're anthropomorphizing, you know, the ant, or are we reverse anthropomorphizing the machine, that the fact is, in terms of sense perception, motor control, we understand how the robot computer works much better than the mind.
And so are the active inference equations really more suited to machine learning, robotic automation, and then where you reverse anthropomorphizing that to the human mind.
But, you know, certainly the equations are valuable, because, you know, largely, they could be interchanged and defined how you want them to.
Thanks.
I'll connect some ant thoughts to the skydiver.
So Dean has returned to this example of the skydiver as being like, well, if I can't change gravity, my policies, whether mental attention policies, prey or no prey, you know, do this motor behavior or do the speech behavior, which is a motor behavior as well, conditioned on policy, not going to be able to influence gravity.
And then once updates their prior that also conditioned upon various action policies, they're not going to be able to open a functional parachute, then there's this discrete shift, as you've described to like making the biggest crater.
And hearing about the ants over the years, it makes me think about folk biology, like the notion that people have in terms of their received understanding that there is like a drive to survive or a drive to reproduce or a drive to do various numbers of things.
It's almost like the BDI of evolutionary biology or of ecology.
And I'm thinking about the case where a nest mate is out foraging for the colony, and then they're being like messed with by somebody with like a magnifying glass or being touching them.
And at first, it's like evading.
Now, that behavior looks a lot like a solitary insect that might be trying to evade and survive, ostensibly to reproduce and increase like its individual offspring, if one is still within the folk biological realm.
And then it's like there's a switch where the nest mate is actually like, no, the evolutionary unit is the colony.
And so it goes for the biggest crater possible.
And that's even embodied in the anatomy of some insects, for example, with a hooked stinger, where they can't, they're committing six-legged death to compose a broader high fitness entity at the colony scale.
And so that's like a behavioral shift from trying to open the individual nest mate parachute to make the biggest crater on the attacker possible for the good of the colony.
And that, no matter how hard you try to map that to the behavior of a solitary insect, will be along a potentially didactic or interesting, but ultimately facetious route, because the colony is the evolutionary unit for these obligately used social species.
And so one will be scratching their head at various of the behaviors.
And that's why the value of a descriptive framework is so important, because we're able to describe various computational qualities and not be inconsistent or contradicting folk in its psychology,
while also remaining absolutely impartial to questions of what ants think, for example.
And so we can have computational representations of ant decision-making and cognition, perception, cognition, action, impact.
And we can link it to natural language descriptions through the active inference ontology, as well as through potentially other ontologies like ant folk psychology.
And we can take that yes and, and other people can add other yes ands if they want, but they're going to have to take a different tack to uncouple the relationship between these computational quantities and try to interject a wedge and say, no, it does contradict folk psychology.
That's a different argument than that relationship is in violating some other third belief system that I'm bringing to the table.
So hope that addresses some of it.
And thanks, Blue, for your questions in the chat there.
Ali, would you like to raise anything or take us to a question or area that you want to focus on?
Yeah.

And one more thing about this discussion is bringing personal semiotics into table, I think.
Well, the active inference actually, I believe, is a kind of iconic symbol as opposed to index.
Because you see in personal semiotics for index, we need to necessarily allow some kind of causal relationship between the symbol and the index.
But for icons, we only need to have some isomorphic similarities.
Not to say similarity because similarity is a very vague term.
Some isomorphism between the symbol and the icon.
So ideally, active inference is a kind of, let's say, structure-preserving mapping between the behavior and the model.
So I guess if we can, if we could differentiate between icons and indices, some of these, at least, confusions could possibly, could potentially be well resolved.
So icons and indices of process semiotics.
Alex Mitryk
representations is pretty much how I think of theories and how I mean the most recent thing
I published with Jacob Hovey we basically said that you can think of scientific theories as
relating to the world by a process non-process a relation of sort of structural similarity
isomorphism being the sort of limit case so I just I agree with that and I think it's
it kind of comes right back to a lot of what we discussed like I I'm as I as I get older I start
to think that maybe there's something to the essential indexical idea that like I has a special
role to play you know the letter capital I in English but other than that I think things pretty
much function function descriptively and and I think description functions via isomorphism or
similarities so totally agree awesome that reminds me of um the book anthem by rand where the word I
is not included in the linguistics and then the end of the book not you know spoiler alert um
that word I is rediscovered and so it's kind of an allegory that traces some of these questions
about the potentially special role of the bodily identity but it's very interesting that these
frameworks actually are engaging or with this augmented perspective for example that Ali has raised
that these theories can be seen as already having been engaged in
a discourse that people might not expect like predictive processing is what the brain is doing
do you agree or deny what's the evidence for predictive processing being active in the brain
versus not active in the brain is this neural signal recording that we made more consistent with
a predictive or non-predictive model it takes that meso range of what the system is doing
and it partitions it as we heard also from ryan previously into like well predictive processing can't
be invalidated not nor can linear regression framework nor can active inference framework any specific model
is now engaged in a specific model evidence comparison and then one can choose what kind of model
comparisons they want to make knowing that they're not going to be able to exhaustively consider all
possible cognitive architectures but also any invalidation or relative model fit or adequacy amongst
different models at this specific level are speaking only rhetorically to the truth or the validity or the
adequacy of the higher level inviolable framework there's a lot there to explore do it
yeah maybe maybe we could tie this back to the limit of ism um in uh you know the anthropomorphism so
if you know you ascribe an eye to the computer you say that's a logical fallacy of anthropomorphism
because there is no i it's just following code or even to uh the ant if uh uh you know mammals maybe uh but
but uh you know insects communicate if the ants sends pheromones and you want to anthropomorphize an eye to the
ant that uh like the the ant is saying i want to communicate with my fellow ants for a purpose and
it's like no no that's not that's anthropomorphism logical fallacy the ant is just uh following genetic
code and then you say well uh really for humans also that uh you know we're uh morphizing uh the mind and
that there is no i related to uh unified i related to the me that even right now that you know i am
communicating with uh with you you you find gentlemen uh but that's a misnomer and in terms that it's just
me following uh my my predictive coding and that uh you know just for the purpose of language i'm referring
it to as i talking to you uh but you know that's just like a computer sending code to another computer
or an ant sending pheromones or whatever method of communication it it uses and that's just the
language and lexicon that we use yeah it's uh it's a dialogue that has played out in
not only girdle escher bach but many college dorm rooms many late night sessions one participant or
perspective believes that they have for example the ability to choose and have agency and the other
disregards that position or one believes that there's something and there's a divergence in
their perspective i think this is just the heart of the map territory debate in the distributed cognitive
setting as all cognitive systems ultimately are even what is called individual behavior is just
referring to collective behavior at another scale for example one person can say this conversation can be
modeled using active inference or this conversation can be modeled using predictive processing just like
it could be constructed with a linear regression or family of linear regressions and somebody else could
say this conversation is nothing but linear aggressions nothing but predictive processing nothing but active
inference someone might believe that and if they believe that it would be true that that is their perspective
i don't know if that would make it true but they would be taking they would be stepping into a territory
that the person who remains with both feet in instrumentalism i'm choosing to model it this way
or i'm testing a portfolio of different models around how we could model our difference in perspective
maybe one can say that they have uh been too timid and they haven't actually engaged in the
real question which is what's really happening not with how you're modeling it but that's a whole
another debate alex and then do it yeah um i just think i mean this this might tie into the stuff in
section nine that maybe we'll get to we don't have to jump to i'm just saying uh uh basically i i agree
you could raise these questions for any of these systems people machines ants uh protons whatever and uh
and i think there's an argument to be made that there's not a clear place to draw the line there
but it could go either way with respect to all of those right i i think that you know you could be
anthropomorphizing in all of those cases or none of them um it's not easy to i don't think it's easy
to draw a line somewhere along the sort of evolutionary continuum or anything like that to say
although there's there's an argument about temporal depth of generative models that's interesting that
that touched on a couple of papers here and there but um you know i think uh the the cool thing about
uh active inference and the free energy principle stuff is that it applies across scales um so i think
that to me that means that you're faced with a similar problem um at whatever scale you consider it
um i just gotta throw out there i probably gonna have to leave around 12 30 eastern so i'll say that now
so that i can just abruptly uh close my window that's all great so we're in the summary of main
argument section nine so alex what is the main argument and also in the contexts and audiences
that you've presented it in how do you feel like it lands or what cognitive updates are you aiming to
achieve with this argument as constructed and communicated is this section nine i think i
actually made them in section eight but um sorry okay section eight desires and affective states no
no no let me see i meant 10. okay um i i don't want to totally bypass your question i just think nine
is kind of a summary of the argument thus far so all right how about 10 let's talk about direction of fit
yeah so i mean so the sorry the the sort of the point here was just that there's a this
certainly is relevant to a lot of what we're discussing there's a straightforward way to
generalize this beyond systems that you would necessarily intuitively describe as having beliefs
and desires and we can just talk about any system that's described by active inference by this framework
or that's describable accurately by this framework you can talk about the difference between q and p
and this i think also ties into some of the work that maxwell remsted has done on um just the idea that
you know uh degenerative model is sort of a representation uh or it's it's sort of a
representation embodied by the system if it's a representation we still disagree about that anyway
the generative model and the approximate recognition model are sort of always there even if you apply
these um frameworks um to describe very simple systems and you can you can see something desire like
or belief like in those and we just remain very neutral on on that in this paper on the question
whether there really are beliefs and desires in these sort of extended cases by extended i mean not
necessarily paradigmatic right so if if beliefs and desires paradigmatically applied to like people
and then maybe to ants and i would say definitely dogs you know um then uh this this stuff in section 10 is
is is about uh what you can say without necessarily committing to beliefs and desires and those in the in the edge cases
um but you can still say that there's at least an ingredient of beliefs and desires which is a direction of fit
um that's sums it up so how could this be used in one case for a human entity in the folk psychological way
and in another case for some entity that people would maybe say that type of folk psychology would be inadmissible for
um i mean as far as how it could be used in the case of of people that have beliefs and desires or that we think do
i think it's pretty it's pretty straightforward right it's just saying well any kind of folk psychological
explanation you can give of the person's behavior you can uh it's consistent with the description of that
person in terms of active inference um i guess then the the only question is like in the case of a
system that might be not clearly uh that you wouldn't necessarily think of as having a psychology
in the same sense uh what kinds of things would you want to say about it um i think i think there's an
example that made into the paper about like a a plant reaching towards the light or something or it's sort of
these simple simpler sort of feedback systems right where something there's like a set point uh and
the thing is approaching the set point um you could still think of the of the prior distribution as
having a uh world to mind direction of fit right because it's it's the piece of the system that brings
it about that um that things change so that that distribution uh describes uh you know reality um
yeah so uh yeah and so you still have those so so that's one example um i don't know maybe like a
bacterium following some kind of nutrient gradient or something i don't really know about that stuff but
that's one another example that might you could you could ascribe directions of fit to that creature and
i don't okay last last my last thought on this i don't know why it would be useful to do that necessarily
uh i don't know there might be reasons in studying these systems that you want to
but if you did want to do it you could understand it from the framework just some brief thoughts and then
ali so first there's a paper of calvo and friston 2017 which is specifically applying predictive
processing and active to the um vegetative case and i think from the perspective of behavioral analysis
there's also precedent in the 1989 paper framework for plant behavior by silvertown and gordon so
suffice to say that plants are included within this cognitivist modeling perspective and then it made me
think about how the surprise the self-information is an energy function it's what dampens the spring
and so maybe could you say like the heavier ball with folk ball psychology the heavier ball wants to
drop faster or it wants to make a bigger crater or all these other things just again it doesn't have
the agency to want otherwise given the initial conditions and the rules of physics in that situation
but it's exactly like a person wanting to make a small hole in the paper or wanting to make a big
hole and then realizing that intention would be analogous to an energy functional being reduced by some
kind of purely physical system which does again hint towards some of the potentially non-materialist
implications legacy that do slip in to different in cultured conversations around mind um yes alex any
last thoughts on that just real quick yeah on the ball example i mean i think there is a sense of course in
which this framework applies but i think if anything the ball wouldn't have a desire or if the system
involving the ball might though right so because the the term that would that would pull the ball towards
the ground or whatever wouldn't really be in the makeup of the ball but and so whether that larger
system has a proto belief or desire i don't know ali and again alex feel free to depart whenever but ali go for
uh well yeah i'm not sure if we have enough time to get into this question i mean if not we can uh discuss it in the
dot too but uh i had a question about the aesthetic experience and the pleasure or a positive balance we get
from engaging with works of art uh in particular i'm talking about unexpected plot twists in movies or novels or
different kinds of intentional ambiguities in some artworks for instance the works of mc escher and his
impossible geometries uh will immediately come to mind and the sense of excitement and joy they tend to
induce in the audience uh in fact playing around with these kinds of defamiliarizations as literary
critics like to call them seems to be more of a rule than an exception in any creative endeavor
uh on the other hand outside the safety of the world of arts we generally don't like to be encountered
with too much unexpectedness as we've seen uh so i wonder whether or how these kinds of aesthetic
reactions can be integrated within the formalism of active inference are they special cases of
information seeking drives or there's a whole other story going on here
alex go for this and then thanks again for your time here yeah yeah yeah i'll check out after this
thank you so much i love these discussions i knew it would be an interesting interesting crowd interesting
uh topics um i gotta say i i don't know much about what you just asked about um oe but i love this
this topic um i'm coming i actually come from a background in aesthetics as well i should say but
anyway i know there's a lot of work on this so i know that predictive process under the banner of
predictive processing there's a whole lot of work in aesthetics these days on i think suggesting a lot
something very similar to what you're saying that there's clearly a relationship here between
surprisal and unexpectedness and predictions and the joy that we get out of and other emotions that we
get out of artworks and i i would love to to know more about this i haven't had time to look into it but
i i think daniel's put a uh this was a uh also predictive processing type paper with a incredible title
move me astonish me delight my eyes and brain and then enter the subtitle sequel title um perhaps in
the dot two let's sketch this out let's act let's look at the formalisms and let's do some mappings so
someone said i believe that mondrian is an amazing painter and i want to go to a space where i do see
beautiful art and i want to have this kind of experience or something like that but let's explore that
in the dot two with some of the bdi's and the aesthetics of encultured experiences
yeah thank you alex yeah sure if i could just just really quickly i think that the challenge there is
going to be that sometimes prediction error is fine and sometimes it's not we need to figure out right
there's probably some complicated way of saying what the difference is between those cases but that's
that's as far as my intuition goes yeah i'd love to discuss it awesome thanks again see you later
thank you all bye bye
great dean yeah i just wanted to kind of jump on that point that ali was making i i think that in the
in this in the i just want to make sure i've got the right section of the paper here
uh sorry the free energy principle and the direction of fit yeah sort of to tag on what ali and and alex
were saying there's a there's a statement here that says holding the value of the observation constant
in this equation f decreases as the approximate posterior distribution q of the state approaches
through posterior the qs term therefore has a straightforwardly belief like mind to world
direction of fit in that its value changes to accommodate new observations i think that the
escher and the andreant and every time i go to a sporting event my openness my accommodation
to what is perceived as an uncertain outcome is the thing that draws my attention
and i think daniel's point of let's let's map that out let's see how long some people are able to hold
that ambiguity space and not necessarily see it as a risk is both immaterial until it materializes
and is a process that i think a lot of people want to go through because there's there's something to
that that that isn't just attention it isn't just information seeking but it may also satiate certain
desires so i think that is a point to mapping that we should maybe spend a little bit of time on because
i don't know that when you open a space up for something to eventually happen you're you're imposing what
the final material form should take you're simply leaving something open in the hopes that something
interesting i.e an escher painting might end up being in the next room i mean this is what happens when i
go to museums in spain is i'm not looking to find the particular dally i'm looking to go into that space
and be surprised so i wonder how that actually does map out using these formalisms yes it reminds me of
when in the dot zero ryan described like the different reasons and the different nuancing the
types of information seeking that's very relevant i'm navigating through this museum to reduce my
uncertainty about where that one piece that i came to see is the target driven epistemic foraging from
a more general like i don't know what is in that other room that is going to influence my probability
of moving room to room and certainly with the eye circading that is how we maintain a visual field
that appears to have roughly equal resolution via our generative model of vision and ocular motor
circading to regions of maximal information distinctly uncoupled from only what regions are
most rewarding though people's gaze does tend to linger in certain regions that might be perceived as rewarding
that isn't the only imperative and that's why it's so special and relevant to have a cross system and multi-scale
behavioral modeling framework like active inference that helps us understand the pure static field eyes trying to latch on to anything mode
from the gaze on a candle flame during meditation or one region of particular beauty in another visual scene
dean yeah just real quick and i think that also ali thank you you raised semiotics and i'm a pierce fan so
there's a there's a huge piece of that involved in this as well as so what is the signal that that very much
there's a there's a slide in here that we didn't get to but when the ice cream cone is looking off into the
distance at that at that ice cream truck where where do we where do we place that in the foreground or in the
background and that is a huge i think that plays a huge part in in their the role of the third person
now looking at the observer looking at the observer getting that sort of recursive aspect involved in
this as well so again i don't know how that we will have to we'll borrow daniel's and how to be able to
map that as a nine one or as a three seven and then maybe put it on the lichert scale because i think
all of that kind of is a potential way for this to sort of make a sense i wasn't bringing up with alex
the idea that like literally beliefs and desires add up to intentions i was sort of saying that tongue in
cheek just to be able to show the difference when something is discreet and and how we try to bring
them together and this observer of an observer thing um although it's not i don't think it's alex's and
and the other two authors primary goal here but i but i do think they lower the bar in terms of bringing
some of the more folk folk aspects of this into the formalism aspects yes and it was a very clever and
interesting response which is it depends on what is meant by addition what does it mean for um dean
plus ali does that mean they're both going to stand on a scale and we're measuring their mass does it
mean that we're going to stack them head to toe and then consider the length does it mean that they're
going to interact in a certain context does it mean we're going to blend them up i mean there isn't
an intrinsic definition to what the addition operator or any operator means in a formal system
and so it opens up the idea that we could have whether specific symbols or just here's how we're
using this symbol here and use that to refer to relatively potentially complex and multi-step operations
or operations that can be phrased in multi-step for example a multiplication on the processor might
happen in a different way than somebody is cognitively thinking about it but that is um
as the title hints not contradictory not that one validates or encompasses or proves the other but
there's so many things that are not contradictory and active inference may be contradictory of certain
things let's make a list what is active inference contradictory of what is folk psychology contradicting
of and we can make all of that mapping in the right knowledge management system and the claim of the
article as i guess ryan's imperative was was to make this claim that as they've operationalized both
active inference models do not contradict folk psychology and that's quite an interesting claim dean
yeah just real quick i think then your point is i'm rephrasing it in my own from my own view which is
you raise a lot of different joint probabilities that by their nature are arbitrary and i think that's
important to keep in mind this leaves open the possibility of looking at things a variety of
different ways yeah and just to speak to the joint probability density so the joint probability density in
the bayesian modeling approach is like where there's a comma so instead of a conditioned on b it's like the
joint distribution of a and b right why a and b why not b and why why not these three and so there's always
something like a periphery that the model comes from and we can be blanketed off from it and that
actually serves as a scientific and really meta-scientific way to have rigor and accessibility
potentially of the models to respect when we're in the regime of attention of a model what kinds of
claims can or cannot be supported what kinds of contradictions are or are not tenable to make
and then also have the yes and with respecting that that joint distribution was not handed down from on high
it is not the only possible joint distribution that could have been selected and so we can separate
off how did these real researchers in this real situation come to focus on that phenomena and pick
this joint distribution from conditioned on the joint distribution what was the actual conversation
and consequences and modeling they performed duvid
yeah it's all fascinating um i guess i had two separate points i wanted to express and they might
be more general if this is my first time on the stream than uh i mean it's related to this paper but
specific to active inference in general and the interdisciplinary studies um what my streaming partner uh jennifer
sharif calls herself church of entropy we've been three years now uh talking about consciousness
and i showed her the free energy principle and she immediately said that uh isn't that just the
least action principle and uh i mean it's not directly related to this paper but i could see that
in terms of uh um you know my second point i'll call gold directed behavior in general and uh you know if
you want to say that there's only one motivating force in active inference and that's the uh free energy
principle which is basically a restating of uh um the least action principle and then uh at a second point
i went you know last week in metro detroit they had the international automation conference
and uh they had the latest in robotic arms and technology for uh manufacturer and they had on display
um you know a lot of uh what we'll call sense perception and motor control specifically robotic arms that uh
um don't just repeat the same action or even have like a sensor embedded wind but have an embedded sensor
of a camera that will recognize the object and then create a set of rules in order to uh tell the
robotic arm the best uh trajectory in order to pick up the object and then in terms of uh like old school
manufacturer where it would just been taking an object and setting it in one place where it actually
has some level of machine learning intelligence where it could uh intelligently design where to put the
object in terms of like stacking boxes where it could uh you know the algorithm of the computer could
determine what's the best way to stack the objects and then control the robotic arm to uh to do that
and if it's like so for humans uh just on the pure level of sense perception has goal directed behavior
how do i you know if we have 100 million uh uh cones and rods in our eye how do we direct uh our physical
capabilities of sense perception to perceive the environment uh in this thing that could be modeled
by these equations and uh we'll call you know the free energy principle least action principle and then the
decision making that uh uh you know the goal uh directed behavior like the like the automation computer
it has to have a goal code in order to act and so it could action reaction sense perception uh
feedback mechanism in order to action and then the equation are describing goal directed behavior and
that's why i'm a fan of the active inference model because uh as a dualist i mean as a scientist i i could
let's describe these in purely materialistic things and we don't have to get too much into the theology
or uh uh you know what's the origin of these higher order rules even if you want to assume
that all higher order rules are material in uh in origin but i think the equations in general uh could
model it no matter what their origin is and it's uh you know just a good framework to understand uh
um you know all these theories the goal directed behavior at all aspects and then to put on you know
the last spin on it like the maslow's hierarchy of needs and uh in like you know what is belief desire
and uh you know that i would have introspection or education that would give me um you know morals
ethics that okay like my body uh like i put the pithy in the the expression i see the heart desires
the mind plots and the limb carry out that uh that uh i have the capability that my eyes see
my heart desires but my mind stops me and says that's wrong and uh even though uh my sense perception
saw it and my desires told me that i should do it somehow there's this higher order principle of the mind
that tells me that's wrong and i'm not going to do it and there's that control factor before the limbs
carry out thank you i'll just make some short points and then we can just close off with what
we're excited to explore in the dot 2. i really just appreciate what a lot of people shared and i think
over these discussions and the years we're finding some clarities around where are different
implications and consequences what is entering into active inference as a field and a filter
and what is coming out of it what's happening on the playground and so there's just a lot to explore
then um live stream 45 just in the last few weeks and not to rehearse outside of this paper regime of
attention but the free energy principle as it's rehearsed in that paper is establishing the particular
partition that's markov blanketing off the figure from the ground the thing which is able to undergo
repeated measurements in the quantum sense from the thing that is not that thing that's the particular
partition with the sensory active internal external partition the autonomous states the blanket states
from sparse coupling unpacking the implications in terms of bayesian inference in other words seeing
the flow of those states as doing something that is slash can be modeled as bayesian inference and then
finally understanding paths in terms of a principle of least action which has been starting to be explored
from at least the early path formalizations of active inference years ago and i think in the last two weeks
to two years taking a new view on that through a lot of the work on geometry and analysis by dalton
maxwell and other collaborators so indeed this path formalization is very relevant and the principle
of least action which isn't the principle of least motion it's not the laziest thing it's not the one
that always works it's none of those things but it's a framework for analyzing behavior and with that
what would people be excited to explore next week or what would be something that they didn't have
uncertainty or a motivational drive to explore before today but it has come onto their horizon through this
discussion yes ali then dean dude
uh well it was uh it was a really fascinating discussion and uh i thank you all for bringing
such interesting uh this interesting topics um uh onto the table but um i'm very much looking forward to
that too and uh i also had a couple of questions and i'm interested in exploring uh the phenomenological
aspects of the folk psychology especially uh belief and desire uh and also uh the relation of dai to
abnormal psychology which is uh just briefly touched on in the paper but uh not in detail and uh yeah i
hope uh the next session uh will be at least as fascinating as this one thank you ali dean
i already said what i'm hoping we can look at it as a point too but i'll just add this i think it's
really interesting that the term active inference um and i'll just say in in this calendar year alone
we've had a couple of papers that have started typing active inference we've had outside the skull or
extended active inference and now we've got this dai and mai and i think there's probably going to be more
more and so depending on how many authors are available next week i might be asking them a
little bit about that too like is that does that seem like an a natural rollout when you have these
scale-free ideas that you need these these scale friendly qualifiers just so that it continues to make
sense thank you do it and then i'll make a play on that dean
yeah and because this is my first uh time side a lot of general stuff on active in inference in general
and i try to stick straight to this paper um i think it'd be interesting to cover more i asked the
question you know has active inference even explained one qualia and uh you know that uh uh
you know there's actually a model here in the equations could we describe a single process a single
sense perception to decision making and uh you know so like the human model to uh um
a simpler life form or even say that uh is in essence the you know the automation like the machine
learning algorithms uh for robotic arms um is that in essence using these same active uh inference
computers i spoke to you know brock online who i guess is an entrepreneur thinking like real estate
uh but uh is is it you know what would the application of this be uh to uh you know autonomous
cars are more complicated but like something the most simplified version which is probably uh robotic
sensors and uh controlled movement based on machine learning that uh and uh and then you know said could we
try to explain a single qualia in terms of what happens when i sense something and make some sort of
movement and then like i was talking what would all of the axioms uh necessary to in terms of the
higher order rules or goal-oriented behavior if they're not beliefs desires intentions what are they and how
are they modeled into the equation what happens when i perceive something and that's translated into
action uh what axioms do we have to put into the model to make it work as opposed to uh or in comparison
to uh the robotic arm that's coded for that does that thank you to all those returning in first time and our
second applied active inference symposium which is going to be in july 2022 is on robotics so we can
absolutely address a lot of the applications and also adjacencies and the the sense that i got maybe
just thinking of that robotic case is like a little wind-up toy on a table we want to build it and this
discussion because of how it is constituted and enacted is helping us understand not just all of
the implications that go into that wind-up toy but exploring a lot of the consequences of the wind-up
toy and then there's people saying but wasn't the table constructed and wouldn't a different table have
resulted in a different wind-up toy behavior and who placed it on the table and why are tables designed
that way and isn't table just like a functional consequence of anything being put on it and what
are we doing here how did we decide on that how should we decide the next wind-up toy and it just
takes it in so many amazing places so thanks to everybody in the chat and joining live and of
course to the authors for the paper see you in 46.2 thank you jens bye
thank you






















































Thank you.

## 7_YNInrALU8

Hello, everyone.
Welcome to ActInFLAB livestream number 46.2.
It's June 22, 2022.
Welcome to the ActInFLAB.
We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
You can find us at the links on the slide.
This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can
improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn about participating in livestreams or in the many
other ActInFLAB projects.
We're here in our third discussion on the paper, Active Inference Models Do Not Contradict
Folk Psychology by Smith, Ramstad, and Kiefer.
We had a .0 with Ryan joining and Jakob and Dean where we talked through some of the background
of this paper.
And last week in the .1, we had a great discussion, went a lot of ways as .1s do, and opened up
some threads to continue discussing in this .2.
I know each of you have some things to bring up.
There's also a few key sections of the paper that we haven't gone into in much detail.
So there'll be a lot to do in the .2.
And of course, everybody watching live is also welcome to make comments.
We'll start with just an introduction and warm-up.
We can say hi and add anything else that we're looking forward to talking about or to reducing
our uncertainty about through today's discussion or maybe even if it's not too early, where
we'd like to be heading as we take off on this .2 and leave the 46 series.
How does it result in us being different, thinking differently, acting differently in the rest
of our post-46 lives?
So I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California.
And just a conversation with Dean before we began about some other core concepts other
than beliefs, desires, and intentions.
So what other acronym models could we use?
What other kinds of models are consistent?
Or where else can active inference be providing us extra information or utility?
And a few other things.
And I'll pass it to Dean.
Thanks, Daniel.
I'm Dean here in Calgary.
I think what I'm curious about is a couple of things.
As I said, I'm curious about things are behaviors that appear to be targeted versus behaviors that
appear to be non-targeted.
And there was some reference to that in this paper.
The other thing, as I said, I'm kind of curious about is this moving to the place of saying
that active inference has these different types, be it extended or decision-making or motor active
inference and what the implications of that are.
The bottom line for me is I think if we can operationalize that word through active inference,
it shouldn't be difficult to figure out that that applies to behaviors, that there's operations grounding a lot of behaviors.
So, yeah, that's what I'm kind of curious about today.
I'll pass it to David.
Great to be back.
It's my second time on here.
Really appreciate this.
I'm on 33.
So I've listened through lecture 33.
So I'm almost caught up to the current.
I look forward to having Daniel on my channel Friday, 4 p.m. Eastern time.
There's so much to active inference because it's a useful framework for countless different fields.
And specifically related to this, I had definitely thoughts.
And then how do we look at the mechanics of the equation versus, you know, we call folks ecology,
but I would put that generally into what I would call introspection.
I have a background in theology.
And, you know, I've thought a lot about introspection and trying to match what we see through various methods of introspection.
And, you know, maybe where the science and mathematics is leading us.
And also, I guess, the field of psychometrics that isn't necessarily introspection, but it may or may not match the equations.
And then how do we describe the phenomenon?
You understand them, or maybe they're not descriptible, saying that we describe them with the mathematical equations.
And there's not really any good way to translate that into words that would be understandable to your folk, common people in that way.
Awesome. Ali?
Ali?
Hi, I'm Ali.
I'm an independent researcher from Iran.
I'm very glad to be here.
And I'm looking forward to learn more about this fascinating paper.
Especially, I'm interested in exploring phenomenological aspects of BDI, belief, desire and intention.
And also, to explore somewhat more deeply the philosophical underpinnings of representation versus simulation aspect of modeling BDI in active inference.
And, yeah, that's it for me.
Great.
Let's begin with this more taxonomic question about the types of active inference.
So, we can think about different types that we've heard about in this paper and elsewhere.
And then, whether or not we have something to contribute about adding a specific type to this list that will continue to grow.
What does it mean or entail that we do have these different types?
So, just to review, in this paper, 46, they make a very clear, upfront distinction between what they characterize as motor active, MAI, and decision active.
And there's a few differences between motor and decision.
Who can list one category of difference?
Well, the motor active inference doesn't typically require that you have to make a decision.
It's more a reaction or a reflective form as compared to the decision active inference, which does, as the paper say, likely map over to the desired question.
Yes.
So, the motor AI was connected to, like, motor reflex.
Are there decision-making reflex?
Does, even if that's not a classical usage, like in the reflex arc of the spine or something, moving the hand away from a hot surface, are there cognitive reflexes?
I'm not really sure.
I just, I basically was asking in the context of people who are writing these papers now, who are bringing the question down to a motor operational behavior standpoint, how breaking active inference up into different classifications,
is that in response to a bigger problem, which is the behavior doesn't necessarily,
behavior doesn't necessarily, isn't something that's necessarily, we're able to conveniently dissolve down to our concentrate down into motor operations, or extensions, or any of those other different things that the writers tend to want to focus on now.
As opposed to sort of the complexity and the variety and the randomness of behavior as a whole.
So.
Yes.
Great.
So this is from page 81.
Oh, yes, Ali, go for it.
Well, I think the distinction between MAI and DAI is not globally accepted among various researchers.
For instance, if we look at the work of Alan Bertos, a French neuroscientist, especially his book, I think it was called, The Brain's Sense of Movement.
In that book, he actually has a famous quote, namely, perception is simulated action.
And by this, he implies that he implies that perception and motion, motion and perception, or thinking for that matter, are irreducibly interconnected.
And so the former, the former defines the latter because of the intrinsic matricity of the creatures endowed with nervous systems.
So I'm not sure if we can distinguish between MAI and DAI in such a clear cut manner.
Because as we know that most modern, most.
Mocentricity and modern or actions are also pretty predefined in that perception or many other thought processes.
Thanks.
Thanks, David.
Yeah, so I didn't know enough about the BDI model, or the, you know, I'm still new to the language, especially of the authors of this paper, to the general philosophy.
But, you know, I was talking a lot about last week about the unified I and higher order rules.
So if you want to like decision as higher order rules, and they would have some sort of power, like usually when we think of consciousness and a unified I, that makes decisions.
And we talked about eliminativism and the implications of the equations, are they eliminativistic or not?
And yours is there, what direction does the evidence take us?
And so in terms of motor control, like I mentioned, Fodar's modular mind, that it could be that, you know, it's a threshold, it's a free energy principle.
And it could just be action, reaction, sense perception, and then a module of our mind sends, you know, some perception of what, however we understand consciousness, that makes it appear to us like we made a decision.
Pardon me, but that may not be accurate, that, you know, the equations might hint that that's not actually what's going on.
It's simply free energy threshold being reached, the threshold could conceivably have nothing or very little to do with the decision making process.
And it could be post facto, like the Leibet experiments, that the perception, like we made a decision, actually comes post facto from the threshold.
Cool. Thank you. Also, I think Adam Safran, who had discussed those Leibet experiments, does find a space for agency, if that's not too coarse of a simplification.
But there is some interesting ways to think about what that experiment does or doesn't show.
Maybe we can return to that when we kind of have some figures and details. Dean?
Yeah, I didn't know what you guys were talking about with this, a limited of this thing, until I went back to the paper, and then I found this.
And I'll just quote it, we also, this is from the paper, we also motivate a squarely non a limited position with respect to such constructs, and suggest that the set of theoretical primitives out of which the active inference models are built, is sufficient, not only to recover the categories of folks psychology, but also potentially nuance them with more fine grained.
Dean?
Dean?
Dean?
Dean?
So the other thing is, I think, of the reasons of what they're saying, is that it is a limit of this. And they'll put a little statement in like it's not a limit of this. But what is the evidence of their models actually say? And can they actually program like a unified eye? And you put the you did they eliminate the unified eye? And it's just a bunch of perceptions, and various factors that reach a threshold. And what does it mean to make a decision?

Dean?

Dean?
Dean?
Dean?

Dean?

Dean?
Dean?

Dean?
Dean?
Dean?

Dean?
Dean?
Dean?
Dean?

Dean?
Dean?

Dean?
Dean?



!


! Dean?

Dean?
I'm not I'm not I don't think I'm I don't think I'm leading with this question about are we moving to a place that says that active inference will have different types because I think that there's different math there's a there's math that's used in financial situations those operations. There's math that's used in mechanical situations.
question about are we moving to a place that says that active inference will have different types
because I think that there's different math there's a there's math that's used in financial
situations those operations there's math that's used in mechanical situations those operations
so I think it's it's a natural byproduct of so how do you make the math work given the circumstance
I don't think that there's anything about this that's saying active inference doesn't work just
because you want to make sure that you're applying the proper formula to the thing that you're trying
to describe but I do think it's interesting that in order to be able to describe it more precisely
you just can't say active inference you have to kind of figure out what the math is for the specific
condition that you're trying to analyze yeah definitely makes sense let's now move to this
lower part of the page on the different adjectives that we've seen so people can probably add or think
of more or even imagine there's so many adjectives in the in the textbook called the dictionary
we've talked about extended active inference which was addressing extended cognitive features and
phenomena where there could be sort of a uh offloading which was when the adaptive active entity is going
to utilize something that is more like a notepad like it's offloading memory onto the notepad and then the
entity is holding on to information about how to seek that information or on both sides of the interface
there could be adaptive active and so that was like the sort of true emergent extended cognitive processes
deep active inference and and citations could be could be added didn't get them for all uh deep was
utilized to describe temporal depth in terms of longer and longer time horizons of considerations
this was really an important development because it moved beyond the sort of one shot
next step model of active and help manage this trade-off between considering time horizons as well
as taking action in the time step that the entity is actually in uh sophisticated active inference
and various other um cousins of it utilized hierarchical modeling which could have temporal depth
at one or multiple levels but doesn't need to it it it does and it could but this is referring to like the thickness
or the hierarchical modeling component uh affective active inference which was used by has bet all to refer to
uncertainty parameters and some of the cognitive interpretations of uncertainty parameters as being related to to valence
um and then there's others like branching time active infants um it comes to what dean said which is just saying like we use active inference may not reduce uncertainty enough
any more than we use any more than we use any more than we use any more than we use a linear model
whether just talking about it casually or writing the paper more information has to be provided and so this is sorting this is
sorting to uh starting to build the taxonomy and the classifications and the ways of communicating reducing uncertainty okay you went to that hemisphere but was it this continent or that continent was it this coast or was it that coast like zooming in
ultimately resulting in ultimately resulting in just describing the particulars of the model that was constructed
elite uh well adding to what uh dean has just said uh well i don't think that these different flavors and versions of active imprints that have recently been uh recently been branched up uh
uh uh they don't necessarily uh concern themselves with different situations or different niches uh for example that last one branching time active inference uh well that was a very recent uh version of active inference which was uh yes this is the paper uh they introduced that and uh it's basically a more efficient uh computational approach to
uh active inference uh and it's just the traditional active inference but in a more uh efficient uh with a more efficient algorithm to compute uh the all the parameters needed
yes sometimes uh these adjectives are describing uh these adjectives are describing heuristics or implementations or algorithms other times they're describing the model structure other times they're referring to the context that the model is being applied to like an extended cognitive system dean
yeah that's that's what i was going to ask ali about so if i'm saying something more efficient what am i saying it more efficient relative to
uh well relative to uh the traditional uh approach to active inference uh that has been proposed uh for uh the past decade or two uh and also uh relative to the other uh uh
uh the other uh the other approaches uh that are similar to active inferences approach but not if not uh exactly equivalent to it uh for instance uh reinforcement reinforcement learning approaches or so on
okay okay and one other kind of analogy or mapping there would be like when a new variant of a neural network architecture is introduced there's a pomp and circumstance
to announce the novelty and the relevance of this for somebody who's in that field similarly when there's a new variant or a new focus whether model structure model target or something else related to evolutionary biology
sometimes a new word will come in but then that new uh target or model structure if it becomes used
and it's sufficiently close that it's not rejected from the rest of the body of theory
because it's an incoherent usage of the adjective someone says well i made you know simple active inference
and it has this totally different structure that might not become incorporated into the the network of active inference models
whereas if it does become incorporated through its theoretical compatibility or utility and modeling that phenomena or it's presented in terms of a model architecture that does apply elsewhere
and then the adjective kind of the adjective kind of the adjective kind of gets dropped and then it just goes back to being neural networks back to being active inference back to being evolutionary biology
and then the field moves on and so the the adjectives are just kind of like another brick in the wall
stupid
yeah i also mentioned last week i'm not sure if it would go here in this section is uh the purpose driven act the purpose driven behavior action or even uh perception related to a unified eye and
even if it's on the pure level of sense perception is it just that we have uh you know these perceivers and they perceive and then how are the signals
and then how are the signals read and uh i mean it's easier to describe this in a limitivistic way whether we're limitivist or not uh in the for the predictive mind is the main uh struggle so to say between short-term uh goals and long-term goals and then you have to put in what axioms are we making is there some sort of uh you know for the higher order rules if we assume that there's some sort of rule that like an organism
acts in its own self-interest in its own uh you know sort of say desire to survive or to uh replicate and then you know the only struggle would be between short-term and long-term actions like you know god forbid here we have a mosquito pandemic i was gardening and got you know eaten up by mosquitoes and if it's just a sense you're replying to the environment like i have an itch should i itch it or should i have some longer term that'll go away quicker and then you have to go away
if uh if uh if i don't itch it and is that uh you know something that's even in the subconscious where just naturally i would have an itch and i would itch it but then i would somehow enter a longer term decision making process
that uh would uh would uh tell me to act in a different way and even terms for how i'm going to interact
with the environment in the future let alone something that might have a moral or ethical
implication so if you have a simplified model of just uh
where do we need purpose for sense perception to work and for motor control to work even in terms of reflexes
because i think uh you know just even on the motor control let alone the decision making uh you know
where does the decision making uh go and what's the purpose uh behind it and then how is that purpose derived
yes so we can go to uh targeted non-targeted
um another branch point is i think this important question of mapping from real world phenomena and even
direct felt experiences like aesthetic or just more generally phenomenological and anything about a
formalism and i'm not sure if i've quoted too narrowly but they are writing that intentions so just to
review the uh bdi the beliefs and the desires come together and that is what generates the intention
there's the desire for the ice cream and there's the belief that there's the ice cream truck and that is
what generates the intentional behavior of like pursuing the ice cream truck
intentions map straightforwardly to policies with lowest value for expected free energy which is
calculated across different policies policies are affordances that can be taken over a given time
horizon so over time horizon of three it's the combination of affordances of length three
almost all the variables in the dai model are candidates for traditional psychological beliefs
if being used to model the right kinds of high level cognitive processes so what are the right
kinds but then later in footnote five this is distinguishing uh in uh what they characterize as a
different reading of desire this reading is not the thing that is desired but instead about the transient
presence of the motivational force to approach the thing we desire
so it's like why did you go there it was my desire to go there what moved you to go there desire so
it's almost like desire in the specifics and then also seeing it as a motivating force
but then they note that habit might not have a direction to fit and it illustrates another reason
consistent with our broader argument concerning desires
desires not to assume that probability distributions in the formalism must be mapped onto beliefs at the
psychological level so they're candidates if we do it right
but it isn't an assumption that they must be mapped onto beliefs
beliefs
uh well i wanted to mention uh the uh a broader sense of the term intentionality uh which i think
he was referred to because uh you see uh for all the entities defined by uh markov blankets and
uh defined by uh the existence of their markov blankets and their ergodic behavior uh well we need an entity uh
who can treat an effect as being about its cause you see an entity who can follow the direction from effect uh
to cause and um we also need an entity um who can treat an isomorphic map
uh as being about what it maps uh or let's say as oriented toward what it maps well in both of these cases
the directionality or orientation uh can be referred to as intentionality in its broad sense
so just to clarify there so the second piece you mentioned was
the entity needs to be able to treat some sort of isomorphic or structure preserving mapping
as having an aboutness of the target like the map of the city translating that into the physical
movement and then uh there was a a causal inference question entity can trace causes such that they
understand such that they're doing some kind of causal mapping where agency is the belief that one can
be the cause of future aspects so is this agency or is this causal modeling that could happen in the absence of
entity level agency i think it's more it's broader than uh necessarily being a cognitive agent uh you see
uh it's uh it's any abstract entity uh that can uh uh that can sketch out uh these kind of causal
relationships uh between uh between the signs and uh their uh either uh icons or their indices so
it's much broader and more abstract than uh necessarily cognitive agents
what kind of entities are you thinking of and isn't manipulation and and that kind of logical
uh juxtaposition nor no the one uh obvious example would be neural networks neural nets uh we don't
necessarily bestow upon neural networks uh a cognitive agency right but they can uh well match uh the
at least uh their input patterns uh onto uh their uh output um like uh output indices
and it's um
these continuums of agency continuums of cognitive systems it's like easy to forget we're we're
talking about a cognitive modeling framework albeit one that has a motor cousin mai and motor
motor modeling history because the mai distinction is um also historical like in terms of what which models
were developed when
and uh is this pan cognitivism are we modeling everything as if it is on the continuum of cognitive
entities like i don't know if it's as controversial to say that a neural network is a cognitive artifact
it might not be self-perpetuating or embodied or have open-ended agency or all these other features
that some cognitive systems have but what makes it not cognitive if you meant that
uh well probably the cognitive here uh it was not a proper proper adjective uh perhaps what i meant was
uh to be uh i don't know a kind of uh conscious agent or uh but again on the uh the subject of uh
uh using the adjective cognitive or neural networks uh well there are quite a few uh well uh opponents
uh to this characterization for neural networks because uh they believe that uh neural networks as agents
uh don't necessarily uh decide on their cognitive decide on their cognitive basis uh how to
uh map how to uh you see map between uh the inputs and outputs uh because uh that's the difference between
representation and simulation if we uh well uh can differentiate between the between those two uh so uh probably yeah
uh the more suitable adjective here uh should be a conscious agent uh as opposed to cognitive agents
uh does that not take us extremely far afield out of where we um lose touch with empirical measurements
for example and enter into important philosophical questions but ones that take us like
away from our cognitive leg and psychology perhaps even especially folk psychology is sitting at the
intersection of the intersection of cognitive systems philosophical self-reflexive systems so it's almost
like a question of this teetering stack of folk psychology which way will it end up falling
a limit of ism perhaps is saying we'll be able to dispense with classical philosophical debates or some
aspects of them by just moving everything that was folk psychological into a mathematical cognivist framework
well what i mean here is that uh well uh the term intentionality here can also be used in uh in abstract
models of active inference and not necessarily uh well uh in the cases where we uh unambiguously deal with
conscious entities that's what i mean
i think one of the takeaways of this paper or one of the implications of this paper would be that if
the belief intentions in folk psychology are beliefs plus desires hashtag bdi model and beliefs and desires are identifiable quantities in the acadent formalism
then by constructing entities consistent with the acadent formalism it can be said that they have intentionality
because it could be said that they have beliefs and desires and so then it would only make sense to call the behaviors arising from beliefs and desires to be intentional
so doesn't this uh conceptualization of uh intentionality also subsume uh the um a more uh strict or narrow sense of that term
uh because uh well if uh uh well if we uh well in this sense if we uh uh inferred um from uh the the use of intentionality here uh uh as referring to only conscious agents uh well in that case uh the um
uh the whole purpose of simulating uh active inference agents uh could potentially uh well raise some questions
that's well i i'm not sure if i uh could express myself clearly on this matter or not but oh no very interesting um dean and then do it
um so maybe amongst the three of you you can help me with this because i don't really keep up with the latest
news on neural nets but if i if i were to look at a neural net i would assume that most of those nets
are given some kind of a target even if they go out and forage for it there is something about that but
what i've been always been curious about is especially in the in the context of this paper
is that if there is a target that's been sort of linked to desire in this paper and if there's
a curiosity aspect to the agent or the net that's been sort of linked to non-targeting so if that's
if that's one continuum the orthogonal aspect of that also in the paper is that there's a reward
seeking component say on the left of that there's an information seeking or an information and ambiguity
component to the right of that so here's my question if unless we say that curiosity actually is a target
which this paper says is it's actually a non-target and the operation and the formalism actually points
that out then how do we set something up like a neural net to actually be curious because we we can
be curious we can be non-targeting and find reward in that if we go one direction and find information
gained in that in another direction and they are they are completely different things they're not seen in
the in the formalism as the same thing so i'm just curious whether we're because as i said i don't
know enough about neural nets to know but aren't neural nets constantly constrained by having a target
i think there's many ways to answer that
i am not sure if it would totally map on to the difference of supervised and unsupervised learning
like supervised learning being where labels are provided these x-rays belong to this patient
category these ones belong to the alternate category i want you to get really good but you know
don't over specify don't over fit that distinction supervised learning unsupervised learning is more along
the lines of like here's input according to how you're set up embody the statistical regularities and the
structure of the information that has been input okay and then that representation allows like clustering and
subsequent analyses or the addition of labels later but it isn't predicated in the training phase
upon the data or the cases being labels
does that yeah but the predication is not curiosity is it that's my point is that there is no curiosity in
what you just described
what you're saying is that there is no curiosity is not a problem
right it's like a pipeline that is receiving whatever information is being provided
and curiosity seems to kind of break out of that and it's like give me more examples
and then the directed curiosity would be like i'm looking for more examples of the label a
the undirected curiosity would be more like i just would like more examples right so to ask ali maybe ali is
it consciousness if it doesn't have curiosity
uh well uh i don't think so because uh you see uh even in uh unsupervised learnings uh we don't
necessarily uh well the neural networks uh don't necessarily uh extract the uh uh the the essence
of their training examples what they do is all what is to extract a statistical prototype of their tokens
the statistical prototype of their training examples uh so uh actually uh they can't recognize
uh a dog as a dog they just see patterns they just see statistical patterns which they've learned
uh through their uh training process uh so they're not uh they're not necessarily conscious of uh the
object of dog or a cat or whatever uh what what are what they uh try to do is uh and in fact in some cases
uh well sometimes we see that uh they have in fact inferred uh wrong statistical prototypes uh because of uh
well insufficient training examples or uh uh well not appropriate training examples or so on uh but
in any case uh what uh i don't think we can uh say that uh well neural networks because uh because of
their ability to recognize these patterns they necessarily uh well have consciousness because
well probably uh in order to achieve consciousness uh well other layers of uh cognitive and even
perceptual uh mechanisms need to be deployed
do this
yeah i had some other points but if you wanted to uh you'll stay on the curiosity topic um and
you know it's related to what the point i was going to make about belief and desire
uh you know what clearly defining the words so they're specifically you know you're going to take
the bdi model and use words like belief and desire to uh you know some relatively obscure scientific model
versus uh you know like a whole historical review of the etymology and uh you know i mean and how do we
how are we defining uh beliefs and desire you know does curiosity have a desire to learn something um
you know for its own purpose that that that means it's not goal uh driven and then how i would
understand belief and desire in terms of uh you know so desires are biological urges like uh your
reproduction or uh survival and if of the emotions are maybe all derivative uh how you're going to put
that out where if you're going to try to uh source all of them from one pure desire and all the other
desires are derivative or if you're going to have multiple uh desires and then you'd have to have some
sort of weighting function to uh weight the different desires and then beliefs are self-made
rules that come from our own cognition and that's where decision making comes comes in and even
you know i think a rabbinic statement in terms of free will that free will is implying that you have
the choice to make the less desirous opinion that the less desires choice like as a chess player if you're
thinking like uh uh candidate moves and analysis trees that in reality our candidate moves are just how
we control our body and you know do we move our arm up or down or the various controls of our physical
function uh but uh you know what are the candidate moves and then how would the analysis tree and
decision making is it you know how would it come that you would make the less desirous uh decision is
it purely you know it's a short term uh versus uh long term and then the organization of uh you know
let's take a system like okay i'm a jew i'm a muslim i'm an atheist or i'm a capitalist i'm a communist
that we have these self-directed uh beliefs that control our behavior and if it's learning to do things
like i can't steal uh god forbid i can't rape i can't kill and that like my desire if the body tells me
okay i see attractive woman uh i want to have sexual relations uh but then i have these beliefs
like uh that there's a system of rules and governance that uh is it purely because i can't
get away with it that i don't do it we don't rape still and kill because uh uh we can't get away with
it or is there this self-imposed moralistic uh behavior and that's coming down to uh what belief
means and then you know also if uh you know so curiosity you'd have to clearly define
curiosity if you're talking about neural nets that uh you know can computer just learn for its own sake
uh and even can a human just learn for its own sake that uh you know we're participating in these
discussions purely because i enjoy figuring things out even if it has no practical implication to uh you
know some primal directive of a survival or reproduction or however you're going to understand
these primal directives and then uh you know the equation be similar to a chess algorithm for a
computer where uh you know it would appear that you could add in weighting factors that you could program
this into the equations and uh you have some constants that would be weighting factors so if you did have just
one primal directive of survival or two primal directives of uh reproduction and survival uh and
then you could give those weighting factors or you could have uh um a feedback mechanism i mean with the
environment and and then you know as i said where do the belief comes in the self-made rules and then how
do how are those weighting factors calculated in decision making and what does it mean to make a
decision is it possible that we make the least desirous decision and if we can't make the less
desirous decision uh you know do we not have free will thanks so jonathan shock made a great point
which is that deep neural networks applied to reinforcement learning can include curiosity as
an explicit factor it guides the agent to states which it has about which it has the most uncertainty
so it's a term which makes it rewarding to explore currently unexplored states and then just
um to get provide a recent example here's a way in which a neural network architecture was used
certainly worthy of more exploration and at a first pass or at least just qualitatively one way to
think about that and then we'll come to how curiosity was described in the text is in active
inference we have a imperative for action selection that includes a pragmatic and an epistemic component
whereas a pragmatic absolutist perspective like reinforcement learning needs to generate these
modules and alternate architectures such that information seeking curiosity can be coerced into
a reward framework i mean what is the next question going to be well it's rewarding to gain information
oh what kind of information how much information how are we going to learn the parameters on our curiosity
model and so on and so active inference as a first principles approach for this kind of artificially intelligent system
allows us to include at the base level both an objective uh achieving and a pure curiosity reducing
element uh dean and then we'll look at how they talk about curiosity
thanks daniel so as is as is historically been the case for point twos oh he just left and i was going to
ask him this question okay i guess he's still here um so david when after uh dot one and now just what you
were just sharing with us here i wondered without putting words in the room up can i get a clarification
i think one of the things that you're trying to make clear or or at least bring into the conversation
that prioritization which is the sort of the value weighting aspect of how we see the world is not
ordering the kind of placing of a formalism down on paper that includes rules like equals and plus and
minus in the fbp or the sort of extended and variation of three energy pieces is that
that and that's what's that oversimplifying what you want us to make clear that that having evaluating
is not the same that kind of prioritization is not the same as being able to formally set down and order
well i'm a dualist so like i'm i'm trying to i i think i could use these equations for dualistic
your purposes and you could just factor in a weighting factor for these higher order rules and
then you know so my system would have some sort of uh um struggle between two separate realms of
material and spiritual realm so that's you know personally how i'm looking at it but you know i could
attempt to understand it from uh just the materialistic realm and how the uh equations uh you would apply
and then if there's competing factors what's the origin of those competing factors so so if you just put
uh your desires are biological uh animalistic urges and beliefs are self-created uh rules of uh cognition
and then you want to have a separate function like curiosity where where where curiosity maybe benefits
the purpose of making beliefs which would later come to become higher order rules um and or if you want
to have the ability to have behavior that has no purpose that you know i just enjoy understanding
things uh maybe that understanding will help me make better higher order rules um and you know that's
saying oh like you're saying for the equation because here we have these equations and it's free energy
and uh you know so the purpose is to uh minimize minimize uh you know the least action principle or
to eliminate uh limit energy usage and so if you're looking like well why did i do that was like you know
dummy didn't you look at the equation it was still it was the free energy principle you did it to uh
minimize energy usage and uh you know so we're just saying that that uh that's you know the origin of all
human behavior from an eliminativistic uh sense and uh you know from the folk psychology that's why i said
i'm taking a dualistic perspective where these higher order rules are coming from a non-material plane
but i think they could be modeled into the equations thanks um also free energy minimization doesn't
entail the actual minimal possible energy usage though some people have made that accidentally or
intentionally a claim it isn't what those equations as they're being used here necessarily represent
but it could there could be a system that thrives optimally based upon reducing energy usage but also
there's situations where free energy minimization and the path of least action are not the lowest energy
consumption um is that short term or long term that they're saying long term it is but it's just
short term versus long term the decision making in the as opposed to a dualistic uh the predictive
mind that's saying it's not dualistic spiritual verse material it's a single materialistic in its
short term versus long term
okay let's think about that in the context of of curiosity um how they're describing so uh
uh g expected free energy of policies it's like the policies are enumerated and then g is calculated
for them reflects the inferred value of each policy based upon beliefs beliefs are p of o sub t
conditioned on pi so the distribution of outcomes conditioned upon policies if i go left what do i expect
to see if i go right what do i expect to see that's a belief and the belief distribution about observations
conditioned upon hidden states of the world if there is food there then what observations will i expect
to see and desired outcomes which is as we've explored in 37 in user's guide there's this dual
the actual implication of the p of o distribution and active inference as what is expected as well as preferred
because we reduce our surprise about the expected slash preferred outcome distribution and that is how
the desired outcomes are realized not by providing a higher reward or value
the higher reward or value to increasingly preferred states but rather treating the preference distribution
as expectations which allows us to use surprisal and surprisal bounding approaches towards achieving
preferences so how do they talk about desire and curiosity they're suggesting that these drives so this is in
earlier we talked about there's the two ways to talk about desire the specific target of desire as a desire
like i desire a cube of tungsten or something and then there's the drive that is associated with desire
what made the person do it desire in the abstract um curiosity drives discovery of what is not yet known and thus
has no preconceived target however one could also say that it has a semi-formed concept of target because one could be like
curious about something and then their curiosity would be satiated by something else something but not
something else so in that case there was some of something of a prior on what they were looking for
um the claim that curiosity is not cognitive so desire related might seem suspect on the grounds it could
also be characterized as simply the desire to learn qualitatively and this in turn could be conceived as the
desire that one's beliefs are as precise as possible even though especially in the short term learning sometimes feels like it reduces our precision
however the mathematics allow us to motivate a genuine distinction here
specifically changing outcomes to minimize the kl divergence in the risk term in efe is a fundamentally
different sort of process for minimizing the ambiguity term so the kl divergence is on the left side here
and the ambiguity term is on the right side here here's equation 2.6 from the textbook
and it's it's in a different order but just to see here's risk with the kl divergence and then here's expected
ambiguity with the h for the entropy calculation
um the latter which is the ambiguity term does not care how uncertainty is resolved so long it is resolved
there's no preference for becoming more confident in one possible belief over another whereas the reduction of uncertainty
by reducing the kl divergence is what is bringing us into alignment with our preferences slash expectations
hence that is a much more targeted form of curiosity in that it allows for goal-directed information seeking
and then they write at a minimum the folk psychological concept of curiosity corresponds to a very different
type of desire with a distinct counterpart in dai dean yeah that's perfect because what i wanted to say
was that i think that the curiosity really points to that risk and the reason i say that is because you may find
that when the ambiguity is removed the prize is a happy one or a not so happy one and i think that's
that's kind of important here to to see sort of the it's it's hard to say as it says here
it's however the claim the curiosity is non-conductor might seem suspect on the grounds it could also be
characterized as simply just the desire to learn well that before the learning you you're you're sort of
in a in a ambiguous state will it be a happy surprise or will it be an unhappy surprise and so i think this
this kind of pulls that out you
you the the ambiguity applies a certain amount of risk but then you have to you have to act
in the active inference aspect of it to determine whether or not the surprise i'll let the other side of it is actually a
good or not so good so i think that's where the curiosity arm of this comes to the fore it is non-targeted until
it actually has been realized or somehow materialized whereas the the targeted stuff the desire stuff can be part of your plan
i'm not sure whether the curiosity fits as conveniently as the desire does
and just one short note on that is we we see a conditioning on policy right
in a few different places so it'd be interesting to think about where does planning to learn come into
play and in what ways is planning to learn directed or what if you plan to have undirected learning
or all these other combinations do it yeah i'm not sure if it would exactly fit in with the equation
but i'm thinking here like maslow's hierarchy of needs uh defined in terms of the free energy principle
where um you know so to say curiosity requires excess energy so if you're on the first runk of the
hierarchy that you have limited energy to apply towards curiosity and if you do have energy to
apply towards curiosity you're going to be best off to be curious about things that will directly apply
to uh you know your security uh you know your food or the primal uh directives as opposed to uh you
know if you move up uh up the hierarchy uh at least put this into maslow's hierarchy where there you
know there's less risk associated with curiosity that maybe you've achieved more leisure activity
and then and therefore have more um energy to expand towards curiosity that you could reach the
highest levels of maslow's hierarchy and focus on uh your ideals and uh what is the meaning of truth
or understanding uh science uh but it would still be uh you however you're defining the free energy
principle that you have some sort of uh uh conservation of energy and curiosity is an expansion of energy
that uh is limited uh but uh you have more resources could be allocated so to say energy resources to
curiosity if it uh makes the whole you know uh unified uh your person more more uh um efficient and you
know you know they become more secure more safe more social except so on and so on and therefore
they have more energy to expand towards curiosity thanks ali
uh i also think uh it might be helpful to uh mention the neural basis for um these surprise appraisals
because uh you see uh as we know we have two systems of thinking system one system two famously uh sketched out by
kahneman and toversky uh or fast track and slow track of reacting to stimuli uh so uh in the fast track
uh well uh the uh stimuli bypass the sensory cortex and go directly from thalamus to amygdala right so uh
our first reaction our immediate react reaction to every surprise uh would be something quite similar to
fear but then after uh appraising that stimuli stimulus after going through the sensory cortex and
then amygdala and then hippocampus uh then we can appraise uh we can evaluate that surprise as being positive or negative
and uh as a result of that we get a positive or negative
valence effect uh so uh
in summary uh well every surprise uh
uh i mean either positive or negative it could be at first at the very first moment uh be a kind of
uh negative uh can induce a negative valence emotion in us
yes i i brought in some of the quotes from this paper um habitual and reflective control in hierarchical
predictive coding it's uh from 2021 and it's by kinghorn millage and buckley so they directly connect
hierarchical predictive coding architectures which when they consider action have a lot to do with active
inference in terms of thinking fast and slow like you had just brought up so they wrote on this view
fast actions may be triggered using only the lower levels of the hierarchical predictive coding schema
whereas more deliberative actions need higher layers we demonstrate that hpc can distribute learning
throughout its hierarchy with higher layers called into use only as required so that is very interesting
when we think about going back to the mai dai distinction from this paper it's a hybrid model
albeit one where the motor spatial control is continuous or modeled as continuous
and then there's a more discrete more mental or cognitive model that's like thinking slow so it's almost like
there's thinking fast and slow even within the mind and then there's thinking with the body
and that's like even a lower level i don't think even by thinking fast they weren't talking about the reflex arc
but there can be hierarchical modeling even there um so it uh
what are these nested models that are slower how do those develop are they related to the
physical architecture of our onboard machinery to what extent do they involve so many of our off-sourced or
extended cognitive phenomena like our our colleagues like our social networks
our books and learnings our books and learnings the social structures that scaffold our beliefs and so on
there's a lot of interesting pieces there um
um what would be a good direction to go in this second half of the dot two um we had targeted non-targeted
is there anything there that's not covered by the curiosity discussion is there oh unmute dean and then yes go for it
okay sorry about that yeah i think we pretty much okay wrestled that one to the ground okay do that
yeah my conception for targeted i'm calling the unified i in terms of uh you know maybe like the ant colony
uh where uh if you you could look at it like the ants are all functioning personally with their own uh
uh your directive behavior and uh it just works out that they're directed or or as a unit but even in
like a human whether there's a unified um of the human cells like even sense perception that you know it's
easier to look at it like our our um you know like i mentioned we have a hundred like almost a hundred
million uh cones and rods in our eyes that are receiving photons at every given instant and we just
look at it like they're active acting in a unified manner um but even that requires some sort of targeted
behavior that the you know for for even direct motor uh motor control that our cells in our given body are
acting in a unified manner and could you uh you take the free energy principle to uh a cellular level
and say well cells will act in a unified way if it's in accordance with the free energy principle but
if it wasn't in accordance with the free energy principle then cells don't act in a unified targeted
way and act according to their own levels i'm not sure if you could take that to uh the cellular level for
even things like sense perception motor control like one arm wants to go this way and one arm wants to
go that way and how do we have this unified control
it's it's interesting thing about what would it what would make something concord or not with fep
because it's a description framework here is where in from live stream 25 with uh professor levin
here's even in the ant colony example where different subsist and and cancer and and um like other
situations like biofilms were modeled this way that there can be coherence within each tone so to speak
uh i don't know if this moves us closer to understanding the experience of the eye
or whether there is in fundament a unified eye but the cells in the nestmates body can be understood as
undergoing coherent behavior the nestmates can the colony can and then different people have taken
different perspectives on what makes one level of analysis more relevant than others like an
evolutionary perspective is that the unit of selection is granted some special power a information
processing perspective or integrated information theory might highlight what happens informationally
within and across levels
let's look at the air their um dark room experiment we kind of came to it a little bit last time but what
did anyone think their figure and simulation spoke to how was it adding details or information that weren't
known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to
Andrew Klein, Entropy question being resolved, because what I saw was the latter I, I kind of saw that something, something appeared with more information gain or something disappeared if there was no sense that, that the, that the change of an ambiguity state was going to make any difference.
Andrew Klein, So I'm kind of curious what others, how others interpreted the actual data as it as it laid out post hoc, because this is all post hoc. This is just comparing dot dot seven dot three to dot nine nine zero one.
Andrew Klein, In terms of the, in terms of the desire strength. And I think they use the term urgency in the paper going up. Right.
Andrew Klein, Yes.
Andrew Klein, Yes.
Andrew Klein, Well, on, on the left side. Okay, so time is, there's a time is moving from left to right.
Andrew Klein, Yeah.
Andrew Klein, There's a, an entity that doesn't desire, they don't have a preference for achieving ice cream. And in this simulation run, they observed that they were in the dark room, and they picked the decision to flip a switch.
Andrew Klein, They then went to the right. And they ended up not finding that they got ice cream.
Andrew Klein, The weak desire agent first flips a switch. And then, with higher confidence goes to the left. And they end up realizing ice cream.
Andrew Klein, In this case of the strong desire agent, even though they have uncertainty about going left or right initially, they're in a hurry. Or it's urgent.
Andrew Klein, And they go left immediately. And that turns out that it does achieve getting the ice cream.
Andrew Klein, One, one note is like, these are only showing one run of each of those simulations. So it's like, does the no desire entity always go to the right? Or is that a 50 50?
Andrew Klein, How have people used the BDI to do quantitative modeling of behavior? Are they moving their verbal and formal arguments from above in the paper into a form factor that will be more amenable or palatable to people who are already using these models to do behavioral analysis?
Andrew Klein, Well, I think the BDI, I mean, strictly from the standpoint of here's what we watched this agent do, it kind of it kind of had a 50 50 choice, it was playing more in the geometry space, how this is represented is more sort of the Bayesian distribution piece.
Andrew Klein, Right? So you've got a percentage of an area, as you're moving from left to right, that's either darkened or remains agnostic and doesn't it doesn't sort of change what, what the outcome or what the matching of an outcome and the expected free energy are.
Andrew Klein, So I think that it just brings more information to the to the observation of what's actually going on when, when the lights either do go on or don't go on because that first one, the lights don't go on, I think, and the agent either stumbles to the right place or doesn't.
Andrew Klein, But they don't care.
Andrew Klein, But I do think that what what happens is you can have geometry only, or you can have geometry and a proportion or distribution and I think that's what this is kind of laying out for us that you now you've got more information.
Andrew Klein, And with more information hopefully you've got less less less invariance you've got more variance being described here than you would if you left it at the geometric level alone. Does that make sense?
Andrew Klein, Yes, and they follow up after the figure that this magnitude mapping, it's giving not just some theoretical detail to this mapping.
Andrew Klein, And they provide several citations, many recently with Smith and others, where it's used in many different contexts.
Andrew Klein, And then I kind of found it also interesting in the following sentences after the paragraph that I had just quoted there.
Andrew Klein, This motivating force could be corresponding to the magnitude of the KL divergence.
KL divergence between the Q variational distribution of observations conditioned upon policy divergence with the preference distribution p of o within the expected free energy.
Andrew Klein, So that's one of the terms that we've looked at in the G of pi, i.e. the risk term, not the ambiguity term with the entropy.
Andrew Klein, This is because stronger preference values over rewarding outcomes in p of o of t increase the KL divergence and lead the agent to seek reward over information gain.
Andrew Klein, So there's still a knob, maybe multiple that are slightly interacting.
Andrew Klein, There's a knob by which more pure curiosity, that would be just the ambiguity resolving, but undirected.
Andrew Klein, Mixtures of pure curiosity and directed curiosity, weak preferences with a lot of openness, and increasingly sharp preference distributions induce increasingly urgent pragmatic value seeking outcomes.
Andrew Klein, And there's a lot of funny things that come to mind.
Andrew Klein, Like a question for one person might be a survival question.
Andrew Klein, For another, it might be a research question.
Andrew Klein, For another, it might be like a pure curiosity.
Andrew Klein, Where's the oxygen in this room?
Andrew Klein, Is that a survival question?
Andrew Klein, Is that just, you know, again, are you researching oxygen distributions in rooms?
Andrew Klein, So you have a target to understand that?
Andrew Klein, Or are you just curious about that thought?
Andrew Klein, Dean, then do it.
Dean Dupont, I think that I think Daniel that clearly speaks to what David and Ali were both mentioning in terms of, so what's your timeframe here, right?
Andrew Klein, So you take off and you have a bird strike and now you don't have enough time to land anywhere on the river?
Andrew Klein, Is that curiosity?
Andrew Klein, It's that desire?
Andrew Klein, Is that what is that in terms of how much time do you have now to manage the risk?
Andrew Klein, Aspect of this, this situation that you now find yourself under certainly survival.
Andrew Klein, But yeah, what what what percentages or what proportions of each one of these different parts of the equation are being calculated at any given moment relative to the overall timeframe that you're now constrained under?
Andrew Klein, Yes, do it.
Andrew Klein, Yeah, let me just look at the refrigerator, you know, example that, well, okay, had I been curious, you know, earlier during the day, about the layout of the room, I might have remembered how to get to the refrigerator, but I didn't expend that mental energy.
Andrew Klein, So here I am hungry.
Andrew Klein, And I don't know my surroundings.
Andrew Klein, And so you have the level of curiosity could have provided benefit.
Andrew Klein, But now at this point, you know, you have the risk factor, will I injure myself or eat and that I was thinking, you know, like chess or something like, okay, like,
Andrew Klein, The Alpha zero is programmed with the, you know, the most powerful computers for hours and hours to just understand the game.
Andrew Klein, And then later, it's able to take that and win.
Andrew Klein, So like, as a person, it's like, okay, I really just like thinking about chess and understanding the patterns.
Andrew Klein, But then you will have to reproduce, I have to see to the success of my children, and the offspring, I have to, you know, make money and survive.
Andrew Klein, And so you know, maybe I could become a professional chess player, or something like that.
Andrew Klein, But then you would come in and well, if my goal is to, you know, reproduce and see the success of my offspring, and you'll make money and survive, there's better methods to do that, than becoming a professional chess
Andrew Klein, even like active inference, that okay, I'm curious about how this stuff works.
Andrew Klein, But it's probably not going to help me reproduce or make a living.
Andrew Klein, And if I tried to, you know, take my curiosity about consciousness, and use that to benefit the reproduction or making or making a living, it's unlikely to see that much fruition.
Andrew Klein, But at the same time, the power of curiosity is you don't know how it's going to benefit you.
Andrew Klein, So the ice cream example, you know, if we if we had a meeting in the kitchen, you know, during the day, and then we all go back to our rooms to go to sleep, and then we're hungry at night, the person who was just curious about how the room was laid out, is going to be able to, you'll likely retrieve the ice cream without any injury, as where the person who didn't expand the energy to be curious about the layer, layout of the room, may not achieve the ice cream.
Andrew Klein, That's why I like in my own head, it may not be directly applicable to this paper, but could be in folk psychology.
Andrew Klein, It would be to map this to something like Maslow's hierarchy of rules, which would be in line with neural neural nets, that there would be some sort of higher order rules, and some sort of ability to put the expansion of more energy like okay, like I thought about chess, and now I'm winning.
Andrew Klein, And I've achieved a little bit of social standing or you know, one of little prize money, or you know, even school, I was curious about consciousness now I got a bachelor's degree.
Andrew Klein, And I have enough proficiency to you know, get a job and support a family.
Andrew Klein, And now I could exhort even more energy to it.
Andrew Klein, But at the time of the pure curiosity, you don't know how it may you actually benefit you in terms of reward.
Andrew Klein, Great points that it's almost like jumping through different hoops, what might be best accomplished through pure curiosity.
Andrew Klein, And again, that survival research and pure curiosity trilemma, there's times where being driven by one or the other helps us move through complex real world situations.
Andrew Klein, If we knew the whole story from the beginning, then we could just follow along.
Andrew Klein, But in a highly partial information world, where we don't want our priors to lead to ruin, basically, then pure curiosity and research help bring things within our survivable limit into information gathering spaces that we wouldn't necessarily have.
Andrew Klein, Limited resources.
Andrew Klein, Limited resources.
Andrew Klein, Limited resources.
Andrew Klein, I don't know if they could program that also into the computer also like the limit of resources and if that if you interpret free energy principle in general to you'll be a definition of limited energy resources.
Andrew Klein, Ali.
Andrew Klein, Well, adding to my own previous comments about the subject of consciousness and curiosity, I personally believe that the nature of consciousness is ultimately computational.
Andrew Klein, So it's amenable to modeling and the simulation, but we're, we're just not there yet.
Andrew Klein, But, well, one possible approach to achieve such model could be potentially the active inference approach or other related approaches.
Andrew Klein, But you see, curiosity is just one aspect of consciousness and I think it should, it could probably be helpful to distinguish between the artificial curiosity and the experience of curiosity or the phenomenology of the curiosity.
Andrew Klein, Because what we see here is the agent that simulates the artificial curiosity and not, it's not exactly.
Andrew Klein, Isomorphic with the experience we get from our derived to our information seeking drives and.
Andrew Klein, And, and in fact, in this paper, I think it was in page 28.
Andrew Klein, Yes, it's in page 28 that they state that.
Andrew Klein, We have not addressed questions about the structure regenerative model would need in order to account for experiences of beliefs and desires.
Andrew Klein, So, well, at least in this paper we're not dealing with the actual experience of curiosity.
Andrew Klein, We're just trying to somehow model and simulate the artificial curiosity.
Andrew Klein, In fact, this term artificial curiosity is one favored by Carl Preston himself in his various other lectures.
Andrew Klein, Yes, very good point.
Andrew Klein, And it relates to kind of the experience view from the inside versus the behavioral modeling view from the outside.
Andrew Klein, A curious particle or a curious forager might be engaging in some kind of behavior, but that isn't the same thing as the experience of.
Andrew Klein, But they do provide references to other work, like including work that has been discussed previously on live streams with Christopher White and Ryan Smith on report paradigms of consciousness.
Andrew Klein, As we kind of head towards the end here.
Andrew Klein, I thought this was very interesting in the section before the conclusion 11 free energy principle and direction of fit.
Andrew Klein, And this is kind of a good section to carry out and bring forward into our other discussions on active.
Andrew Klein, For any organism described by the FEP, the description will contain an implicitly normative state element about the state the organism should be in and can be described as having cognitive desire like direction of fit.
Andrew Klein, So there's a preference distribution.
Andrew Klein, And as this paper is building up, it can have an interpretation as desire being a targeted desire.
Andrew Klein, Even beyond the case of forward looking decision making agents, not all Bayesian beliefs in the FEP formalism are best characterized as doxastic being about belief doxology.
Andrew Klein, This perspective may expand upon current discussion in the FEP literature, where it is fairly prominent to discuss as if beliefs in simple systems, whether a mere active entity like a pendulum or adaptive active entities, and just say, well, I'm not saying that it really believes that it's acting as if it believes that.
Andrew Klein, That conform to the FEP.
Andrew Klein, Here, our point is they can also equally be described as having as if desires.
Andrew Klein, Belief is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to
belief not towards phenomenology but stapling together some of the bayesian distributional
usage of the term belief with the doxastic being about belief the aboutness of those
bayesian beliefs is the folk psychological concept of belief by making that mapping and
connecting the formalism as a whole or at least in the core equations like the f and the g to the
bdi model it also allows them to identify which bayesian belief distributions map to belief in the
bdi and which bayesian belief distributions map to d to the desires in the bdi and so to the extent that
somebody can say a system has an as if belief implicitly in a folk psychological way we can
also talk about as if desires and that helps um partition but not disregard the discussion around
what different systems experience the classic you know what is it like to be x but
it at least according to this argument and perspective authorizes usage of intentions and
desires intentions arising from basically the combination of the beliefs and the desires in the
bdi and talking about active systems as if they have desires what is that simulation desirous of
and then using its beliefs and desires to explain its intentional behavior not the experience of
intentionality experience of belief experience of desire but using them in this view from the outside
more deflationary perspective so that's quite interesting and i think something that
is that will be uh we'll see how it catches on
are there other sections that people want to talk about or what will they carry forward into their post 46 life
i think daniel a couple things i think the desire and the think part that you're just talking about there
i'm not sure that it's specific in nature i think it's more generalizable and sort of that scale free
um to some of the stuff that duvid brought up um i think that when you when you um
when you start getting getting to know active infants a little bit more and i'll speak from
personal experience with a focus on a little bit of sort of personal grooming you become one heck of an
attractive state and so i think you might not make money off of that but at this point but i think as
you get more comfortable with the kind of being able to take the information and uh use it across a
variety of different situations it's um it's actually is quite helpful i don't think i'll i'll ever get rich
off of it at this point but it it is kind of interesting how it's um i think it is growing in terms of
the amount of attention that it's getting so that's kind of my my two takes on this so far
so you're saying it might influence fitness i think it might down the road as long as we have enough
time scale dude
yeah and i've been coaching chess for a while and mostly to youth and i'm used to explaining uh
uh somewhat you know these concepts like you know i i want you to say that uh people who are just
curious about chess and how the patterns work and how the pieces work often improve much faster than
people who desire to win and that a lot of times people will reach a certain strength and then uh their
curiosity diminishes and it's just their desire to win which isn't enough that you know it's just like
i want to spend my night thinking about these uh patterns uh versus like i really want to you know
win and have some sort of practical benefit from uh my efforts so uh you know i have my own personal
you know goals that brought me to active inference because i was looking for my own tools to advance
my own research and came on to active inference as a a method or tool that even though i you know like
it appears that you know the majority of people are using it for a different purpose that i would be
able to rework it for my own purpose but because it's a uh interdisciplinary study and like you know
i'm an engineer and like engineering usually works that way where someone has professional certification
they sign off and you could expect that they did their part right and it's going to work and you could
you know attach that module to your module and both modules are going to do
uh what they said they're going to do uh and then you know the curiosity well do i really want to
understand how your module works you know do i really care about dean and ali's research or you
know do i just uh you know want to trust that their module works and i'm going to be able to attach that
to my module to uh you know make make something uh more powerful and both are probably true to it you know
to uh you know limited uh energy uh limited resources that uh you know that i would like to understand
dean and ali's module to the best of my ability but energy uh time allocation uh resources are are
limited uh but then you know certainly if you had a module that would help my module and we could plug
them in together and uh you create a more powerful interface so that i'm bullish about active inference
and uh as a framework that will benefit uh you know the more and more people who get involved and i'm
seeing my own direction into my own research how uh you know i think this will be useful and i even
think uh yeah i got uh jennifer i think joined the discord and i mentioned it to a few other people
that that might be able to advance their research and then try to understand uh you know the current
existing modules uh you know that are that are out there you know within the active inference and you
know as i mentioned the first the importance of interdisciplinary studies for uh you know big issues uh you know none of us are
going to figure this out it's going to take interdisciplinary studies and none of us are going to be able to
understand all the disciplines necessary uh to piece together the bigger puzzle
nice thank you yes interesting point about the uh curiosity driven learning
and how that can be like a not even paradoxically more successful approach or mentality to set off on a journey a learning journey with um
i just think about somebody trying to learn organic chemistry which i tutored for many years and people who set
themselves up for the pragmatic value and said i want this outcome sometimes they achieve the outcome other
times they didn't but it set up a lot of psychology around not achieving the outcome when it didn't happen on the
expected timeline and a lot of like secondary cascading failures
course however there's also the the clear counterpoint which is but if we don't want the higher grade then
like if we're just going to be curious about learning organic chemistry like my finals in six weeks so how
are we going to balance the timelines and uh the curiosity and i think maybe even this paper helped us look at
one way which is keep the preference direction but understand how the urgency of your preference
influences the way that you take action and just think about what what if you what if your final was
tomorrow how would you go about it okay now what if the final was in 100 years how would you go about it
where are we in that continuum do we have time for curiosity and for openness or is this an actual
emergency situation and then we can triage where there is an emergency organic chemistry situation
but also hold space for curiosity and openness and even in the emergency there has to be information
seeking it's just more directed information seeking okay we're going to work through the practice tests
and that's what we're going to have time for there still is going to be information seeking but not
of the same kind if we had more time to kind of space out even though in a alternate slash preferable
world perhaps that's the better way to learn or the more fun way to learn or so on
any other thoughts
one of the things i really like about active inference research is the willingness of the researchers in
this area to seriously address the criticisms instead of just dodging them and their willingness to
to constantly improve and update the theory in order to fill the fill the gaps and well
and also address the weakness or any weakness or loophole in the theory and that's very
you see liberating to see such active area of research going forward in a very determined and also very
open-minded open-minded way uh and uh well that's one of the things i think is sets it apart from uh
other some other uh research areas today
it's what we prefer it's what we expect
we're curious about it
okay dean ali duvid thanks a lot for this fun discussion and and ryan maxwell and alex for this
paper it really capped off a long run of live streams we've had quite a nice sequence going back to
the beginning of the beginning of this year getting through many many discussions next week we're going
to have the second quarterly roundtable meeting and then we'll have july off of paper discussions and
we'll be coming back in august with paper discussions we don't know exactly what they're going to be but
we know some of them and we have a few guest streams and other streams coming up but um
yeah it's been a nice run the lab meeting next week will be a great cap to this season slash semester and
then we'll come back for the end of 2022 with some new changes that i think people will be really
excited about so thanks everybody and see you later thanks daniel thanks everyone okay thanks a lot
so








thank you






















































Thank you.