## 1VTviUyntt8

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

This is Active Inference live stream number 20.0 on April 15th, 2021.

I'm Daniel and I am here with Blue who will say hello.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant out of New Mexico.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for being on Blue and looking forward to this conversation.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

20.0 is a contextualizing stream for the upcoming discussions that we'll have on April 20th and 27th about this paper, The Emperor's New Markov Blankets.

And we'll have some of the authors join us as well.

So this will be an awesome discussion.

Here we are in number 20.0 and the goal of this discussion as stated is to set the context for the upcoming discussions that we'll have on number 20 and number 20.1.

And that is about the paper, The Emperor's New Markov Blanket by Jelle Brunberg et al.

And the link is provided here.

The video is just an introduction and us kind of working through the paper so that we're ready to interact with the authors and really grasp what they're discussing.

And we'll be going through the usual sections of the paper.

Any just overall thoughts before we sort of lead into it, Blue?

Just what did you like about it or what drew you to the paper?


SPEAKER_01:
I liked this paper.

I thought it really provided an overarching view of the Markov blanket and its use throughout, like, historical use and also throughout the Fristian context.

So I thought it was really thorough and gave a good treatment to all of those topics.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Agreed.

So the paper is Emperor's New Markov Blankets, and the link's provided here.

the aims of the claims of the paper that's where we're going to start with the aims and the abstract and the roadmap to just see how the authors laid out what they're going to be trying to do so we're going to evaluate their aims and then see whether the claims they make are valid and whether they support their aims that they laid out and they write all be the first one blue

The aim of the paper is twofold.

First, we want to explain how it has been possible for such an innocuous technical concept as a Markov blanket to come to be used in order to settle central debates in the philosophy of biology and cognition.

So that's the main key aim here is how did we get here?

How did we get to debating a statistical technical concept like the Markov blanket and having people talk about consciousness and emotion and multi-scale systems?

So how did we get here with the Markov blanket?

And then Blue, you can go for the second aim and what you thought it meant.


SPEAKER_01:
They say, we will trace the development of Markov blankets starting from their standard application in Bayesian networks through the role that they play in variational inference to their use in the literature on active inference, which is what I had said about the paper that I liked.

They say, we will argue that in the course of this transition, a new and largely independent theoretical construct has emerged, one that is more closely aligned with the notions of sensory motor loops and agent environment boundaries.

Do you have any thoughts on that, Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
It's going to be the core distinction that we're going to hit probably 50 times is that there's two ways to talk about boundaries.

maybe the ones that really are there, and then the ones that we infer.

And that's what this paper is about.

So here we go to the abstract.

Markov blankets have been used to settle disputes central to philosophy of mind and cognition.

Their development from a technical concept in Bayesian inference to a central concept within the free energy principle is analyzed.

So that's the historical component of the paper.

Then there's the sort of distinguishing part of the paper.

We propose to distinguish between instrumental pearl blankets and realist Friston blankets.

Pearl blankets are substantiated by the empirical literature, but can do limited philosophical work.

Friston blankets can do philosophical work, but require strong theoretical assumptions.

Both are conflated in the current literature on the free energy principle.

And then their conclusion is, consequently, we propose that distinguishing between an instrumental and a realist research program will help clarify the literature.

Good?


SPEAKER_02:
Good.


SPEAKER_00:
On to the roadmap, which now has a 55 miles per hour speedway on the left side for the rapid run through.

They...

start with introducing Bayesian inference and really walk through it in a nice way that we're going to walk through as well and go from kind of the simplest form of Bayesian inference to surprisingly nuanced forms that introduce networks like Bayesian networks.

And that's where we get to this concept of a pearl blanket.

And then it's by tracing the history and the citations and the formalisms around the Pearl blanket and the Markov blanket that

we find out where it intersects with active inference, which is where the authors propose that this Friston blanket concept sort of surreptitiously or without being noticed starts getting deployed in a way that's sort of sometimes one way, sometimes the other way, but it's actually the looseness around the definition that in their opinion gives rise to uncertainty, which is not what we're about here.

And, uh,

in section five they really just provide more examples with walkthroughs and graphs and figures that we're going to walk through today with how is the pearl blanket different than the first and blanket sense of the Markov blanket and then how does that relate to this key distinction at the end between inference with a model versus inference within a model so kind of like generative models versus generative processes that's going to come back and um

It's a great paper, so we hope that you listen to these discussions and also read it.

Any thoughts on the roadmap?


SPEAKER_01:
Nope, it's going to go fast.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

It's a long paper.

Yeah.

So the title of the paper is an allusion to the story called The Emperor's New Clothes.

So people can read through the way that it's written here, but

The Emperor's New Clothes is an interesting story.

It's a polysemous story.

There are many meanings of it.

So what is The Emperor's New Clothes about blue in general?

Or what is it doing here in the title?

And we can definitely ask the authors, but what do you think it's doing here?


SPEAKER_01:
So in my understanding of the emperor's new clothes, it's definitely like, without reading the screen, it's a story about an emperor who wants, who goes to like the best, you know, clothes maker in town, pays them all kinds of money.

And the clothes maker proceeds to make them clothes that are invisible.

And then when the emperor, he sees essentially maybe what he wants to see in the clothes, like sees this, you know, and dresses himself in them and then goes parading throughout the town naked because the clothes are invisible.


SPEAKER_00:
And then the child says, hey, that guy's naked.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
And then here's what part I had forgotten was, although startled, the emperor continues the procession walking more proudly than ever.

So it's like, it's not like, oh, then he was so embarrassed that he stopped doing it.

So maybe it's a story we'll keep in mind and we'll ask who are these characters or what did the authors mean by that?

but also at this sort of general level.

Why does this paper matter?

Why are we talking about it and studying it and discussing the implications?

Because it's good to be clear when we're talking about science or philosophy and

uh an unfortunate reality of science is that it's easy to slip in metaphysical claims into uh so-called facts of the world or even just measurements of the world and it's not good to slip in ungrounded metaphysical claims and then also this realism instrumentalism distinction is something that has been dealt with basically in every field oh is it the model of language you're talking about or are you really talking about language or

Those kinds of differences between systems as they are and systems as we model them is something that is a nomadic concept.

So to see it appear in active inference is cool, but also it's exciting to be involved with the authors and see how the scientists and the philosophers are actually dealing with this question in a new way at a new time scale because of maybe the way that they're communicating with each other.

The big questions in the paper, like sort of beyond just what they set out to address would be like, how is physics related to metaphysics?

What can we study about electrons and temperature and mass that would tell us anything about whether a spirit exists or what's really out there beyond Plato's cave?

How is scientific modeling related to reality?

And then a big question for a lot of us,

and a lot of people outside of our active inference community is like what does the free energy principle and active inference really say about pragmatic concerns and then totally independently what do they say about philosophical concerns and it'd be awesome if they were 10 out of 10 on both but what is the actual reality of what these frameworks tell us about pragmatic concerns and philosophical questions what big questions resonated with you blue


SPEAKER_01:
The biggest question really that resonated with me, I think, is are we, you know, using the right tools to study the right things?

So I think that, you know, when we think about active inference and cognition and statistics, like are these all, you know, should these all be represented by a Markov blanket?

Like is this the right thing to study this with?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
How unified do we want models and systems to be?

On that, this is sort of the last little general signpost before we plunge into the free energy principle and active inference and everything.

It's just a little distinction on maps and territories because realism and instrumentalism, it sounds really philosophical and there's isms and it sounds like a belief system, but it really boils down to this map territory distinction.

And so the authors wrote,

In our view, the free energy principle literature, so whatever it is, even if you've never heard of this idea, it consistently fails to distinguish between the map, a representation of reality, and the territory, reality itself.

This slippage becomes most apparent in their treatment of the concept of a Markov blanket.

So if we're ever getting lost in the weeds with Friston and Pearl and instrumentalism and realism, we think like map and territory.

And then what's really cool about this topic, especially in the active inference setting, is that two of the papers that are cited in this paper as relevant prior work are Mel Andrews's paper and also Thomas Van Es and Ines Hipolito's paper.

And these were on Active Inference 14 and 15.

And now we're here in number 20.

So it's kind of like we're going quickly and we're speaking with a lot of the authors.

And then also on the left is a paper that I co-authored with RJ and another colleague, Mikel.

And we kind of stepped back even further than Active Inference and just asked, what does it mean to map across systems?

And we highlighted that sometimes when mapping across systems and using the complexity science approach, people use Bayesian statistics, networks and predictive and counterfactual approaches.

Those are kind of like three key ideas in making some systems similar to each other or comparing different systems.

And those are citations to the active inference literature, because active inference is drawing together a lot of these different domains that might be seen as different, like Bayesian statistics, network science, cybernetics, ecological psychology.

I mean, there's different words because they're different areas.

but we're actually coming at it in a new way.

And that is why we're thinking about maps and territories in a new way, because it's not just like cognitive maps, yes or no, or maps in the city, yes or no.

It's a lot of new things coming together, which is why it's good to clarify.


SPEAKER_01:
Adding on to that is the Fields and Glaze book paper that we did that mapped the two spaces, right, from one to the other, like the category theory.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, nice, the mapping.

And then what if the map is the territory?

So let's get to FEP.

So for this breakdown, every time in reading a paper, we get to reintroduce the free energy principle because it's always good to start with sort of a first pass on what it is because this video might be someone's first time hearing about free energy principle.

And also it's a good opportunity to see how the authors frame free energy principle.

and then use that as a scaffolding for our understanding and our curiosity.

Instead of us trying to get to the best explanation week after week after week, we can develop our understanding week by week but then always be inspired by the way that authors have phrased it in their writing.

So on the right side with the colors, I kind of broke down into like almost haiku or just short sentence, a little bit what they were saying.

And what it comes down to is that the FEP is a normative mathematical framework.

So normative, like it says what should happen, like evolution by fitness maximization says that it should be maximizing its fitness.

That's kind of similar.

It's not saying what you should do, but it's saying how systems should be.

And it's about systems that are self-organizing and how they fit into their niche.

FEP is drawing on physics inspired machine learning approaches.

and so part of the appeal and the excitement of the free energy principle is that it brings together machine learning and physics and math with also potentially some qualitative dimensions but even without dipping into the qualitative or the aesthetic or the embodied or the inactive at the very least from a control theoretic perspective

the free energy principle adds in a lot of features that are absent from other frameworks like network theory alone, Bayesian alone, or predictive systems alone.

Combining those types of approaches in a really interchangeable way with system properties like learning, attention, and action planning is very powerful.

Active inference is a theory that is a corollary to, or it's a compatible implementation of systems that are

broadly construed under the free energy principle.

And then they kind of close, the authors do, with the recognition of a claim that you'll see in a lot of places that if we could have a theory of everything or a multi-scale system, then it would be great.

So that's what motivates people to work on the FEP and why a lot of people are excited about it.

Anything to add on that, Blue?

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
It would be great.

I'm excited about it.

A unifying theory of everything.

Let's get to it.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's get to it.

Now we want to, just like you said with, are we studying the right systems with the right tools?

So this is what the FEP is.

And very intentionally, it appeals to things like control theory and measurement.

Let's take it into the deep end with metaphysics.

So the author's right.

The FEP has been applied to metaphysical questions.

So these are very different than action planning, learning, attention.

These are gonna be related to questions that are metaphysical, like what are the boundaries of the mind?

And the citations are in the paper.

What are the boundaries of living systems?

So what's really there ontologically?

What's the relationship between mind and matter?

Like what is experience?

All these kinds of philosophical questions about qualia and even things like is Gaia real or is there a scientific basis for talking about Gaia or sort of earth level awareness or at what level could awareness exist?

And more.

We're probably all curious about a lot of questions, and it's not like we need to a priori classify them into physics or metaphysics, but that shouldn't make us think there's no distinction.

The questions that come to our mind, we're curious probably about a lot of stuff.

So we want to be open to questions as they come in, especially ones that are framed in new ways, and then also be trying to approach them rigorously because as they raise here,

it's a web of formalisms.

It's true that it is a web because we're going to walk through it in the order that the authors laid it out, but it is a web of concepts.

And so even for those who are experienced in the field, but especially those who are new to the area, or as they call it, a lay person, not only are there

distinctions that are unconventional, but their implications are not always obvious, like assumptions or axioms or relationships that have maybe very non-obvious conclusions or implications, especially when combined.

And then

The two risks here are it might appear to be and actually mathematically unjustified, but at the very least appear to be.

And that might warrant the unintended smuggling in of metaphysical assumptions.

Like I have information theory, I can calculate it, and here's who's conscious and who's not conscious.

I would say that's completely unwarranted.


SPEAKER_01:
Good example.

I mean, that's like the main critique, right, of IIT.

So I don't know.

I think that it's a good example.

And how can you say who's conscious and who's not when you can't even give consciousness an adequate definition?

I think, I don't know.

But we're solving unanswerable questions, but that's the joy of it.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yep, we talked about the consciousness side in some of our other discussions, but suffice to say that there's kind of a distinction between the questions on this slide, which are related to stochastic systems and action in the niche, and then the metaphysics, which are things that you can imagine even robots would debate over, like who is really a robot like us or whatever they ask.

So how does the FEP relate to active inference?

They write, active inference is a process theory derived from the application of variational inference to the study of biological and cognitive systems.

And we're not gonna read this whole piece, but active inference is a process theory.

So it specifies how processes play out, which we're gonna go into a lot of detail.

And it sort of takes something that's initially static

and it figures out how to take a bunch of equations just there on the page and actually link them in a way where it helps us think about how systems work in their flow.

So we take a bunch of equations that relate variables like estimates and action states and sensory states that are all happening at once as analytical equations in the FVP and then

Active Inference is a compatible architecture like a skeleton or a style of model that implements processes compatible with FEP.

What would you say about that, Liv?


SPEAKER_01:
I think that you summed it up well.

I mean, the authors, you have a couple of points here that are highlighted.

So the fundamental imperative of active inference is to minimize free energy.

So this is the FEP, the free energy principle.

And then the other point is that, you know, this is also the question that I had at the beginning.

Are we using the right tools to study these phenomena, right?

More specifically, we can ask what role the pearl blankets might play in active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, we're going to be seeing how this technical concept entered the discussion of metaphysical questions and it's almost like active inference as applied to biological creatures is where we see a lot of it coming into play.

And yep, we talk about active inference throughout, so we'll kind of return to it.

So now let's, that's like the modern stuff, right?

FEP and active inference.

Let's pull back to Bayes and to Bayesian statistics and build up in a new way

how we're going to go from simple bays to modern bays.

So Blue, how would you start us off?

Or what do we need to know as we go on this little bays, several slide journey?


SPEAKER_01:
So like the one sentence or maybe like the short summary that I give about Bayes, like Bayesian statistics versus frequentist statistics.

And frequentist statistics, which is like what most people are taught in school, like when you flip a coin, the probability of it coming up heads is half, right?

50% of the time it comes up half.

Bayesian statistics accounts for the fact that like the previous

12 flips have all been heads, right?

So what would you, if you have flipped a coin and you know it's a fair coin, if it's come up heads 12 times in a row, the next time you flip it, don't you think it's more likely to come up tails?

So the Bayesian accounts for what has happened in the past when it's not accounted for in frequency statistics at all.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

And just to go through the notation, because we are going to be kind of going through the notation, as they write, it's a recipe for calculating the posterior probability.

So that's the probability of X given Y. And X is the hidden state of the world.

Like, let's just say that the hidden state of the world is the true temperature.

it uh it's actually a hypothesis about the world that's why base in bayesian statistics it's like a hypothesis that you're testing and uh the observational data the measurement is y and this is uh posterior to data so like prior and posterior are referring to when new information comes in prior to the new data coming in and then it's updated and then you have a posterior which has been updated by the new data and

And very rapid here in this paragraph, they make the move from doing inference, Bayesian inference on a hidden variable, like the temperature of the world,

into this idea of the model evidence with a normalization that keeps things adding up to one.

So instead of having like an uncertainty distribution of how the temperature might be in the world, and then taking in new data and updating that, another way might be, I have two hypotheses.

It's colder than 20 or it's warmer than 20.

And then I can always be judging relatively which one of those is more accurate.

So even if the temperature distribution is like very gnarly, it's possible sometimes to have a simpler thing that you're trying to hypothesize about the world.

Like, is it over or under a certain number that helps you guide action?

And then also when you do this model comparison, you can keep the relative

Basically, you can keep models being compared relative to one another, and that can sum to one.

So you can do probability type estimates on different model classes, even without knowing whether any specific model is likely or unlikely.

So like in phylogenetics, which is an area that Blue and I have both worked, you could use Bayesian statistics to relatively evaluate what the most likely tree is for species, but that tree's likelihood might be like super low, but that's not what matters.

It's whether it's more likely than other hypotheses.

So that's kind of what they write a little bit about here is,

when you have types of models that are computationally or analytically intractable.

So there's no closed form solution for the posterior.

Like there's no clean way how you're gonna update your model of the phylogenetic tree given the next new genome that's added in.

It's just not something smooth like signal processing might be.

So how are you going to deal with that?

And that's the big challenge.

So it's kind of this rapid Bayesian acceleration from like you're trying to estimate something about the world that's unknown.

OK, well, what's unknown is which model is better.

And then the challenge is we want to update our ongoing estimate of what the best model of the world is.

but there aren't really update rules for how new data coming in should help us update which model it is like night and day it's clear more light it's likely to be daytime but again think about the phylogenetics or something where as new data comes in it's really hard to know how exactly to update your models


SPEAKER_01:
So in that, the phylogenetic analysis, if you have new data coming in, literally like you wanna add a new branch to your phylogenetic tree, the computational way that that's calculated is by switching in and out, in and out, in and out each branch to see the likelihood of the least likely or the best evidence for that tree that's existence.

But it literally makes every single tree and then calculates that.

which is computationally a really intense and time-consuming effort.

So that's why variational Bayes is so neat and swift in comparison.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, exactly.

It's these red and blue on the bottom.

It's like a continuum of approaches.

uh before enter variational the continuum being we have some simple cases where we have a closed form solution for exactly how to update the model's evidence as new data comes in and then there's sort of this wild west where you need to use customized schemes and sometimes you have to resort to just extremely costly like almost brute force like swapping or doing the markov chain monte carlo however

maybe there's another way, which is what brings us to variational base.

And variational Bayes, as the authors write on the bottom, the trick of variational Bayes, and we're going to come back to the KL divergence, but here's the trick upfront, is consists in letting go of trying to minimize the KL divergence in equation three directly, shifting the objective to optimizing a different functional, which bounds the model evidence.

So what would you say the variational trick is?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, that's it.

So if you bound the model evidence, so you know that the answer can't be outside of these parameters, that's like bounding the model evidence, then you're not calculating or trying to calculate things that are outside of those parameters, I would say.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, and maybe there's another way to read this equation on three, but the underlined red part D sub KL is the KL divergence.

So it's about the divergence between two different distributions.

And the double line is like what the two distributions are.

So that P X given Y, we saw that back here.

That's what we want to calculate.

So even though we're kind of accelerated on Bayes, we're still back on equation one doing inference on the world.

But it's going to look...

more complex now.

So we're looking for the difference between that thing that we really want to find out, P X given Y, and then the magical Q distribution that we're in control of.

And then we want the divergence between those two distributions to be zero.

And distance is always positive.

There's no negative distance.

And so we just have to minimize this divergence

so that we can get at what we really want and again one part we don't know and it's hard and the other part we're totally in control of so the whole question and trick is going to be can we design a q so that by reducing the kl divergence on q versus p we're getting at what we truly want

So that is kind of what threads the needle between these two approaches, the red being like the elegant and simple and effective, and then the blue being like the extremely messy and simulation-based.

Variational Bayes is elegant, and also it helps us potentially deal with complex underlying distributions.

Cool?


SPEAKER_02:
Good.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Now, here we return in 5, there's d sub kl between q of what we want to know and p of x given y. So it's the same as it was on the previous equation 3.

And that is going to be given another equivalency.

And it's restated as the natural log of p of y minus big L of x. So...

What do you think about L of X blue, or what did you see here?

Sorry.

No worries.

Okay.

Go ahead.

I'm lost in the math.

Yeah.

I was just, like, thinking, oh, you know, there's two lines.

That's an equal sign.

Here's one line as a minus, and here's three lines.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I was lost at the three lines.

Like, why is that an equal sign?

Like, yeah, I'm confused at that three triple line thing.


SPEAKER_00:
I think three lines can mean that it is defined as...

like it's strictly defined as, but let's find out.

I don't want to say anything that's incorrect.

That's what I was thinking of though.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm like, no, no, I'm opting out.

I pass.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, but the restatement here is this value that we want to go low, low, low with the divergence between what we can control and what we can't control

We're going to restate it in terms of two different pieces, a sort of log.

This is just the likelihood model of the observations.

So this is just Y. Here PX given Y was like the true X given the Y observation, like the true temperature given a thermometer.

And here we're just going to have the likelihood of the observation.

measurements so this is a lot easier to calculate than x given y because it's not a conditional and then we're going to penalize that by big l of x which is an expectation of q what q thinks is going to be a likely value for x

plus a joint distribution of X and Y of P, not the conditional.

So it's a little past me why reframing it in each of these nuanced ways helps you do it.

But I just think of it like mathematical pinball.

Like you gotta like bring some wall down so that you can go up another ramp and do something different.

But let's definitely ask the authors about it.


SPEAKER_01:
And the negative is like baffling.

Like, I think like the point of when you are getting into the logarithm, the logarithmic scale, like, and so that you like eliminate any possibility of a negative.

And then like, they put the negative on the front of it.

I'm like, Hmm, that's a little strange to me.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And then also it's like the, it's like the negative variational free energy.

And so we push on though.

Um, they are able to, uh,

say that basically free energy this is by analogy to the variational free energy they're going to bring this that's where they bring in the f they say basically free energy that you might want to minimize we'll get there in a few equations but the free energy function of x that hidden state of the world like which model is best or what's the real temperature it is the negative of this l

because here, L was defined this way, and it's almost like we don't, we can separate out L from P at all.

So here we had like sort of a hybrid with Qs and Ps, and here there's like a P here, but now when we get L all alone, now we've kind of encapsulated

P in a way where it's like all Q-centric.

I'm not even sure if that's true, so I don't want to go too down the rabbit hole.

But now it's framed in a way where we can do our work on Q, but get to where we want to get on P. And I think that is the rub.

That's...

what the question is about is okay it's a approach and i would love to ask somebody with more variational inference especially actually on this uh i think these are the ones where we were like blue and i were just like okay these are we're gonna raise more questions than we uh answer

but what does it look like to make the variational version of a model and what do you sit down and do so that you can calculate this or is it all carried out beneath the hood so uh minimizing free energy as defined in this way

on the Q, which is the function that we control, the goal is that that will also get us to the right value on P, the function we don't control.

So I have my internal model of temperature and I wanna be doing inference on that, finding what's the most likely, the most free energy minimized internal model of temperature.

And then if that is attuned properly, that should be accurate in terms of the external as well.


SPEAKER_01:
So in my limited understanding of making a variational model, I think that these models, instead of using values, they use distributions.

So that's the key difference, I think, between the variational model construction versus the non-variational variety of Bayesian model, in my limited understanding.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice point that previously we were like looking at passing like a number through a function.

And then when we're going variational, we're talking about like passing functions through each other.

This one, we're not gonna go into the technical details, but it's about mean field approximations.

And this is a super interesting topic because a lot of statistical models will assume that there's like a homogenous field or that a gas is well mixed or that all types of a certain interaction are equally likely to happen amongst all gases.

molecules bouncing around, but because we're interested in applying free energy principle, not just to the burning candle or to a chemical reaction, but to active inference agents, to cybernetic and goal oriented agents,

how does the mean field approximation work?

Like if we want to explain culture, is there a mean field approximation for culture?

Or how are we going to apply this to the systems where we know we're kind of extending into analogy land?

but at the same time maybe reality is really multi-scale so it's not just uh an analogy to say like when Chris field talked about Quantum and communication at our scale not just as bubbling up from electrons and not just as a metaphor but actually as like a third way that it really was based upon those principles at our scale that's what this makes me think about like

do we need or will there be mean field approximations at a lower level?

And then we're just experiencing a sort of non-mean field at our level.

And, okay, 21.

Anything else to say there, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So I think that the mean field approximation, I think it's like, I don't know, it limits the interactions between different variables.

So you're interacting with the density instead of each individual variable interacting with each variable.

So it's like a course graining, like having this mean field approximation, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, and we'll return to it when we look at the figures related to Fristen's paper, but yes, it's related to partitioning variables and yes.

Now this part I thought was really interesting and kind of like basic statistics.

So maybe it will be familiar to some, but they're seeing it in a new way that the difference between

the different relationships that variables can have.

And we're seeing it here written out with math, but we're actually gonna come back to it with figures.

And so it will potentially be a little bit clearer, but there's a few different situations.

The nicest situation for a statistical inference is when you can cleanly separate inference on the two variables.

So here it's like PX1 and X2, the joint distribution of X1 and X2.

it could be separated very cleanly because they're independent.

So it's like you flip a coin and you roll a die.

The way that you get the probability of a head and a four is basically you just multiply that probability of head times probability of getting a four.

And so that's the clean case.

And sort of almost by analogy, that's how I understand variational inference.

The variables cleanly separate so that you can do restricted optimization on subsets of variables in a little bit more principled way.

But back to the stats, there's often a time where the joint distribution that you care about is conditionally dependent

So conditional dependence, conditional independence, two sides of the same coin.

It's conditionally dependent on a third variable x3.

And so here we're going to separate x1 and x2 just like we did above.

But now we have like x1 conditioned on 3 and x2 conditioned on 3.

And there's actually all kinds of situations where we're really interested in these interactor variables.

and so there's there's one reason it might be latent cause estimation like i want to know why is it that some people take this drug and have this side effect and other people don't sometimes you want to know all three factors like how three different nodes of a computer network or a genetic network are related so you actually might be interested in how all three of these nodes are linked

And then other times the mediator might be useful for like a statistical analysis or like an interaction effect in an ANOVA.

Like, okay, there's an effect of age and there's an effect of height, but is there a height by age interaction?

So those kinds of questions, they're not, that ANOVA question's not in the Bayesian framework.

That's from the frequentist framework, but it's an example of when you wanna know about interactor variables.

But it turns out that this is gonna facilitate the variational inference because you can like use this hidden variable three to shield or separate X1 from X2 and X2 from X1.

So that's the move of Pearl.

And then that's what we're gonna dive into from then on.

So we went from basically Bayes on states, Bayes on models to variational Bayes.

Variational Bayes gives us this free energy minimizing way to work the variational inference.

contingent on a few assumptions that we would love clarification and education on.

And that's going to help us separate out in a way that's tractable different parts of the world model that we care about.


SPEAKER_01:
So an easy way to think about this conditional dependence is if you're like thinking about the probability of Mary and Mo both eating at the Frontier Restaurant in Albuquerque, it's independent of one another, right?

Like Mary and Mo, they eat periodically at the Frontier Restaurant.

This is like an independent probability that they go there, whatever.

And then they have another friend that they go with.

So Mary and Mo go with Sally.

If Sally eats at the Frontier restaurant, then the probability that Mary and Mo will be there together, because they'll all go together, is they'll all be there at the same time if Sally's there, because then they'll all go eat together.

But they're not independently friends.

They're only friends.

They only go as a trio when Sally's involved.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Our variables just hanging out with each other.

Let's take it from doing inference on like one variable

states and the variational and everything to two variables that's with this joint inference and then here we brought in the third variable let's generalize that beyond three because we're not just interested in x1 and x2 in their relationship or how three influences it we want to be actually open to all graphical relationships and that just means everything you can draw as a network

with nodes and edges is graphical, or that's a network analysis.

So they bring in now the notion of a Bayesian network beta, and it is defined as containing G and P. So G is subdefined with vertices and edges, V and D.

So G is really like edges and nodes.

So G is the network itself, and that's kind of the matrix form, the choose space form that we're familiar with.

And then P is, as they write, a collection of tables containing dependencies between the variables as a set of matrices with

structure but it's kind of like g is the social network like who are the people and what are the edges and then p is describing their relationship in a way and uh

They also, then they write the tables P, the graph G is often represented by an adjacency matrix.

So that's a, you know, nodes by nodes, and then the cells are whether they're connected or not.

And that's exactly what we were getting at with the two spaces.

So yeah, it is pretty interesting.

And then the tables P contain the factorization for the joint probability distribution over the variables characterized for the directed acyclic graph, the DAG.

And so there's an equation that we're gonna use to jointly consider like the network nodes and edges G and all the dependencies on the network P. And so you could imagine if there was like, if you had a matrix of a hundred people and these 50 all knew each other, like they had dependencies between each other.

And then these 50 people all knew each other.

They had dependencies between each other.

We would want a method that could decompose that matrix

into a more factorizable, potentially nicer to deal with form.

Okay.

So here we visually see it.

And I think that the circles are all meant to be complete, but they look like I was wondering if it was a dashed line or something, but I think it's all, yeah.

So here we have a bunch of variables, T, W, Y, X, U, and Z. And then the authors very helpfully go through a few of the kinds of relationships that can link motifs of three variables.

And so here's W and Y. And so it's like, notice how W and Y are unconnected, but they both have a dependency towards X. So it's like W and Y are marginally independent, but only conditionally dependent if X is observed.

So if you didn't see X, you wouldn't know that W and Y had a dependency.

But then when you do observe X, you can see that, oh, X is actually being influenced by both of them.

That's called the head-to-head.

W and Z, marginally dependent because you could tell that potentially through a latent interactor variable X, if you had W and Z measured, you could tell that there was an influence.

But you wouldn't know as much about the influence of W on Z unless you knew about X. And then there's X and U, which is kind of like the backwards example of W and Y.

because X and U would be correlated in the real world.

Like you'd be pulling out Xs and pulling out Us and they'd be correlated.

So they're marginally dependent.

But then if you measured Y, if you observed Y, you would make them conditionally independent because you'd be able to correct for Y. And then as you pulled out corrected Xs and Us, they would be conditionally independent.

So the Bayesian graphical form

allows us to go from that p of t w etc etc so think about that there's six variables that could be six times six variables to consider like 36 connections but we can factor it into like the function of z given x because that's the only thing that z is conditioned on x is conditioned on w and y

u is conditioned on y, and then t is a lone variable.

So we've gotten all six variables into a...

way that is like a lot sparser it only specifies the parts that we actually need to care about in terms of the dependencies that actually exist so that's kind of the base network it's just using network thinking to talk about the really nuanced relationships between sets of variables so this could be like six demographic factors of a person and z could be the health outcome

And so then we can use this analysis to do statistical inference, just like we would with any other technique.

Anything to add on it, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Just the final formula down at the bottom really specifies, like, it separates out, like, z, z given x, right?

And so, and t is independent of everything, so you can really see, like, the conditional dependencies down here in this final equation.

x given w and y, and then u given y, so...


SPEAKER_00:
yeah it's almost like there's the graph representation then there's the adjacency matrix representation and then here's an equation representation so it's like a rosetta stone if you could have a technique that works on matrices and then you wanted to apply it to a network well then you need to connect networks and matrices but then you could definitely apply it there what about the pearl blanket with this cute picture


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So the Perl blanket is really traditionally is described by the set of nodes that shields a variable.

So in this case, variable A that's in the middle from the other nodes in the network.

So A can't interact with these nodes that are outside of the Perl blanket, which is the represented by this circular blanket.

So A can't interact with these other nodes without going through the nodes that are contained in the circle.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, and if you notice it has like the ones that are to the sides of A, it's because all these kinds of relationships are relevant.

So even the one that A, it does not directly connected to A, but it still is included within the blanket.

That's kind of important to note.

All right, so now we're gonna get to this figure, and it's kind of clever how I think the authors did it, because they introduced this in figure two, uncolored, and then we're gonna talk through some Fristen simulations, and then active inference in figure six, and then we're gonna return to this in figure seven with a new color scheme that will help really make their point clear.

So here they're taking this simple example, and they're just giving another example,

And here is their legend.

The grays are the observables.

So Y is observable.

Y1, Y2.

We're observing two things about the world, measuring two things.

All the Xs are hidden states.

The arrows are that Bayes net directed acyclic graph representation.

The dash node is this special node A10.

That's like our focal node.

And then the thick nodes are the blankets around X10.

So here, just like you had A and it was like its neighborhood was the blanket.

Here, we're gonna have the pearl blanket

as they write, thick lines are used for nodes constituting the pearl blanket for a selected node X10 depicted here with a dash border.

So it's kind of like a legal argument.

They're like saying, you know,

Would you agree that this is the appropriate use of the pearl blanket?

Because if you do think that this is a pearl blanket, you might find yourself in a trap in figure seven when they show you what this actually represents.

So it's like, okay, good.

This is what a pearl blanket is.

There's no real dissension.

This is where we're at with pearl blanket thinking.

And we've just specified some arbitrary network, you know, nothing in mind, just specified it.

And then they also define in 4.1 a little bit about how Perl blankets play a role in active inference.

And it's a super fascinating topic that is something we want to return to with the authors.

But if you notice that this queue distribution

that was the one that we were in control of.

And then that minimization, previously we were looking like at f of x. It was free energy minimization on states, hypotheses.

But here we're also including policies, pi, sequences of action.

So now we're doing free energy minimization

on policy and so that's what allows us to include the action in the loop with active inference so active inference isn't like just a two-stroke engine where we're going to do inference on states and then action selection in a second step

It's actually a loop that integrates action and inference into functions in a co-equal way.

And that's what one of the special pieces of active inference is.

As they write, something that classical formulations of variational inference in statistics and machine learning do not consider, instead assuming fixed observations or data.

So you read in the big data set, you do the free energy minimization, and there's your answer.

And then if you get new data, what do these companies do?

They rerun the optimization with the new data.

But this is actually like real time in the loop and it's also taking action.

Okay.

Any thoughts before on figure three?

Do you want to intro it or what?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so this figure, I think the papers on the next slide, actually, the figure that came out of the, it came out of this Friston 2013 paper.

And there's like a set of figures in this paper that were accepted from that paper.

And so this is the it's a primordial soup simulation that was done in the article by Friston and the larger cyan dots represent the location of each particle.

And then there are three smaller blue dots associated with each particle representing the electrochemical state of the particle.

So this is like on on how life came to came to kind of be right.

So that's the what's going to happen in the simulation.

So this is just the first.

And then we go on into the into the next figures from the paper.

Nice.


SPEAKER_00:
So take this one.

Yeah.

Yep.

Yeah.

So the simulation is just like the cyan.

It's kind of like the nucleus of an atom.

And then the blue dots, the little ones are like electrons floating around.

Okay.

So just, it's, it's not trying to be a physics simulation, but that's kind of what's happening.

Figure four here is, and they're electrically charged.

That's the electrochemical part.

Here's what they write.

So let's just say each of these cyan dots had a number, number 1 through 100, like an agent-based model.

Now we're going to element 1 through 120, I guess.

You can plot the adjacency matrix A based upon the coupling, that is dependencies, between the different particles at the final simulation T.

So you're gonna start this simulation, let it run out.

And then, okay, this one is very closely coupled to that one.

And this one is closely coupled to that one.

So number one is talking to four and number four is talking to 22.

And then you can take that matrix and you can just put a dot where you saw a dependency.

So if you saw some sort of behavioral dependency between the two, like an adjacency, you're gonna add a dot and then you're gonna rearrange the rows and the columns

by swapping, which preserves the information, rearrange them so that there's sort of falling out.

There's actually several, there's a pattern that falls out.

We see that there's a broad region of interactions over here.

And then in the bottom right,

there's like another kind of sub area of interaction.

And then on the very bottom right is like a very tight area of interaction where you see a bunch of dots over the 120.

So as they write, the adjacency matrix is a representation of the electrochemical interactions between particles because it's drawn because the adjacency is on the simulation, but can be interpreted as an abstract depiction of a Bayesian network.

And so we're taking the dependencies between these particles as they jostle around.

And this is what we're trying to do.

We're trying to almost like factorize it, separate nature at the joints, you know, map in the territory.

Okay, there's a border on the map, but is there a border on the territory?

And then plot it as a matrix.

And then there's some shading that's going to be suggestive of what role those elements

nodes are hypothesized to be playing so here's what they did just in a little more formal on slide 30 they used spectral well this is i think what frist in 2013 did yes uh spectral graph theory was used to identify the eight most densely coupled nodes which are defined as the internal states so y8 y dense cup okay right that's the question that's what we're discussing and those are going to be defined as internal states

just to skip to the slide, those are those blue ones right in the middle here.

So those are those core states back here.

Given those internal states, the Markov blanket is then found through tracing the parents, children, and co-parents of children in the network.

Sounds like a preschool.

As an extra interpretive step, and that's part of what this discussion is about, how interpretive is this?

Like interpretive dance interpretive or like interpreter at the UN?

The nodes in this Markov blanket can be further separated into sensory and active states.

The sensory states correspond to the parents of the internal states.

So that's incoming info, not that they birthed the internal states, but the sense states are the ones that have an upstream dependency on the internal states.

And the active states correspond to the children of the internal states and their co-parents.

So again, not that the active states are simply birthed by internal states, but that they have downward flowing statistical dependency.

States that are not internal states or part of the Markov blanket are then called external states.

So we're using this partitioning where first you identified dense couplings, then traced out parents and co-parents and children, and then everything that's left is external states.

And so you recolor that simulation

from figure three, here it is uncolored.

And now we're gonna recolor it with this new color code where we've identified the blue densely coupled nodes, and then the active states, and then the sensory states, which are sort of on a frontier

with the uh teal states the cyan the external so it's almost like you have the internal you know let's just imagine it's like the nervous system and then it's swaddled in the active states and then on the outside of the sense of the active states or the sensory states and those interface directly with the world

So that's kind of the tantalizing nature of this model would be like, wow, if it really just fell out of a simulation that you can get self-organization like that, wouldn't that be cool?

But what is the issue here, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, it's kind of arbitrary.

So they said a third of the electrochemical states from the very beginning of the simulation did not interact, right?

So that establishes this non-equilibrium

system, and I think that, you know, the issue then comes from assigning these interactions to internal, external, active, and sensory states that may or may not have some kind of dependence on one another.

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
As they write here, the simulation assumes that by viewing the system through the formalism of the Markov blanket, plus some additional assumptions about the separation of states, the ones that we kind of walked through just a second ago, you can uncover hidden properties of the target system, which is then said to quote, instantiate or possess a Markov blanket.

And then this is the map territory.

The procedure of attributing to the territory, which is the actual dynamical system,

what is a property of the map, which is the scientist doing inference on the dependencies and then cutting it at eight nodes and then using this other approach to make the Markov blanket.

It's a property of the map and it's a clear example of the reification fallacy, treating something abstract as something concrete without further justification.

That's not the only way reification works, but it's one key piece of it.

And so in other words, it's like you go in with a Markov blanket hammer and your secondary

pipeline for identifying parents and children and then you find it because it's defined for any system you're going to be able to get a markup blanket using that protocol and then

Look at this.

Have you really discovered something about this dynamical system by separating it into this partition when actually all of the particles are doing the same jostling motion?

So it's not like we have the influencer nodes here.

These are just densely coupled ones.

And so they propose in this same paragraph,

proposed to distinguish between pearl blankets to refer to this standard epistemic or like statistical use of the Markov blankets and Fristian blankets to refer to this new metaphysical construct.

And they also give a shout out to Martin Beale in the paper.

And so we're kind of coming back to this map territory distinction.

On the map side, we have epistemic, pearl blankets, Bayesian statistics,

but no philosophical power.

And then what they're attributing to the territory would be metaphysics.

And it would be the kinds of things that the Frist and Blanket is making claims about.

And I think my question was, can we do that action in the loop without metaphysics?

Because it seems like there's two innovations in or differences between the Pearl Blanket in its sort of normal statistical use and the way Fristian's using it.

First, he separates sense and action, but also he's making metaphysical or ontological claims.

So I'm just wondering, like, are the ontological claims separable from taking a control theory perspective on Bayesian statistics?

That's what we would like to find out.

So then Blue, you copied this image over.

What do you like about it or what did you see in it?


SPEAKER_01:
So I just thought it was like a nice pictorial representation as opposed to this primordial soup that gets a little bit hairball of what we have as internal states, which were back in the Friston picture, the central states.

dark blue, most highly connected nodes, through the internal states and then the external states, which are separated from these blanket states.

And so that's where this pink dashed line is, surrounded, that's labeled with these beads.

So this is like the frist and blanket contains the active states and the sensory states that may be interacting with each other.

And then this frist and blanket is what separates the internal states from the external states.

And they take it in quite a literal sense, like the boundary of a cell and so forth.

So separating the internal from the external is the Frist and Blinkit.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice, and let's connect this to figure four and then the kinds of things that we wanted to discover there.

Looking at this as a graph of Bayesian variables, it's like active states, they influence external states.

So this is that coupling.

So it's almost like external states, they don't connect to internal states at all.

That's kind of like missing a corner on the graph.

So we have nodes everywhere, you know, there's cells in your hand and there's cells across the wall, but how can we separate nature at the joints

Maybe we could make measurements, find the statistical dependencies and then carve those dependencies into densely connected internal states and then incoming states that are upstream and outgoing states that are downstream.

And then we might have a new way to do Bayesian modeling on systems that are on a continuum.

or as part of a really complex process.

And figure five, yep, we already had that.

I guess we put it twice.

And yes, 4.3.

This is sort of the man's search for meaning.

Why and how have Markov blankets been reified to act as parts of the target system?

How did we get here?

And where this technical idea became reified.

So people thinking that there's support in the literature saying, oh yeah, Markov blankets, it's in the literature.

There's real measurement support for Markov blankets.

That's reification.

of delineating spatial temporal boundaries rather than formal tools intended for scientific representation and statistical analysis.

When did the map become conflated with the territory?

Because like everyone's familiar how we use linear regression on healthcare data, but then no one goes back and says, well, then you're a linear regression.

So it's a little bit like if somebody were using Markov blankets on health data and then said, now you're a Markov blanket.

Or is it?

I'm not saying it's exactly the same, but that's the rhetoric of what is being put out here.


SPEAKER_01:
It would be like the line delineating the healthy from the sick is Markov blanket.


SPEAKER_00:
It's a line.

There's actually a line.

And then they, right.

So again,

people should read these papers.

They're fun to think about.

And there's a lot more that we're not getting to go into in the .zero, but they write basically,

Perhaps surprisingly, many authors in the field are seemingly not aware of this process of reification, and this has led to the conflation of several different kinds of boundaries in the literature.

Markov blankets are characterized alternatively as statistical boundaries, causal boundaries, spatial boundaries, epistemic boundaries, and autopoetic boundaries.

Each characterization is treated as somehow equivalent to and interchangeable with the others.

Now, it's rare that someone does the Grand Slam where they totally conflates all of them.

But then there are papers here and there where, oh, it's causal and it's spatial.

And then it's spatial and it's epistemic and it's statistical and it's causal.

And through this web of formalisms, we can get in a tangle.

to kind of, any thoughts about that, Lynn?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just that the paper itself contains like many quotes from other papers where they use the Markov blanket or the Friston blanket in very much like a statistical and instrumentalist sense and then turn around and use it in a very realist sense.

So there's many like examples of that illustrated through the paper that trace back through the literature.


SPEAKER_00:
good point and those are the parts that we didn't quote in this dot zero but there's many pages so if someone's reading it and they're like wait they don't do that in the literature read the paper because that's where they mention it and this is from the live stream number 15 where we had uh we were discussing the paper of vaness and hippolyto and we introduced

this discussion around realism and instrumentalism and what those authors had written was basically realism and instrumentalism concern the models and statistical manipulations that make up the fep whether they are thought to be used and manipulated by the systems under scrutiny independent of scientific inquiry realism the tree falls in the forest

Does it make a sound?

Realism, yes, there's a real tree.

It really did fall.

It really did make a sound.

Or conversely, whether they are thought to be scientific tools wrought by humans in specific sociocultural environments to study particular systems, instrumentalism.

So that's like, well, no, sound means somebody has to hear it.

So you don't know if the tree is real or it really didn't make a sound.

And the whole question is, where does free energy principle, is it about what systems are doing?

Realism, when we don't look?

or is it about us modeling systems no matter how they look that's instrumentalism and that brings us to figure six where they show a classic sensory motor loop so it looks like it's an active inference loop and that's where they're going with this but their whole point is that um

Although the figure does not use directed edges to signify causal influence, it is not strictly a Bayesian graph as it depicts cyclic sets of circular dependencies, some between pairs and an overall loop containing all components.

This was quite interesting because first off, it points out that yeah, active inference didn't invent the internal external or the action sense idea.

We're using different models and we're recombining them, but there is this cycle, right?

There's also in active inference, more of an emphasis on the internal states and the external states as they have their own endogenous dynamics, but that could be part of these models too.

And then it's true that it's not a directed acyclic graph if there are loops, local or global loops, but what about implementations that have time steps where you can break these loops?

Like if you compute it in this order, just a thought, like does it really violate, how badly does it violate some of the assumptions of directed acyclic graphs?

But I don't know.

Any thoughts are good for seven.


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know.

I don't have the answer for you.

If I did, I mean, I don't know that necessarily putting a blanket over the sensation and the action states, the sensory and the active states, like putting that in a box, like does that break the acyclic graph thing?

I mean, I don't know that that necessarily breaks it enough to make it somehow valid either, right?

Like, I don't know.

It is a cycle, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

So now...

We return to the figure that we saw before, and this is where they now strike.

So figure two, remember, was like, surely you agree this is how a Perl blanket would be deployed on this graph.

Speak now or forever hold your peace.

And then now it's going to come back to bite some people who may have not expected where it was going to come.

So before, they were highlighting that X10 node.

And now they're going to color, according to Fristen's scheme, they're going to color the nodes.

So it's colored like figure five, but on the figure that they introduced earlier with X10 still as a focal node.

But then they're going to show that if you have a different focal node, X9, not only are different nodes included, but they're categorized differently.

which isn't a problem for the Perl blanket, because it's like, oh, if you measure variable A and B, then this one is the child or the parent, depending on what you measured in that bigger graph.

But if you're going to have a realist interpretation of what these nodes are,

out of luck because one is going to be an active state for one and a sensory state for another and then if you are going to say well it doesn't matter if it's an active state or sensory state like they're all doing it for each other it's equivalent to the pearl blanket phrasing so what they write is if you're going to have a sensory motor interpretation which is not the only option

This suggests that the sensory motor blankets are Markov blankets applied under specific set of assumptions, and it can't be traced to standard uses of Markov blankets in variational inference.

So basically, depending on what your hidden variable of interest is,

you compute a different blanket around it.

So that is problematic for realist interpretations because depending on what you were doing inference on, you might variously find that the membrane of a cell or a measurement from the membrane of a cell was a sensory state because it was incoming for something else.

but it could also be an action state because it's outgoing of something else, but then it would be internal to another set of things.

And so if we want to make realist claims or interpretations about blanket states and internal external states, that's an issue.


SPEAKER_01:
So is the issue that we haven't figured out how to nest these models yet?

I mean, I think that it makes sense that the outgoing is incoming for another agent in the model so that we just haven't figured out the nesting properly yet, appropriately, or that each nest is its own blanket state.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
I agree.

I'm an optimist as well.

let's see eight but this is this is where they they really go for it and this one i thought was just very clever and funny so the delayed figure you know with the intermission to convince you lol you now eight so now they're going to go into a graph that oh total coincidence it looks like the left side so here on the right side you know we were talking oh x10 x9 but we never talked about this left one that looks like california

but let's look at it now.

So.

Exactly.

On the left, a Bayesian network where ID and ISUBP denote the motor intentions of a doctor and the patient respectively.

So that's this, these ones on the top two.

H is a medical intervention with a hammer.

C is a cortical motor column and S are spinal neurons.

Movement is M. And then K is a different way that the leg could have been observed to move like somebody could have moved it or gravity could have changed.

So again, M is the movement.

That's the observable movement.

This is the abstract Bayesian net on the left in A. In B is one possible action pattern.

which is that the patient goes to the cortical motor command, the IP, and then H is the medical intervention with a hammer.

And then that results in no motor behavior.

But then here you do have the motor behavior observed

but it comes about a different way.

Rather than H, the intervention as a co-parent, you have K this other way, like somebody picking up the leg and moving it.

In the middle and on the right, the same network is partitioned using a naive Friston blanket with different choice of internal states, C and S respectively.

So if your internal state is the cortical neurons

you're going to think that the basically active states are the spinal neurons, which is how people talk about it.

So it's not like this is like a, the theory is blown out or anything.

It's like saying the spinal neurons are the active states of the cortical neurons.

And then the movement is, if your focal node internal is the spinal neurons, then the active state is what we would call in realism, the real active state.

So it's kind of like saying, again, depending on what node you're focused on, different nodes are going to be categorized as sense active internal and external.

I want to say that's how we've been thinking about it, that depending on which side of the line you're on, that's going to be internal external.

But the point is it provides problems for realist interpretations of any single Markov blanket.

because we have to acknowledge that the markov blankets and especially how the states are classified is conditional so it's like is the bicep an active state or is this an active state it's like well if you're doing inference on this yes but if you're doing inference on that no

So it's hard to have a realist interpretation, even though there are times where if you define something internally as something that's truly on the inside of something, it might be that the active states truly line up with what's on the outside of it.

But that isn't the full generality of this Bayesian network approach.

And that's like a broken clock is right twice a day, and it doesn't actually get as general as it could be.


SPEAKER_01:
This makes me think of like the broken knee, like the phantom limb.

It takes me back to that.

Like what if the sensory neurons are activated for the leg to move, but there is no leg to move, right?

Like then what?


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

So, okay, next one.

They give a little bit of recent history.

So if Twitter's too fast and textbooks are too slow, this is the history speed for you.

Beale, Pollock, and Kanai, 2020, questioned some of the technical assumptions underlying the use of Markov blankets by Friston.

And since then, the idea of the Friston blanket being understood as a distinct construct has gained traction in the literature.

And we're actually looking forward to having Martin discuss that with us in about two weeks.

So again, it will be really interesting to hear like,

How did you come to the position where you were getting at these technicalities and critiquing it?

And where does action fit in?

Where does philosophy fit in?

Where do these other things that Friston is bringing in?

And anything to say on this part or...


SPEAKER_01:
Only the question that I raised at the beginning, where does language fit in, right?

Like to what extent is the problem or the issue that's being raised like a function of the language that we're using?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

And in this paragraph, they make another subtle point that shows why when the language is uncertain, there can be a lot of drift underlying.

They say in a recent paper, Friston blankets are formalized in terms of constraints on sparse couplings.

And then they're identified using

read the technical details, the non-zero components of the Hessians using some other last names, and that is taking the construct, according to the authors, far away from the pearl blanket origins.

And so they're saying you wouldn't make that kind of swap in the underlying mechanics unless you were working with the physical domain of what's really there.

So that's an interesting point.

Will be cool to hear from the authors.

Here on the next slide is kind of a closing remark

by the authors.

And this is kind of a meta point.

And the meta point is actually the relationship between action and inference, like of an organism, and then scientists modeling their world.

So it's not the first person who's made that comparison.

You got physical foraging, you got information foraging, but they're saying basically there's a lot of similarities between perceptual inference and scientific inference.

both use a previously learned model of the world and set of observations to infer the causal structure of the unobserved outside world.

And this was like the triple meta is model-based cognitive neuroscience is in a special place.

It makes models of how animals model their environments.

A cognitive neuroscientist uses both behavioral and neural data to infer the most likely model that the agent's brain implements.

There's nothing wrong with this doubling up of modeling relations as long as one is conceptually careful.

One needs to distinguish between the properties of the environment

properties of the agent's model of the environment and properties of a scientist's model of the agent modeling its environment.

And that's the third level.

And that's why it's unsurprising actually, almost in retrospect, that FEP arose from cognitive neuroscience and neuroimaging with EEG and fMRI,

because it doesn't come from, we're going to use physics to find the grand unifying theory.

It actually came from a, we're making measurements about how agents reduce their uncertainty about their model of the world.

And it's that that gives you the triple loop, which I think is like quite interesting about how it's nested.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, and here we are adding like another layer to the list, like thinking about how, like trying to, you know, criticizing the model with which the scientists are using to model the agents.

It's just models all the way down.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, so what are the implications for cognitive science in humans?

And this part right here, properties of how the scientists model their agent, modeling their environment, you could replace scientist with researcher or data scientist or machine learning algorithm.

This really matters what people take into account when they design their algorithms and when they make algorithms about other cognitive agents.

because that constrains in ways that are sometimes obvious and sometimes not obvious.

If you only had one variable for a user on your website, how likely they are to buy something, that was your variable, you're gonna set up a different algorithm.

So it's the properties of how the scientist models the situation that really matter.

And it has implications for cognitive science that when we're studying humans and non-humans and non-animals,

And Blue's big question.


SPEAKER_01:
This is actually the big question that the authors raised.

So they asked in the paper if Bayesian networks and Markov blankets are the right kinds of conceptual tools to delineate the sensory motor boundaries of agents and living organisms.

So the authors brought this up within the paper.

I thought it was just important to highlight that because I don't know.

I think if we're...

If you go out to a scale, like if you have an image and you start to coarse-grain that image, building representations of the image, building representations of the representations, of the representations, of the representations, eventually you can't see the picture anymore at all.

And the point is to make it easier to understand, not to make it so blurry that nobody understands it at all, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

This is what brings them to the distinction of inference with...

wait, is that even the right, it's, yeah, oh yeah.

Inference with and inference within.

I was thinking, I was getting really, you know, inference of a model, but inference with a model, the distinction between the two blanket constructs as they're positing them, I'll shrink our little video.

Can then be easily identified once we look at who appears to be performing the inference and what system that inference is performed on.

So they go through four kinds of networks.

We're not gonna go through it here, but if people are interested in the technicalities here, it's really worth thinking about what's the difference between the generative model and the generative process.

So like I can have a generative model of blue in my head.

So when she's speaking, I'm doing generative inference on her syntax, but then that's not the generative process, which is the actual underlying person.

So this is just a nice,

very rigorous way to break down when we're doing inference on a model versus inference on a process.

And okay, 42.

All of this points towards a fundamental dilemma for anyone wanting to use Markov blankets to make substantial philosophical claims about biological and cognitive systems, which is what we take proponents of free energy principle to be wanting to do.

so agree or disagree you know if you disagree you can write a paper or you can come on active stream but that's the claim of the authors and so that is what we kind of got excited to learn about

And they then come back to this with versus within.

And they say basically in inference with a model, the graphical model is an epistemic tool.

So that's like, I'm going out to the forest with my machete.

I'm gonna use it as a tool as I go out.

Versus inference within a model, the scientist disappears from the scene.

becoming a mere spectator of the unraveling inference show before their eyes.

The way that's written makes the authors sound a little bit sort of dismissive of that being a likely approach.

It's almost like, well, we wouldn't want that to happen or it can't happen.

So scientists can only do inference with models.

Now the scientist as the body is the inference within a model.

Like the inference is happening within the science body or within the scientist's exocortex or within their community.

But that's very different when you're talking about the real system, the scientist at the desk.

That's the system that is doing inference.

But inference with a model is the instrumentalist take.

Okay.

And this is just a final slide that just gives some closing thoughts.

And this was interesting because they mentioned that there are simulations like the Game of Life

which have been enormously productive in many domains.

And so basically they say that it might be an interesting way of modeling emergent processes in complex systems, but it won't support any metaphysical claims

about frist and blankets and then they say we will not pursue this idea any further here but offer it as a more modest perhaps instrumental interpretation that some proponents of the fep and active inference might be inclined to adopt in order to avoid any stronger commitments

So that's in some ways where we feel like we're sitting, which is we're approaching active inference instrumentally, and then we'll see what happens with the other claims.

But it seems like we can pursue it instrumentally.

And I guess that's a modest proposal.

And then they just summarize.

So overall, nice paper.

relatively good length, a lot of figures, clear arguments, rigorous philosophy and math.

So it was good times.


SPEAKER_01:
And like a good coverage of the literature and, you know, a trace through the history of the methods underlying the FPP.

It was good.


SPEAKER_00:
Do you have any other closing thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Only that maybe inference within a model is actually possible if you're using a robot that's programmed to do inference, right?

Like the inference, if the action is to do inference, if that's how it works, then that's inference within a model possible.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, it will definitely be really interesting to hear from the authors, hear from everybody who wants to join on the stream.

So Blue, thanks a lot for joining.

This was a great discussion.

Thanks everyone for watching and we'll see you later.

Bye.

Bye.

Thank you.

## szCSh8pVEa4

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome to actinflab this is the active inference live stream number 20.1 on april 20th 2021 so a lot of repeating digits and i'm looking forward to this conversation with all of you so thanks for joining

welcome to the active inference lab everyone we're a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at the links that are on this slide this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams like muting when we're not talking and raising our hands so we can hear from everyone on the stack

Hello.

Greetings.

Today, in number 20.1, we're in the first of two discussions that we're going to be having as a group regarding this paper, The Emperor's New Markov Blankets.

And so the goal of these discussions is to learn, discuss, be curious, and find out how we got here and where we're going and why we're doing that.

And we're just going to be having a nice conversation with the authors, which are just really appreciative that they've joined.

So we're going to just go to the introductions and warm up, and then we will just be able to jump around and see where the conversation takes us.

So I'm Daniel and I'm in California.

I will pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_01:
Hey, I'm Shannon.

I'm usually in California, but I'm in South Dakota since the pandemic.

Are we going straight into warmup questions or just names in around the room?


SPEAKER_00:
You can say hello or give a warmup thought.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Um, yeah, so I'm excited today.

I'm excited to explore whether or not we can use Markov blankets to describe groups of people and social dynamics.

Um, and I tried to do this in a project before and abandoned it pretty quickly.

And reading this paper, I think if I had taken the pearl blanket formulation, which I'm sure we'll get into talking about later, it would have been a lot more helpful.

So I'm excited to discuss that today.

I'll pass that to Stephen.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello, Stephen here.

I'm in Toronto.

It's nice to be here and thanks a lot for this paper because I think it's gonna be really interesting to have all these bits of the jigsaw put together.

And I'm actually quite interested in the paper because I'm trying to work out when to use the concepts of like the Markov blanket to help describe processes and when just to maybe talk about hidden states and not focus so much on the blanket part.

So that's quite useful for me.

And I will pass it over to Dave.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Dave.

I'm in Baguio City, 120 miles north of Manila.

It's the blazing summertime.

We're a mile high city, so it might get as high as 80 degrees Fahrenheit.

I'm retired from information technology and my background is in the cybernetics of learning and teaching.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

And we have two authors here.

So maybe first we'll go to Chris and then Jelle, and just feel free to introduce yourself, the project, the collaboration, however you'd like.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you.

So thanks a lot for inviting us.

I'm Chris Dolega.

I'm currently a postdoc at the Ruhl Universität in Bochum, Germany.

I'm joining from Berlin.

I'm currently working on a research grant on Bayesian cognition and conspiracy theories.

I'm specifically interested in how proponents of conspiracy theories discount new evidence that contradict their beliefs.

And this paper, from my perspective, grew out of a really long, I guess, friendship with Jelle, we can say that.

We've met a long time ago at a conference in the Netherlands in 2014, I believe, on Bayesian cognition.

And we were both fascinated by this new theory framework of predictive processing.

And I remember that already there, there was a seed of some kind of doubt in me or kind of a worry planted because it was a conference on probabilistic approaches to cognition.

Everyone there was supposed to be a Bayesian in one way or another.

And suddenly it turned out that basically no one agrees with each other and everyone uses the terms in a different way.

And I feel like this paper is, in a way,

contextualizing that experience for us.

But yeah, sorry, I'll let Jelle speak now.


SPEAKER_09:
Great.

So I'm Jelle Bruyneberg.

I work at Macquarie University in Sydney, but also due to pandemic reasons located in Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

And so my new research project is on the philosophical foundations of the attention economy.

But my PhD was really in

on the free energy principle and embodied recognition.

And indeed, this paper grew out of a group of people who are colleagues and friends and acquainted with each other's work, all roughly on predictive processing and free energy principle and active inference, but from slightly different directions.

And I think it was sparked by a kind of combination of

fmsa kind of curiosity and skepticism about some of the developments that were that were that were happening and have been happening already in these since a long time since since i guess 2013 or 14 when some of these papers originally came out and kind of slowly got taken up in more and more heavy philosophical projects and i think the more and more we read those papers the more and more we grew interested in and skeptical at the same time

and this was really a project to try to finally kind of nail down what was bugging us and perhaps how it might be salvaged or what to do.

So I'm happy this is now pre-printed and I'm very happy we get to discuss this.

I was this morning doing the dishes and on my headphone listening to your exposition of my paper and that was just a very

great and mind-blowing experience where somebody explicate those ideas and not being one of the authors.

So I think that's on behalf of all of us, that's just fantastic to have happen.

I think actually there is a third author latent there.

So I'll try to pass on the baton to Manuel and see if he does anything or responds, otherwise we just continue.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, hello, everyone.

I'm just here trying to lurk around for a little bit.

It's past 11 p.m.

in Tokyo, where I am right now.

So, yeah, I'll try to, you know, stay along for a bit.

But, yeah, clearly, I'll leave the other two guys, like, who are much fresher than me right now to lead the discussion.

As for me, I have more of a background, I guess, in computer science, some maths here and there.

Now I'm doing some work on control theory and estimation theory applied to neuroscience.

A lot of methods probably right now, which is the main reason I guess I started working on active inference and related ideas.

And yeah, as the other two guys have already said, you know, this paper was kind of born out of, you know, our own curiosity and, you know, questions regarding like what the framework actually does and what it can do and what it cannot do.

So, you know, then I'll leave Jelle to, you know, lead the discussion from here on.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thanks everyone for joining.

It's great to have just the authors and kind of read between the citations and then actually enliven between the citations so that we can ask questions that were maybe alluded to and hear your fresh perspectives, what kind of feedback you've gotten on the paper, etc.

So yeah, Yela, where would you like to start?

Otherwise, there's just a bunch of places we can jump in.


SPEAKER_09:
Great.

I'll just briefly give some introductory comments.

I'll keep it brief because I think we're all roughly on the same page having read the paper.

So as I was saying, this project got started out from a combination of curiosity and skepticism about some new applications of active inference and the free energy principle.

and so i think as i understood it before it's it was a kind of functional lens to try to understand cognitive systems and in that sense offering a kind of unifying perspective and all sorts of different cognitive constructs in the cognitive sciences and i was already kind of very interested in that and what we've what what we've seen in the in in the last few years i think are one applications uh or at least attempts to apply it to

uh kind of the harder questions so the hard question of consciousness intentionality etc which is more than this kind of functional lens an application to systems that are not necessarily cognitive so living systems as a whole or even like global global systems or social systems um

and then as well using this terminology not only to as a functional lens to to understand systems that you already deem cognitive but also to use those tools themselves to do that democratic work so to decide what is a living or another living system what is a cognitive or another cognitive system so to somehow employ those tools of active inference to answer these kind of questions

And I think we were all interested in the set of questions and seeing how that could work and whether those arguments really hold.

And I think to do that, we needed to have a combination of, one, conceptual arguments, two, formal arguments, and three, philosophical analysis, and kind of combine those in the same paper.

And I think that also made it a very challenging paper to write, to see how all these different parts of the paper fit together.

And perhaps it's also made it a challenging paper to read, but we'll probably get to that in a moment.

And there's something here, I think, that kind of bogs the whole field.

Some of us were just a few hours ago on social media, and there's a new paper

now among others by Ezequiel Di Paolo and Evan Thompson and Randall Beer.

And I think one of the more meta discussions was like how much mathematics, how much conceptual work do you need to actually contribute to the more conceptual questions you want to ask?

And I think that this is something that's intrinsically in tension here within the literature, that you kind of need to have a very technical understanding

to head towards this question in the first place.

But then if you do that, perhaps you lose out on the more conceptual issues or you lose out also part of your readership because it's only a few people that understand it.

So that's something exciting there about FEP as a whole.

And I think we tried at least to be as accessible as possible in writing this paper, while at the same time supporting our arguments with the formalisms that we thought were necessary.

And that ultimately brought us to writing this.

And the thing

I think at the moment we have a lot of pre-prints that came out in the last few months, all kind of trying to target and trying to criticize these developments in your principle.

So I think some of them you've discussed here already.

So Mel Andrews' papers, Thomas van Espen's papers, I think Pieter de Raga has a good paper on this as well, along with the Thompson paper.

So I'm really curious to see how in the next few months, half year, say, this debate will pan out.

I think there's a number of very interesting kind of proposals now.

And yeah, also keep checking this lab to see how you treat those other papers.

And we're really looking forward to that.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Very interesting.

Blue, do you want to just say hi, give any introductory thoughts if you'd like?


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

Good morning.

I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant from New Mexico, and I really enjoyed this paper.

I don't know if you got to see like our contextualization video, but it was really good.


SPEAKER_00:
cool so i'll be kind of taking some notes everybody can also jump into the document and that was a big question that you raised there yellow um how much mathematics is required to understand or work with free energy principle and active inference and then which are the sort of skeletal elements and the sinews so to speak of the math and then which parts might be secondary or not

are you back yep for some reason there might be a few seconds of uh of uh just flipping but yes sorry just yeah what um elements of the math are required to understand and work with these topics and then of course the major question of your paper and some of these other recent papers we've discussed is whatever the mathematics are what kinds of philosophical or metaphysical claims can we reach validly or or invalidly um


SPEAKER_04:
yeah any other big questions or thoughts people can just raise their hand with a little bottom left icon so yeah we'll do stephen and then blue yeah just one thing building on the bit what daniel said there is active influence in biological systems could be present as a way for

life to function and evolve but there's also possibilities that the active influence process could create structures or networks which then form other systems which may not have to be so um based on ergodicity in the same way it might be like you have the skeletal system which gives you locomotion so i suppose in some ways i'd be interested in that

um way that you know we're not tied to everything being active inference in terms of how we can understand its applications even though maybe at the core it has to be there at some level cool thanks anyone can give a thought on that or blue go for it


SPEAKER_03:
So just to kind of, yeah, to, I don't know.

So Steven, what you just said, like active inference is present in biological systems.

I think, you know, we need to be careful before we pick a side over instrumentalism versus realism.

Like is active inference present in the living system?

Maybe not, maybe it's just the way that we use to represent a living system or to model a living system or like our best guess so far, right?

I mean, I think that the way that the science evolves, you know, in terms of how we think about biological systems processing information will, you know, I mean, active inference is what we have now, but it probably won't be what we have in a hundred years if we survive a hundred years.

um but but my question was uh you know in reading the paper i really it was brought to my attention and and steven's question so perfectly illustrates this so so to there's a great degree of semantics that's involved um and our choice of language i think really shapes how we um perceive the intentions of others

So is that the caution, or is that the tale, or is that the seedy underbelly of the paper?

Or to what role do you really think that language, a lot of these things could be fixed with language?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Cool.

Jelle, you want to go for it?

And then Shannon, I see your hand.


SPEAKER_09:
Great.

So those are two great questions.

And just to clarify the last one, when you say language, do you mean the kind of concepts that we are using or language as a whole as a system?


SPEAKER_03:
So, I mean, like how Steven just said, you know, systems have active inference.

Like systems have active inference.

Like I have a heart and a kidney and a liver, but I don't know that I necessarily have active inference, right?

So it's just our choice of language in that.

So not language as a whole, but language like carefully selected word choice could maybe prevent a lot of the conflict.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah.

I think so, and I guess generally you might think that lots of philosophy is actually a kind of linguistic therapy, right?

Just trying to be very concise and using the right kind of terminology so that you don't slip into confusions that then will cloud your thinking also.

So I think there's definitely some of that on the background in this paper.

But it's not only language, right?

There's also the formal models and how to interpret those formal models.

there in the translation between the technical use of this terminology and the kind of everyday intuitions it gives us, I think there is indeed room for a lot of mistakes and slippage.

I mean, the notion of blanket is one, right?

I mean, I have a blanket on my bed.

and that has that has a spatial dimension and so and you can be either on top of it or below it etc and so when you then use the notion of a Markov blanket this is the first intuition that people will have and it turns out that actually no these kind of things don't have such a kind of existence right they don't actually they're not really spatial things in the world they're they are just aspects of mathematical model and so indeed in kind of there the

language is one, but also just a particular way in which you understand your concepts, either as everyday things or as technical things.

I think that there's a lot of those slippages there.

And I guess the whole literature is full with notions of model or inference.

And then it's very unclear whether something is an inference as a technical notion or inference as a philosophy of mind notion or inference or something else.

So, yeah, there are a lot of those

things on the background.

And I think that that also points to the question that Steven was asking in terms of like, you can think about structures for locomotion and so like, how does this relate to active inference?

And so this is, I guess this is, I mean, perhaps this is a topic that's not really there in this paper so much, but there's a huge literature in active inference and how to understand the notion of model and whether agents are models of the environment.

And one way to see that is thinking like, well, there is an eco-niche around us, and we have, through selection that might not be understood through active inference, have been equipped with a particular kind of neural system, particular kind of body that allows us to engage with that environment.

And in that sense,

kind of things like the structures that facilitate locomotion could be just as part, just as well be part of that model, but then model in a very different sense as it's typically used in cooking designs.

Yeah, so that's also, that's very much how we understand model really shapes how you will answer these kinds of questions about how active inference and locomotion or so relate to each other.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that.

And it's almost like the word semantic, ironically, carries a double meaning because people will dismiss a discussion.

Well, that's a semantic discussion.

On one sense, they mean you're talking about words, words, words, like you're kind of just saying random stuff.

We're debating about a word.

We're talking about the same thing.

It's semantic.

It's only semantic.

But semantics are meaning.

And so I think I've blipped out or maybe for some people for a second, but it's just so funny how semantic refers to both the big sense of meaning and the small sense of the word.

And we're all reducing our uncertainty by actually going into the details.

What is the Markov versus the Pearl versus the Friston blanket?

And can we just have a common reference point so that when somebody says I'm using Friston blanket in the sense of this paper, then it will preempt some of these


SPEAKER_01:
broader um valid or um sort of spurious questions so cool shannon and then anyone else who raises their hand yeah so i'll try to make this comment without too much rambling um but we've talked with with mel um andrews with ns um hippolyta and thomas venice and we've been discussing like on what level the system implements

active inference or has Markov blankets in the system versus when it's useful for us to describe it that way.

So that realism versus instrumental debate.

And something that came up in the conversation with Ines, something that's easy for me is to claim that there is no Markov blanket necessarily in a group of people that are interacting.

If we look at clusters of fans in a stadium,

I might as a researcher identify this cluster of fans because they're interacting in a certain way with each other that's different from this other cluster of fans.

And then some game event happens and that ends up being some sort of coupling parameter.

And now we can describe this as one unified system, one unified cluster of fans, of people.

And I am pretty happy with saying that there is not a real boundary in the world between group A, group B, or that emerges over

um, the larger group C. But I really want to say that that happens in the brain.

Um, and I really want to say that our, like the neurons in our brains are interpreting the world as if there are boundaries and that's forming boundaries on neural processes.

Um, like there's this specific, people are talking about manifolds a lot lately and there's this similar, um, fuzziness and what it means to be a neural manifold, but like there's a certain

manifold that's associated with observing this feature of the world.

And I wonder if you have any intuitions from this distinction.

Can we, can we be realists about Markov blankets or the fringe principle or active inference as applied to neural states?

I mean, that's where these theories started while being anti-realist about applying these to dynamics in the world, like groups of people.


SPEAKER_00:
Great question.

Also, just a technical note, like, I'm not sure what's happening with the Active Inference YouTube or Jitsi or whatever, but clearly my internet is working because we're having the video call, but the stream glitched, so...

can just continue not on live stream and then i'll just re-upload the full quality and it won't have any glitches so i'll figure it out for next week but it's all good it won't be um fully live but we can just still think of it the same way which is the vast majority of people viewing it anyway so yeah sorry about that i'll figure it out for next time but um thanks shannon for the question about the groups so

Anyone want to speak to the group question and about whether groups can be properly said to be having or modeled by these blankets?

Or where is that?


SPEAKER_08:
Sorry, Daniel, you glitched for a second.

In the meanwhile, Jelle asked if I want to answer the group question and I think I would actually.

I have some thoughts about this.

I think one important thing about the free energy framework, especially how it's been developed recently,

is that people often like people in for instance close circle like Ines Hipolito for example has caused the paper recently with him about mark of blankets in which they talk about viewing different systems as agents

So they talk about the neuron as an agent.

They talk about the whole organism as an agent.

And it kind of scaffolds across multiple time scales and spatial scales.

And I think

our paper leaves it open to some extent, leaves the question open whether there is some kind of scale on which if we fix the parameters of the model, the models can be validated and they can produce new predictions or new empirical findings in such a way where we would be forced to accept that perhaps on that particular scale there really are

blankets in the pristine sense or like at least that these models are so good at predicting certain events or findings or phenomena on a given scale that we would be inclined to give them a realist interpretation so i think this is still on the table and it's very much open it's just that

given the ambitions and the scope of the free energy framework and the fact that they start with this assumption of viewing different systems on different scales as agents.

Right now, it's just not really clear which level, so to speak, this way of framing phenomena would be validated in a realist context.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Really, what warrants or what licenses, what evidence will we need for realist interpretations?

And it's not even just a yes, no, because there's kind of a few kinds of realism.

As you pointed out, there's different notions of boundary.

And so a group might be very well said to have an informational boundary, like this jitsi.

People who are not in the jitsi are not part of this informational boundary.

But then in some other sense,

the group may not fall so neatly under the definition of a realist interpretation of a blanket.

Manuel?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So I was a bit slow, I guess, after Stephen and Blue actually asked a couple of questions earlier.

So I'm briefly going to go back to that and then try to reconnect to what Shannon was actually talking about.

As for, I guess, the loose sense in which we might want to interpret active inference, I think there is, I don't know, relatively low risk in just, I don't know, waving our hands and saying the systems do some sort of active inference, as long as we keep it loose.

lose in such a way that in my opinion you might just lose entirely like any meaning we're just saying well you know there's some active inference happening there in the same sense that there is some active inference happening in i don't know planets orbiting around stars or galaxies

having some particular physical behavior.

And so we might end up just not having anything to say.

It's safe, but it's also not very useful in a sense.

So in that direction, I think that our work is trying to go in the direction where we want to say what active inference is not.

in a way it is important to say well you know this is what it is right now and this is what it cannot be and if you want it to be something else well you you have to tell me exactly what else you need for that thing to even work to begin with and then related to that there's also um

I think I might have heard this from Alex Shantz before, and I don't know who else before him might have mentioned this.

The idea of, say, an active inference coming from the highway and an active inference coming from a more normal, if we can call it like that, path.

The highway is what Friston has been trying to do more recently, you know, starting from first principles, as he claims, like from the physics of, you know, Langevin equations and, you know, stochastic systems, and then trying to, say, derive notions that are already established in non-equilibrium physics, and from there get all the way to, say, a definition of what agents might be.

There is also, say, the normal way, which I think is what Shannon alluded to at some point, because this active inference theory was originally brought out in neuroscience with no ambition to be a first principle theory starting from Langevin equations that might describe any physical system in this universe.

It was just supposed to be some sort of helpful framework that in some way was going to generalize reinforcement learning.

which is an absolutely fair, I guess, goal and ambition, but has also nothing to do with all of the physics that is more recently being plugged into active inference.

And one could safely go, say, the second route and just forget about all the physics.

It might leave it, I don't know, to a different, I don't know, to a different status, but it would still be potentially useful and it would still be something that we might look forward to.

And that, I guess, leads me to something that Shannon was mentioning about manifolds.

And in some sense, the question about are Markov blankets real or not is similar to, yes, are manifolds real or not?

And here, I don't want to say

I'm not really sure how to go about this.

In the same way that physicists generally don't think too much about, well, is this energy landscape real or not?

Is my ball actually trying to fall to the ground?

Or is it just, well, it is a good metaphor.

It works really well.

We tend to use some adjective language in there.

But I guess that if you hard-press a physicist, you will probably hardly get an answer about, oh, is this energy scape real?

Is there an energy scape inside the ball that the ball is using to actually roll down the hill?

Well, probably no.

It is the kind of question that, you know, well, I will still be using Lagrangian mechanics.

I will still be using Hamiltonian mechanics, but I will not be, you know, opening up a ball looking for the energy landscape there.

In the same way, I will still be using manifolds.

Well, personally, because, you know, population codes are

revealing to be pretty useful in neuroscience.

But I will not say start looking inside the brain like, well, where's the manifold there, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, totally makes sense and real and useful when they're aligned.

people celebrate.

And when they're not aligned, there's often another story why something is still really useful, even though it's just a useful fiction or something like that.

And I think that vector alignment is really what we want to nuance.

We want to have like an hour hand and a second hand and a minute hand.

We want to be clear, where are we just specifying a partially observable Markov decision process and fitting data?

And then where are we in the interpretive

frame and where are we in a metaphysical frame even beyond the interpretive.

Stephen, and then anyone else raising their hand.


SPEAKER_04:
i think as well as um where we say if it's real or not there's the sense of at what scales and i like the fact that he talks about scales is what scales um and at those scales how much plausibility is there for certain types of inference processes to be possible i suppose that's where you know if there's no ergodicity present or seems to be very little at certain scales then maybe it's less likely that that mechanism

is an active influence mechanism although there may be some elements of it so i think that that also changes the way that the realist aspect could be brought in it's like how much could it be a blanket aspect or maybe like you say that at other scales unlike say a single cell which is diffusing chemicals over a membrane and there'd be some weak mixing process going on there's some

um yeah there's some ways that variation or expected free energy are not the only mechanisms


SPEAKER_00:
Even suggesting that it's a mechanism is something that's mechanical.

These are what we want to understand.

And these are the discussions.

And then are they equivalent?

And do mechanisms have to be real things?

Or can a mechanism be something that doesn't exist in the world?

Or a conceptual mechanism?

Or could it be just a pattern that doesn't exist in one measurable thing we can put on a scale, like a machine?

So cool questions.

Dave, and then anyone else raising their hand.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, sometimes the math is trusted too far and it's allowed to do a whole lot of work, but sometimes the math gets crippled.

Now, I'm a student of Gordon Pask and cyclicity and self-stabilizing feedback is really critical to everything he did in learning theory and biology and system science.

and what's the very first thing you do when you mention markov processes you stomp out the cycles you rip out those cycles you're just not allowed to have loops in a markov network well then they come back in because that's what people are looking for they're looking for self-stabilization and using the environment in the environment using you to enrich itself and

And then, as you point out at the end of your paper, well, then Dr. Friston finds there's cycles in there, and then he goes and rips them out all over again.

Has anybody ever just left the cycles in, come up with a formalism that's richer than a Markovian tree, and then see if maybe things get easier and simpler?


SPEAKER_00:
Great question, Dave.

And I think the big question is, what are the inputs?

What do we want to get out of this math?

Are we looking to make analytical claims?

Or are we looking to have very general frameworks for control theory, or for estimation theory, even like Manuel mentioned?

So anyone can raise their hand, but Chris?


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks.

So I just wanted to follow up on the last two questions, but I see that there's already a theme emerging in a way.

So one thing is about the maths and, you know, already the question that was posed at the beginning, how much the understanding of maths informs research that people can do into the predictive processing framework.

And now we return to this question in a way with this question of cycles and the fact that we actually analyze, you know, we leave the cycles out.

And I think it's in some ways useful to think about our paper in many ways.

And what's happening with the free energy framework as a kind of a pyramid where, you know, formalisms, mathematical formalisms are stacked one on another.

And finally, the free energy principle really lies at the top.

And what we've been trying to do in some ways is to lead our readers, you know, through the steps going up to the free energy principle and like how it's supposed to work.

But the thing is that, of course, there are many different ways to get there.

You can think about the cycles, like the topological method that we took with directed graphs and the way of thinking about dynamical coupled systems and loops and stuff like that.

You can think about this as different slopes of the same pyramid, right?

In the end, the point is that you want to get to the free energy principle.

Exactly.

You want to get to the free energy principle.

And the free energy principle lies on top of a lot of work done in many different formal fields.

And I think that the last question asked by Dave pointing to the possibility that perhaps

If we leave the question of directed acyclical graphs aside and just focus on cyclical systems, perhaps we could arrive at a new formal construct

that could later turn out to be somewhat equivalent to Markov blanket, but wouldn't be so easily conflated with Markov blanket.

I think that's a very interesting possibility that probably should be explored in the literature.

And the other thing I wanted to address very briefly is the fact that

The other theme that seems to be emerging here in the discussion is this theme of patterns and what's real and what's not real.

And I think here it's useful to bring back our kind of point that Dan Dennett has already done some important work in the past on this with his work on real patterns and what does it mean for a pattern to be real?

And what's the difference between a pattern being real and not being real, right?

um one interesting thing if we think about active influence for example is that if we think about the social dynamics uh we can think for example about the dynamics in the army right a platoon clearly has uh an uh some kind of a

blanket like the platoon is trying to maintain its homeostasis they they are all trying to stay alive especially in a hostile environment far away from the equilibrium right the interesting thing about the example of a platoon if i and i hope i'm not getting that wrong now but i'm sure manuel would correct me if i do is that we don't actually assume that the that the that the platoon would be statistically ergodic because it definitely shouldn't uh shouldn't visit some of its

possible state spaces, right?

Portions of the state space.

Like the whole point of putting people into a platoon is so that they won't visit certain regions of the state space.

So those are interesting questions here.

And of course, the question about like, are platoons real?

You know, are they?

It's an interesting question to ponder.

Dan Dennett previously has asked the question about money, right?

So is the value of money real?

Obviously it has direct impact on our lives.

It has a direct impact on how we behave in virtue of the kind of social construct and the social scaffolding on which it rests.

But we all kind of agree that the existence of value of money is just some kind of fiction that we all buy into, especially now that the gold parity is no longer a thing.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Cool point.

It's really remarkable how this, what is real?

I mean, in some sense, it makes sense.

It's the classic philosophy question, Plato's cave and what's real.

And it's hard to differentiate it sometimes because it's used in very many senses.

So sometimes like the pyramid, it's almost like we're surfacing it like an iceberg to mix metaphors.

And then people can visibly attack a formalism.

Well, the directed acyclic graph doesn't represent reality because reality has cyclic elements.

and then we have to sort of change the formalism a little bit like could we run it in a sequential way could a message passing algorithm emulate a cyclic system even though locally computationally it's linearized but you lose some other attribute is that real then would the model be real so fun questions um yellow and then Stephen great um so I think a question kind of


SPEAKER_09:
related slash orthogonal to uh to to to the real question is a question about uh what we in the paper call verification right so it's it's a fact that if you make a mathematical formalization of something that mathematical formalization might is quite often idealization of the target phenomenon that you're that you're investigating and then as long as you treat that mathematical structure as an idealization

of the target phenomenon and don't automatically transfer the properties of the idealization to the target phenomenon, then that's completely fine.

And then where it gets upside down is if you suddenly take that mathematical formalization as somehow being at the root of the appearance of the target phenomenon that you're investigating.

we make this case for the kind of graphical model example, where there is a complicated system, you make a graphical model of it, which is by all means a kind of simplification of that very system.

And then if you start to say, look, Markov blankets were actually in that system, you're also implying that no, actually that mathematical idealization

uh of of of of the system was actually already in the target system that you were that you're investigating and that's that's i think also a move that you make the mathematics itself more real than your than you're supposed to make it um and of course

I think we said this towards the end of the paper, you can buy the bullet, right?

And say, look, no, reality at its very core is mathematical, so we're fine.

But that is something that doesn't itself come from the formalism, but requires actually pretty strong metaphysical assumptions.

And so the question about, in that sense, the question about the reality of a mathematical structure is also intertwined with this question about reification, about

How do you see the relationship between the target phenomenon you're investigating and the mathematical formalization of the target phenomenon?

I think these two questions kind of go hand in hand.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Stephen, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think this mathematical piece is important as well, because I think there's often the assumption

that we're always inferring this model of the world and how to adapt and interact with the world.

But one of the key things, particularly higher order animals and humans like the platoon, is at times they want to be this ordered or this coherent self.

But ultimately, when they're in the field,

Yes, they want to get into the most optimal ways to shoot and do things, but they need to game the system.

They need to not do what the other people think they're going to do.

And they have to guess what someone else might do, which is non-ergotic.

Something which is, you're basically gaming

each other's environment so that you're basically like prey and predator.

You're also then taking another stance.

So you step outside of what would be that normal dynamical free energy minimization process.

And that is sort of sitting on top of the other process.

So I think that's a kind of an interesting confusion.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Dave, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

The question of what is or wasn't, what isn't ergodic seems to interact a lot with scale.

And this is something that can be manipulated in an organization, sometimes to what seemed like contradictory or paradoxical effects.

For a long time, the US military officer corps has had an up or out policy.

If you didn't get promoted within a certain amount of time,

you were invited to leave the military and go do something else with your life, which sometimes didn't work well.

You started running into the, oh, you know, the British sociologist from the 50s with the most famous organizational law, such and such as law.

Yeah, people are, you know, they end up at their level of incompetence.

Well, much more recently, just over 20 years ago, the US Department of Justice started adopting an up or out policy, which quite likely is a lot more toxic than having that in the military because the military has usually a fairly narrow kind of purpose if it's being used at all.

In the Department of Justice, the FBI especially,

If you're a local investigator, you're expected over a period of years, not just to know your colleagues and the cops and the prosecutors and the reporters and the informants and the way the underworld works, whether you're stopping them or not, you're expected to develop an enormous amount of highly differentiated knowledge of South Cincinnati or the East Bronx will then

In the late 90s, somebody decided, oh, no, no, wait a minute.

This leaves a possibility of local corruption.

We're allowing nests of incompetence and nests of bribery.

So we're going to require people to leave.

No matter how much you love working in the South Bronx, you either get promoted to Washington or you get out.

So the intention presumably was to keep a nice, smooth,

pipeline a clear flowing stream but you end up requiring incompetence instead is there a larger scope at which you become scale independent and that sort of thing and oh yeah it looks muddy at a low level but it's actually ends up being clearer or is it just screwing up


SPEAKER_00:
Cool question.

There's a lot there.

One piece I kind of heard is like there's systems that we can actually control, like a software program.

We can write a program with a strictly defined topology of variables.

And so it's easier to take a realist interpretation of a program where we can define all the pieces and we can know everything that's happening.

But once we're dealing with systems that we didn't directly control, we know that we're dealing with a map territory distinction, which I guess is something I'll flip to because this was just a great and a very accessible point, which is

Wherever we go down the rabbit hole with the math, we have to keep that map territory embodied metaphor in mind.

Whether it's a phone you're looking at, and it's deep learning, and it's maps and recommendations, or whether it's a hand-drawn map that your friend made, or whether it's a historical painting, it's a map.

And we can all see how that differs than the actual, quote, realism of the territory, which isn't even like what we see.

It's actually something a little bit else.

So going and holding to this map territory distinction is kind of a useful thing.

And so it's great that you brought it up.

Also on the sort of symbolic and evocative wavelength, what about the title or what inspired the title?

How did you see that story or that narrative play out?

Because you say a lot with a few words.


SPEAKER_09:
Uh...

I think we stumbled upon the title and just thought it was too good not to use.

But in terms of the... You have it there.

Oh, goodness.

I heard you explain the story during the pre-recording, which is very nice.

But I think there was one element there that you didn't mention.

And that there are somehow these swindlers in this story fell to the rest of the lackeys and so in the palace.

These are a set of clothes that you can only see if you're very clever.

If you're too dumb, you won't be able to see these clothes.

So there is, and all the lackeys and everybody involved in the story there, there is a kind of doubt.

Like, is this me?

Am I too stupid?

or is something fishy going on here and i think that kind of state of suspense of not really knowing i think that's perhaps the the key to the title uh we don't we we know we don't suggest that there were swindlers in this story or so but that kind of idea like hey am i

Am I too stupid to get this, or is something weird going on?

And I think everybody working on Free Energy Principle has, or at least should have, had that feeling to some extent.

So I think that's the key to the title, without giving away too much about the rest of the story.

Yes, Shannon?


SPEAKER_01:
I somehow missed that nuance from the title.

It seems really prescient for the new paper that just came out too.

And the Twitter post response on it too is maybe certain technical aspects of the free energy principle weren't described with the specific mathematics and formalism that you need to properly criticize the free energy principle, which maybe you do.

Maybe you need to have that much detail to properly criticize it.

But if it's a principle that we want

to use in our empirical science and our understanding of whatever subject matter we're looking at and also something that we want to use.

I assume that in science we want to use this to also inform the world about something that we know about the system that we're studying, whether it's something like this is a

true real fact of the system or this is the most useful way that we can understand the system so that we can apply treatments you know maybe translate to applied clinical practice or something like that then at some point it needs to be possible to abstract away from the formalism without losing the detail or without losing the assumed detail that the formalism

brings in and maybe it's just maybe like we have to work through this nitty-gritty stuff and we have to fight over very small mathematical details and people that are better at math than I have to make that fight before like we can bring it in and people in applied practices and maybe even the greater public can start understanding exactly what this means but

I don't know.

When is the point that we can get there?

When is the point that we can say, okay, we're done arguing about the formalism.

We know there's subtle differences, but I can still have a conversation with my friend who's just interested in my PhD work, but hasn't done a PhD themselves or something like that.

I'm going to stop talking as I start trailing off with less points here, but just throwing that out there.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Shannon.

Cool points.

Manuel?


SPEAKER_05:
So I hope this doesn't come along as, say, negative perspective in a way.

But I guess that beyond what Shannon mentioned already as being part of the problems, which are real, which are absolutely real, like when can we stop getting into the nitty gritty stuff so that we can actually do some work?

On top of that, and here I'm going to break a lance for Friston for once, where I say that part of what makes his job difficult is also the idea of dealing with definitions that use the same words across different fields.

So we have an example here with ergodicity.

So the ergodicity definition that physicists study is this idea of having a system that visits all of the states in a state space such that you can replace time average with ensemble averages.

If you look at it from the perspective of Markov processes, which I think Dave actually brought out at some point, aperiodicity actually becomes part of the definition.

If you look at it from the perspective of ergodic theory, which is this field born like 70, 80 years ago, and that actually is supposed to just deal with ergodicity, then what Dave actually suggested in their field is weak mixing.

So you can have systems that are not ergodic but not weak mixing.

So all in all, without going too much into details, I'm just trying to suggest that there is also a level of misunderstanding that comes from people having different backgrounds.

So on top of just, say, understanding what is going on, we also need to have, I don't know, a paper or two that just list

definitions as, you know, I'm using this definition from this specific field.

You can find it in this book.

Different people might want to say, well, this is not really how I was taught this specific concept, but at least it is something that now I can engage with.

So a lot of the confusion, especially on ergodicity, actually comes out just of people having different backgrounds.

None of them are wrong, because all of them are just using different definitions, unfortunately.


SPEAKER_00:
Totally agreed with that.

It's almost like a scientific project.

And what we're seeing is that there's an enormous desire to contribute to a shared scientific project and to make these ideas not just something that rests in the head of an expert, but something in our exocortex, in our informational niche, something where we can all just see the affordances in a bigger project like Wikipedia and improve it.

And then in service of that,

we need alignment on really the tools and the people and the ideas.

And the ideas are more on the philosophical side and the tools as we're seeing are more on the technical side and something that's right at the intersection of tools, people and ideas are really the terms and their definitions.

And that pursuit of clarity as well as improved ability to translate and generate introductory material is really key.

And that active inference ontology type work is one of the things we're working on in ACT-InfLab because we totally agree when there are multiple definitions, then it's either a don't ask, don't tell policy on definitions or

people do go into the details and then the paper is criticized for providing a specific detailed take or they make nine out of ten points but then it leaves um a shadow of doubt about the tenth of tenth point because it seems like it's going too technical and when people do a linear regression or a time series model even when lives are on the line no one says wait a minute i need the least squares error to be real but we're seeing criticisms about what's real here

And so that's such a fascinating pattern that really will be explored, I think, in the coming months and years.

this line of research has brought us to some fundamentals and we are bringing up some new questions and connecting ideas and terms in new ways so it's fun to be a part of and um i hope that those who are listening can see that they're a part of this active conversation and it's not like they um the authors release this paper and now the conversation is over this is sort of their

opening call and i hope that we can hear a few more pieces about what does that call entail for those who take it up yellow yeah great um i i just want to briefly follow up on on on shannon's point and uh saying that at least i think our aim is also to to uh um


SPEAKER_09:
to kind of tease apart a little bit the kind of empirical research program of active inference and DCM.

And the more kind of what we in the paper in the end called the kind of most ambitious version of blanket-oriented ontology.

and show that you don't need to buy into that heavy-duty metaphysical framework in order to do interesting empirical work with active inference or with DCM or so.

So that kind of association back and forth, there might be a good fit, but I think there's very good reasons to just say, well, marker blankets stay in my toolkit as a scientist, and I can use them and employ them every once in a while, but...

I'm not going to speculate about how my toolkit fits onto reality, et cetera.

That's a different ballpark.

But as having it in your toolkit, you can still do basically all the science that's there already.

So I just want to be clear that at no point do we want to say, oh, people should do empirical work differently or so.

But it's really like if you want to use this toolkit to dive into a different set of questions rather than the traditional empirical ones, you can ask what the question is about.

demarcation of agents or so that might look a lot like the empirical ones that actually are not really, then you are confronted with a different set of questions, namely about how does mathematics relate to reality and so, but by no means do we want to kind of block that.

And I think, I mean, a long time ago, I studied physics, right?

And then if you open beers, you get discussions about are atoms real and so, right?

And these are kind of,

These are the kind of questions that are just funny to raise, and some people have more or less patience with them, but by no means do any of those questions block the actual research in physics.

They're orthogonal to each other.

I think the same holds for neuroscience, at least to some extent, if you want to interpret data or so and use a mathematical toolbox for that, then that's completely...

metaphysically innocent in that, so to say.

It's just this transition that has happened that we have doubts about or take issue with.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, thanks, and anyone can raise their hand.

One thought on that is that the structure of the implementation of active inference models with a partially observable Markov decision processes helps us separate out, for example, our priors about different variables, our generative model, our affordances, and our preferences.

So using that model helps us distinguish, for example, our aspirational model

beliefs about how the world should be or what we'd prefer from the sort of reality on the ground with what our affordances are.

And almost at a higher level, this is where this discussion is coming.

Can we separate out our technological affordances from our preferences?

For example, that an integrated theory of everything would be preferable.

That just makes a theory better for it to be more explanatory, more predictive, more universal, more transferable across different systems.

Those are,

preferences we might have over distributions of scientific theories.

But that's not quite the same thing as what are our affordances.

And we don't know all the affordances yet.

There's theories that haven't been invented.

There's frameworks that don't exist yet.

So how do we make sense at the lower level and then also at sort of a higher meta-scientific level have a discussion across different frameworks

without trapezing into essentially unknowable metaphysical questions.

Steven, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I'd be interested.

It sort of relates a bit to what Dave was saying there about feedback loops.

And in the last session, we had Caspar Hesp talking about some of the modeling.

And there you have these kind of cyclical, iterative dynamics at different scales of how fast or slow the kind of the churn of

observations and sensory states and maybe states of belief and such things.

So there's kind of a cyclical pattern sort of in there.

So just be curious how that cyclical pattern relates also to other types of feedback, which is maybe a bit more dynamic or just other types of feedback loops that you might think might need to be thought of.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I see Chris and Manuel both with Henry's.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah.

Am I unmuted?

Go ahead.

Manuel, if you want to say something directly to the last question, then go ahead.


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

My bad for actually not covering that before.

But the idea, I guess, that Dave previously brought out and now Stephen kindly reminded us about, this idea of feedback loops, there is

So let's say I would say that my background might be more from control theory in some sense.

So I do see the need of considering feedback loops because there's sort of like bread and butter in control theory.

There is also a sense, however, in which I guess usually in control theory, we draw diagrams.

But they are kind of representations that will live there, as in, well, this is the type of system I'm dealing with.

It is some sort of picturesque, say, view of what is actually happening out there.

We are not doing maths on, say, the diagram that we are drawing.

I guess what is happening with Bayesian networks and why people are so much, say, inclined to use them is the fact that I guess we can actually use Bayesian network to do calculations.

So the work by Pearl, which we briefly mentioned in our paper, clearly not giving enough justice to the entire framework, is something that can be used on these models themselves.

So in a way,

the directionality there the unrolling of time the idea of a narrow of time there makes all of these calculations possible it is by no means a way to say that there will be um um say

system that there will be different systems necessarily different systems at different times we may still choose to group certain variables and say well this is just how i don't know the environment is evolving over time or how uh an agent is evolving over time and we might just call that environment we might just call that agent

That's fine, I guess.

But when it comes to, say, do calculations with that graph, if we just start drawing loops, then time disappears.

And time is what makes a lot of these calculations actually work.

at least say what the algorithms that Daniel also mentioned with message passing on Bayesian networks, that is what makes them work.

Clearly there are also algorithms for cyclic networks, but they are more limited.

They have some stronger assumptions.

So unrolling time, I think, is not an incredibly crazy assumption or an incredibly crazy method to use there.

It is probably something quite reasonable.

We are still saying there's an agent that talks to an environment and an environment that talks to an agent.

We're just trying to make that, say, interaction explicit as a process that happens over time.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Stephen, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thanks for that feedback.

And I suppose one thing that the question that can come up is, and I'm not sure if the pearl blankets could do this, or something that the Friston blankets gives you the possibility is, if you're dealing with entropic information and noisy kind of

data that's coming in and entropy can be like zero dimensional.

It doesn't actually need to have a dimension and you can extract from that.

Whereas in other cases,

you're always working with something which is like a channel coming in, like a dimensional data source, which is somehow like saying something about the thing out there, as opposed to something which can be completely untethered from the environment.

So I wonder how that idea of being able to extract Shannon entropy information might be a unique property of the Friston blanket, or whether that could be done in other ways.


SPEAKER_05:
um so uh i guess there are a couple of considerations there like exactly what would be extracting information from what

uh because i mean this sounds a lot like the sort of like maxwell's demon type of scenario which um you know it's a well-studied field but it's also say possibly controversial in some sense because well in physics you don't need to ask certain questions you just well there's a demon and i don't and i'm not going to tell you what this demon is

I'm not going to tell you how he does his thing.

He just does it.

And this is how things will happen.

The thing about extracting information in the blanket sense, well, here I want to walk, say, a very fine line by saying that the...

There are possibly issues with this definition of the frisson blanket, and they have been raised before, and I think Martin Beale has pointed them out in a recent paper, and Fernando Rosas has also mentioned them in his work on causal blankets as a way to fix, I would say, frisson blankets, in the sense that the information that can be extracted in those blankets

is not past information it's just information at one specific time step because of this unrolling it makes calculations easier but the sort of conditional independence is not only uh in within a time step is also across time steps because of the markovian um

property of these processes.

And I want to make sure this is not something that I first raised.

This came from people like Martin Beale, Fernando Rosas, and probably in first place, Nathaniel Virgo.

So, and again, all the credit goes to them.

So this idea of extracting information is really feeble for now.

It is not something that I would actually, you know, bank on in any way.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So it's almost like it's said to be a strength of the Markov blanket or any kind of blanket concept that it's just one time slice at a time, but you don't get to have the blanket and eat it too because you can't have the through time benefits and then say that you're simplifying with something that's only reading one value at a time, though there's also probably a lot of technical details too.

So Chris, then anyone else raising their hand?

on you.


SPEAKER_08:
Here we go.

Sorry.

So that was a really nice exchange.

And I think it also ties things back to your point about the map and the territory distinction, because

One thing that we had, like, I think one of the intentions we had, at least definitely me and Joe, who unfortunately isn't here, but is very interested in these topics, is the philosophy of science behind the notion of a scientific model.

And one thing that we have to, like, if we frame things in this way, it becomes very interesting how we understand Princeton's formalism, such as Mark of Blankets, for example, because

In philosophy, there's often the distinction made between the model, the construal and the target system of the model, right?

So the target system of the model is a phenomenon we're trying to investigate in the world.

The model itself is some kind of formal construction, usually described in some formal language.

And then the construal is kind of the interpretive link

that connects the formal structure to the concrete real world phenomenon and one interesting thing about this is that the same formal structure the same model can be applied in different fields by different scientists successfully using different controls right and this also goes back to something that manuel mentioned before about the multiplicity of backgrounds from which people come

to the free energy framework, active influence framework.

And it's not unproductive.

I mean, we have good examples in the history of science, in the history of computer science specifically, of people porting certain notions from physics specifically into computer science and making breakthroughs.

So one very nice example of this is the so-called icing model of ferromagnetism.

which has been ported by william little and john hopfield into the neural network domain where they basically used the same formal structure to and gave it a different construal right to model a different a different worldly phenomenon so hopfield networks and later boltzmann networks have been very successful for example in modeling a memory

at least back when they were introduced.

Now we have much more sophisticated models, of course.

But it's a nice example of this kind of cross-insemination between fields, where people can actually take a formal structure or a notion from one field and successfully make progress in a different domain.

But one thing that's important to keep in mind is that

Little or Hopfield never published their neural network model and said, look, it's a thermodynamical model of memory or something like that.

Because it's not.

I mean, in a sense, of course it is, because the formal structure that has been mapped onto the target phenomenon is the same as in the icing model or the spin glass model.

The thing is, though, that the construals are very different.

And I think it's very useful to keep this in mind.

So to boil my point down, I guess, to two sentences, it can be productive doing this.

It's just something that we really wanted to bring to the surface, that we have to be aware of the distinction between the thing in the world and the mathematical formula that we're using to describe the thing in the world.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thanks for this summary.

And as people, I think, learn and read these papers, they'll see that there are these expanding levels of analysis, like the one sentence, don't confuse the map with the territory, or

what you just said there it can be productive you just have to raise this discussion to the surface and then there's more and more and more to uncover um kind of like chipping away at the base of the pyramid almost and finding out what are our assumptions and okay all these people criticizing elements of free energy principle or active inference what's their preference what do they want to see or are we all on the same aspirational team

in that we all want to see a collaborative formal framework that also might help us with real-world questions and also philosophical ones variously.

Stephen, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think this is a really good conversation.

And I think when I've heard other approaches say in the psychology fields, which are kind of looking at how people do sense-making, they often...

Outside of work with the pre-energy principle, it tends to be energy gradients.

People, you know, what's the route to least action or where do you notice the energy is lower so then you know how to act on the environment?

And, of course, the ability to also bring in entropic factors

kind of noisy statistical regularities, which you wouldn't necessarily know why they're there.

Well, you wouldn't know why they're there.

No one knows they're there.

We can't even understand it.

There's something quite interesting in that, and that seems to be where, to my understanding, I don't know if there's any other models that are able to integrate

the energy landscape with this kind of way to infer something plausibly from the entropic dynamics that are played out.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Stephen.

Lou, then anyone else with a question?


SPEAKER_03:
So I just to go back to what Daniel was saying about incorporating the active inference framework, do we want this really to be a framework that is concrete and definite and stable?

Do we want to come to some kind of absolute end point here with active inference?

Or is this something that we want to be

constantly evolving, growing, changing?

Do we want to try applying it in several different fields, seeing what works and what doesn't to then move on?

So we have to think as we ask ourselves and as we discourage and encourage how the active inference framework is used, what do we really want as scientists?

I think it's important to think about that.


SPEAKER_00:
Great question, Blue.

Really something we could


SPEAKER_01:
all think a little bit about shannon than anyone else sort of um following up but a little bit tangential to what blue just mentioned um and maybe joe can be here next week that would be great um but i'm wondering if we're having sort of an emerging folk active inference um so we have a like folk psychological intuitions about the world about how other people behave science uses slightly

different, maybe more complex intuitions to describe how people perceive, interact, to describe the psychology of individuals.

I'm wondering if this active inference concept is really great, how Daniel talks about how we work in teams and how we're working together to resolve our uncertainty and we're coming together in this.

This Markov-blanketed group of us, compared to everyone who will be watching this livestream later,

And these are fruitful to making good team dynamics and to help learn.

And some of us who aren't here right now are applying this to systems, to business and organization.

And this is super useful.

It's not the goal of the scientists perhaps, but maybe we can bring this up again next week and just talk about how that's useful and how that's sort of emerging at the same time as these formalisms.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Shannon.

And I agree that the team and the project and the mission sometimes sidestep or at least ward off the philosophical questions.

It's like, well, let's finish this project with this data set we have, get the publication or get this next checkpoint, and then we'll see where we're at.

We'll have a new perspective on these eternal philosophical questions.

And so it won't be resolved in 2021, maybe not even in 2022.

but we'll be working together and we'll be more productive and we'll have stabilized our informational niche, our financial niche.

Dave, then anyone else on mute?

Dave, Dave, he's still muted, but okay.

OK, anyone else want to add something?


SPEAKER_05:
I was just going to say something very briefly concerning what Blue brought out, which I think is a very fair, I guess, view of a very fair perspective of the current status of people that might choose to work on active inference.

there is a good cluster i guess of people from different backgrounds that have some more or less shared goal that are ready to you know engage with each other and try i guess like to create something good with each other so

if anything else that that's great i mean what else would you actually need to do science if not just a bunch of you know motivated people that get together and try to to work towards something all together um something that you know might have just um on the other hand pushed people away uh like at different stages in time was you know the

the idea of promising something that was not really there yet in a way like the nobody would blame i guess anyone for for a project that is just in the workings for something that is evolving for something that is still you know that is still not reached its final form i guess that the idea of reading you know

theory a unifying theory of this a unifying theory of that is what might have you know discouraged other people from from actually engaging with it so probably some sort of balance that i think is now in place

is conducive to i guess an even better research environment because i think more people can engage more people can see that there are you know constructive criticisms more people can see that you know it's not just uh you know uh

sort of environment completely detached from from reality there is there is a sense in which you know uh improvements happen when people engage and other people listen and you know propose new stuff which you know just a scientific method that's absolutely fine that's great i think we we had some very welcoming you know uh feedback from different people like

regardless of what we said, which I thought is good for a healthy community.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Thank you.

Yeah, a mentor in writing told me that the three stages were the madman, the architect, and the interior designer.

So someone has to envision there could be a skyscraper here, or there could be a stadium here, and then it has to get planned out.

And interior design has to be kept in mind, but it isn't actually applied.

And so not that those are the stages of a scientific theory, but we're closer to the beginning and you're right that now there actually is enough to kind of take a bite out of and to build within.

And then for those who think that there's like little grounding or they want to make almost hyperbolic claims about how little is known, my questions would be, first off, relative to which body of literature that's ongoing?

And the second question would be,

have you read the 2007 SPM textbook?

Because that was 14 years ago and it demonstrates in a little bit like a textbook form, which is more classical than the pre-print back and forth.

That's a lot of the basis.

And so there isn't any philosophy in that textbook, but you'll find a lot of new approaches for thinking about cause and effect and dynamic systems modeling and what we can do with neuroimaging and behavioral data and heterogeneous data sets.

So awesome points.

Dave, if you want to unmute and try again, and then Blue.

I'm not sure why you're still muted, Dave.

There we go.

Okay.

Yep.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

One of the really crucial benefits of doing the deconflation that you are correctly insisting on is that the real essence of what's in

scientific thinking or technical thinking or skill development is the analogies among different realms of thought, realms of action.

If you conflate entropy with the universal tendency, you don't see, you can't think about the actual differentiations of

instruments that that measure entropy um cosmological ideas that discuss and structure are thinking about a different realm of activity and you certainly aren't going to see the analogy between those analogies but once you start pulling stuff apart then you can start doing mapping in detail and find what applications you can relate

through the instrumental or realistic interpretation of any of these meta concepts you can start listing tables of correspondences you can make uh gedanken experiment and you can make literally lab tests and draw out paradoxes where the prediction from one wing of the metaphor

looks like it ought to align with the results in another wing and don't.

At that point, now you can start thinking about what it is that we don't know yet.

So yeah, yeah, keep ripping the stuff apart when it's been conflated.

Phlogiston modeled a lot of real stuff and it was also harmful.

The notion that things fall because they belong down.

That predicted a lot of things.

It modeled a lot of stuff and it interfered

with work that needed to be done.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Thanks, Dave.

Nice points.

Lou?


SPEAKER_03:
This is great because it just ties in everything that Dave said, but I really wanted to respond to Manuel.

I don't necessarily have a perspective on whether we want active inference to be something solid and concrete like a law.

or something that's continually growing and evolving.

And so I just pose it as a question, like where do we really want it to end?

I think that just like Dave said, there's always like we had the laws of physics, right?

Like Newtonian physics, we had all of these laws, they were in place, they worked for a long time and then quantum, right?

So, I mean, we don't know what is gonna be underneath.

When we finally define an absolute, there could be another layer that we just aren't seeing that.

So I think that, you know, just like Newtonian physics and quantum physics, we need to look at where the context is.

Right.

And so there might be an active inference, a contextual barrier that we can say, you know, active inference is this version of active inference is applicable in this context.

And there might be some other deeper, different version that applies in other contexts.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And I think that's partly how the specific projects and deliverables and questions are what ground us.

Like with Dave's example about entropy.

Yeah, you can probably abstract entropy and start applying it to different domains.

And what would psychological entropy, what would spiritual entropy be?

Or you might be concerned with the car that you're building and you're like, okay, I have a preference for the more miles per gallon and whatever.

less of this other emission and then entropy in an applied context is being pursued instrumentally with literal instruments and scientists are not just all-purpose thinkers when the scientist hat is on we're instrumentalists and actually that makes me curious yellow about one of your other papers the anticipating brain is not a scientist

so what was that about because the part in this paper about how the cognitive scientist is in a unique position as the meta modeler reminded me a lot of this line of research so maybe could you summarize that or what was that paper about and how has that been developed in what you're exploring now oh great yep um so yeah i think and i


SPEAKER_09:
Can you hear me?

I only now realize that they use the scientist metaphor in both this paper and in the old one.

And I think here it's very clear to distinguish between models and models of models and animals models and scientist models.

And they have different kind of properties.

in in in the anticipating brain paper um we make the same uh uh distinction between a scientist model of the environment and an animal's model of the environment and there the distinction is more in terms of what are the the aims so to say of the model and where you might say well in the epistemic practice of science then the aim of the scientist model is to get an as accurate

representation or inference or whatever from the outside world as possible so it's kind of a more epistemic process in which the ultimate aim is to to figure out something about the world and now transposing that question to the uh to the animal the problem is a different one it's not like the problem what's out there in the world is secondary to how can i make what's out there in a world compatible with

the kind of existence that I am having or am.

And so there the epistemic story stands in the surface of something like flourishing or staying alive or homeostasis or so.

And there might be cases where actually, and I think this is also related to the kind of the theory of action that's there, like where

inferring what's the exact state of the world is not actually the right thing to do, but changing the world so as to make it conform to your expectations is a better way to do that.

So the kind of the epistemic aims in both settings, the scientist setting and the animal in his environment setting are, or the scientists in his everyday life setting are slightly different.

And so that was also to counter the kind of

they're very prevalent kind of Helmholtzian models of perception that are there in the free energy literature and the processing literature, where you say like, well, first and foremost, the problem for an agent or any agent is to infer what's out there in the world.

And I think FEP shows like, no, that's a secondary problem.

The first problem is staying alive.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.

And that's so funny because what do they say in legacy science, publish or perish?

So it's also not thrive and communicate and mentor.

It's actually still phrased in a life or death way.


SPEAKER_09:
It might be a naive way of understanding science in me.

That might be true.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Alliteration plus competition, just irresistible.

Any other thoughts?

Otherwise, there's a couple other points that would be awesome to kind of just in the last 20 minutes open up and then I'll re-upload this full video.

We can all think about some questions that we're having.

I guess one distinction that is clearly key from where you placed it in the paper and the emphasis and everything is inference with versus inference within a model.

And this is going to sound like a subtlety because it's two letters that you're appending to the word, but they're two letters that make a big difference.

So what would be sort of the map territory distinction?

How do we think about inference with and within a model?

How do we speak clearly about different things that are happening?


SPEAKER_09:
Who's going to take that one?

I think I insisted on keeping in this distinction throughout all phases of the co-writing process, so I guess I'm responsible for now also explaining it coherently.

I think the key distinction there is to draw the distinction between a kind of

everyday way of understanding modeling of saying, well, a model can be used by something external to the model to model something that's even external to that, right?

So I guess perhaps the notion of construal might actually also be something, right?

There is a scientist or there is a practice or so that construes and relates a model to some target phenomenon so that you can do a predictive analysis or whatsoever.

uh and i think that's our everyday way of thinking about scientific inference um and then especially in the in the live as we know it papers of the first in 2013 uh a paper something quite different is is is happening right so so in most of the particular processing literature this distinction is not really made made explicit but in 2013 that analysis is is

not making clear how an agent or an animal can use a model to do something but shows makes a model and shows how somehow within that model a demarcation between agent and environment starts to emerge and because of the demarcation an inferential relationship between agent and environment starts to emerge so there's now there's not there's not a user of that model but somehow

Within a model, an inferential relationship starts to emerge.

And so that's why we call it inference within a model.

The emergence of the inference is within that model.

And the other one is something outside of the model is using the model to predict something or something.

That's supposed to be this distinction.

Maybe we think about a better, a clearer semantic separation between those two concepts that should be a part.


SPEAKER_00:
in the four different kinds of, I guess, I wanna say processes, but the four different ways in which inference is sometimes deployed to be talking about generative processes and generative models.

The generative process is what actually the air moving through the house and the temperature as it's actually changing.

And then the generative model, the predictive thermometer.

And there's other work that I know some of you have done about connecting systems that are probably less than lifelike and realizing that we can frame them in a cybernetic context using these same constructs, which is really an argument by demonstration almost about the philosophical points that you're trying to show.

It's like if somebody were making big claims about cybernetic systems, and then someone said, oh, but it applies to a thermometer.

So either you need to pull back your claims a little bit, or it's fine if you think thermometers have this attribute, like regret, that you're going to be studying.

But you don't get to say that the thermometer is, of course, insentient, yet it's doing what you say is granting us sentience.

And these kinds of distinctions are not within Active Inference proper.

It's actually just about clarifying research directions and learning about how we work on these projects that go beyond the understanding of one person, because there are a lot of technical elements.

remind us of that earlier thread, which is how are we all going to be learning about this and working within it and communicating within it when one could go deep into variational inference, but I'm not going to be the one to find that there's some deep quirk or assumption in variational inference that invalidates some other technical piece of the puzzle.

So how do we almost, kind of like the doors in the Titanic, separate different parts of our model

so that we at least know if one of them is going to be unsupported at this moment or is apt to even fail, that there isn't a cascading failure for our actual direction, but rather there's something that's modular that could be pulled out?


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, I think there's lots of things about the free energy principle that are actually pretty trivial.

and lots of things that are actually pretty speculative and high stakes.

And indeed, having some of the demarcation that we make in our paper, I guess, allows you to separate some empirical methods that are useful and kind of non-controversial and separate it indeed from what we call BOO, the kind of blanket-oriented ontology, which is

Big ID, which we are kind of skeptical about, at least I am, I'm not sure I speak for all the co-authors, but at least it has a different epistemic status than the everyday bread and butter active inference that people are using.

And so separating those out a little bit,

using the different concepts and different assumptions that are made by each approach probably also gives a better overview of the field and the things you need to buy into and don't necessarily need to buy into if you want to work with it.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Dave, then anyone else raising their hand?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I'm going to ask a question not about status,

or stature or number of papers, what influence has the personality of Carl Friston had on the development of these fields?


SPEAKER_05:
I want to go and break another lance in his favor.

I haven't worked directly with Carl unless on really small projects, but he's just an extremely nice and kind person.

I think it is as simple as that.

It is really hard not to get along with him on some level.

So, I mean, I want to be positive in a sense to say that it is really hard not to want to work with such a nice person.

If we want to talk about that, trying to stay away from his influence and his status across fields, he's just an incredibly nice person.

And even if sometimes there are some misunderstandings in communications, there is, I don't know, there is a sense in which you feel like you want to work with that person.


SPEAKER_00:
I agree, and also beyond niceness, it is reflected through action and mentorship and collaboration.

But also it's, yes.

Jelle, and anyone else as well.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, no, I can only second that.

I spent some time at UCL in this group.

uh for for for outsiders and for brandings so you might think sometimes that that carl is able to speak a bit uh too well right so listening to him if you don't really understand what he's saying it sounds it sounds enigmatic it sounds it sounds fascinating and it sounds it is but it also sounds incredibly clever right and so um

I guess in terms of branding, right?

I mean, what we see a lot now is that there is a kind of circle of people who really understand the stuff that's going on and a group of people who are also put off by it a little bit because it seems so intimidating from the outside.

And I think that's something that FTP as a whole

kind of struggles with a little bit, that it might seem a little bit esoteric if you're not familiar with the key works or haven't worked on that for a while.

And I think that that's partly sparkled by just these kind of fantastic lectures that Carl is able to give.

They're all over YouTube.

And they're hard to get on the first go.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
And it's also notable that the 2013 single author paper, Life As We Know It, it serves as a lightning rod for Lotta Critique, as does his 2010 paper, Unified Brain Theory.

And they're both, I hesitate to call them old because they're less than, you know, a decade old in some cases.

But in terms of our current environment, there's been a lot between then and now.

And also they're single author.

And so...

let him speak and represent what he wants to share just like every author and collaboration and then there's a ton of nuance and a lot of development that's happened and i totally also resonate with the um criticism that many raise or at least the point that it is a rapidly developing field so it's like oh active inference can't deal with long time steps

aha but then have you thought about sophisticated active inference and so it does become a little bit of this sort of like criticism development criticism development which actually reminds me of daniel dennett's book darwin's dangerous idea and he says evolution by natural selection is the theory that's describing itself because it is improving itself and someone says well

evolution doesn't include ecology or development or evolution okay well then we make eco evo and then we go from there and so there's sort of um a little bit of a blurriness between who's the detractor and who's actually out in front pulling theory where it needs to be and that's also where cognitive diversity comes into play and just we're all seeing cool


SPEAKER_06:
blue, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_03:
So just to kind of piggyback off of what you said, I always think, you know, especially in our culture, we have like this idea that there's a leader or a creator.

And in this situation, it's Carl Friston, right?

So is there a leader or a creator of the field?


SPEAKER_06:
Or has it become it's single handedly?


SPEAKER_03:
invented a light bulb that's not how it happened but but we you know we kind of think this way and we've kind of placed first in in the leadership role here but but really i think that there's a lot going on underneath the curtains or underneath the blankets right i agree and it's it's a meta problem with science communication like the 2018 wired article which the title be a singular person


SPEAKER_00:
and about something about their endocortex.

Not this dedicated researcher has built a network and tools for 30 years that are inspiring the next generation of researchers to make impact.

doesn't fit quite as well in the headline.

And so it's like a communication and a meta communication question, communicating about how these fields actually work.

And yeah, there's gonna be a lot of interesting times ahead on those frontiers, I think.

Any sort of closing thoughts?

Or maybe we could go around and just give a last little thought or something that we're excited or curious about for next week's discussion when I'll fix it and we'll be able to include participants live.

Also, thanks, Manuel, for staying up late.

We'll have Martin Beal on April 28th, and that will be at a better time.

I think it's two hours earlier than this one.

So, Stephen, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
yeah i'd just like to thank you for a really you know powerful presentation and answering a lot of difficult questions and also i suppose what i'll take away is this question about the blanket orientated ontology i think it's really good to have that

## q3qBepJf3vA

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone to ACT-INF Lab.

This is ACT-INF Lab live stream number 20.2.

This is our second group discussion on the paper, The Emperor's New Markov Blankets.

And today is April 27th, 2021.

Welcome to ACT-INF Lab everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at our links on this slide.

This is recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome.

And we'll be following video etiquette for group live streams like muting if we're not gonna be talking and raising our hands so that we can hear from everyone.

We're down here on the bottom of the slide in the second discussion for the Emperor's New Markov Blankets and closing out April with this really great discussion.

So check out this link, rb.gy slash kvnpyc, if you want to see what's upcoming for the different streams.

goal of today is really just to continue this awesome exploration and learning and discussion that we've been having and really appreciative that the authors are here to be talking about it with us so we'll be able to ask some cool questions and anyone who's watching feel free to ask a question in the live chat and we'll relay it to the group

Today, we're just gonna be going wherever we need to go.

We'll start with introductions and then if people wanna call out a specific figure or a specific question or especially reference a quotation in the text or just something that they've prepared, that would be really great.

So we'll just go around and introduce everyone and say hello.

Feel free to just introduce yourself however you'd like and give a short check-in.

And then after we have an introduction round, we can return to these warm-up questions.

And anyone can feel free to chime in on one of these questions, such as what they're excited about.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm in California.

And I will pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_05:
Hey, everyone.

I'm Shannon.

I'm usually in California, but I'm in South Dakota for the pandemic.

And I will pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, I'm Steven.

I'm in Toronto, and I'm doing a practice-based PhD through the Solomon School of Applied Psychology, and I will pass it to Scott.


SPEAKER_07:
Hello, I'm Scott David from Seattle, Washington, and at the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab.

And we're working on synthetic intelligence.

And I will pass it to, wait, I lost my list.

Who hasn't chatted yet?

Dean, have you had a chance?


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm from Calgary.

I'm retired.

And I just like hanging out here because I learn a few things.

And I'll pass it to Chris.

Chris.


SPEAKER_08:
Hi, I'm Chris.

I'm a postdoc at the Ruhl Universität in Bochum in Germany, but I'm joining from Berlin today, and I'm one of the authors on the paper.

And I'll pass it to Joe.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks, Chris.

I'm Joe Dewhurst.

I'm a postdoc at the Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy, also one of the authors on the paper.

My background's in philosophy of neuroscience and computer science primarily, I'd say.

Thanks.

I'll pass to Jelle.


SPEAKER_09:
Hi, everyone.

Happy to be here again.

I'm Jelle Bruyneberg, also one of the authors of the paper.

I am currently based in Amsterdam, although I'm supposed to be in Sydney, Australia.

Yeah, happy to be here today.

Today's the birthday of the Dutch king, so it's a special day.

Happy birthday.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, I think that's everyone with the introduction.

So anyone, please feel free to raise your hand and start off.

Some of the warmup questions are, what is something that you're excited about today?

Could be related to the paper or tangentially.

What's something that you liked or remembered about the paper or from our discussion last week?

And what is something that you're wondering about or you'd like to have resolved by the end of today's discussion?

Maybe another question would be what kind of momentum or what kind of next steps would make sense, you know, emerging from this, whatever we end up resolving or not in the next conversation, where will that take us in our research or in our practice journeys, I guess.

So Joe, and then anyone who'd like to speak.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

Do I need to lower my hand again, or is that done?

It's just good.

Good, great.

Cool.

So I missed the discussion last week, so some of this may have already been covered.

But one thing which relates a little bit to something we were discussing just before we went live here, and I think is kind of a broadening of the points we wanted to make in the paper, which I wonder about, is what

what the if if active inference can be kind of arbitrarily applied to any given case given the right kind of setup and parameters and so on um what does this mean for its future application is this since so far as it's too general or is this a strength and so far as it can be used anywhere really um and this this i think is kind of lurking underneath some of the points we make in the paper but that's a more general point


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So can active inference apply to anything and everything?

Would that be a strength or would that be a weakness?

Awesome question.

Any other thoughts?

Anyone wants to raise your hand?

Yeah.

Steven.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I'd be interested to, um, learn more about the way that the pearl blankets and the Friston blankets, um,

interpretations might be useful in applications and how that might inform, you know, the way that modeling is done.

So that's kind of exciting for me.

So that's one thing that I'm looking forward to.


SPEAKER_01:
Great question as well.

The distinguishing different kinds of blankets and even pulling back to like, what kind of metaphors will we use?

And how will we relate technical terms to different settings, different practices?

Those are some big questions we want to address.

Scott, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I'm interested in all, in both of those questions or all that aspects.

And then also the frizzle of the paradox of those two questions.

So it's a chicken and egg question of Frist and not for active inference in a sense, right?

We're observing something, we're projecting it out as a teleology onto the world and then asking if it's a good teleology, right?

So it's, so in a way,

If you go for the David Bohm idea that all reality is first a thought, that includes the realities that we don't create entirely, but that we project.

So one of the questions I have, so I was a practicing lawyer for 30 years or 25 years-ish.

And when I see active inference, I think contracts.

And so I think of it as biomimicry of what we can do socially

and project further with real intention to control systems so that so what i'm wondering is and i think both are valid but because so ultimately is it a notion i'll use the word biomimicry but obviously i don't mean in the physical sense but for us to learn from deep time what we can do as biological organisms to better organize ourselves

Despite our social elements.

So to get back to our biology in a way and maybe organize ourselves a bit better and more resiliently with reference to that.

Anyway, that's the frizzle I'm interested in is the both the cause being upward and downward with regard to active inference.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Ooh, and connecting the micro and the macro, it's sort of, sometimes it's laid out abstractly like multiple spatial scales that are nested within each other or timescales.

But then when we talk about action and we have the example of sort of the person in a maze and you take a step back so that you can go around,

That's the kind of settings where we might want to apply active inference, where the initial action might be nonlinear or away from the goal in a sense, but it's part of a policy trajectory that actually gets you where you want to be.


SPEAKER_07:
So the other the other part of it is with the Markov blankets being a Bayesian notion because of the Bayesian, then you say, oh, when does Bayes, when is Bayes effective?

Well, that becomes a pretty broad application, right?

Because I always say to people to get them in this space, I always say, if you're in a dark forest with no flashlight, you don't run full speed ahead.

You stick out your hand in front of your face, right?

And that's basically active inference.

As I say, you don't, you know, you want to know what's in front of you before you run into a tree, right?

So anyway, good stuff.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Any other, yep, Yela, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_09:
I think last week we ended the discussion on Shannon's point on what it means to have a focus

both psychological form of active inference.

And I think it related to the tension between needing to have a very deep mathematical understanding of an increasingly kind of developing field of maths and applying these kind of more broad set of ideas to a particular kind of case.

So I thought this was a point to explore further and think about how this would look like, this more folk psychological way of understanding active inference, using the concepts maybe without

the nitty gritty details of mathematics.

Shannon?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I was hoping that we could bring that up today and maybe ask Joe's take.

And also sort of if we're talking about something like a Friston blanket, and that's supposed to be a real demarcation of a system, or a pearl blanket, which is supposed to just be how we describe

the system, then maybe in this, you know, folk psychological notion of active inference or talking about how a phenomenon appears to this person in a crowd versus another person in a crowd where both phenomenons are real, but depending on which one you decide to model, you'll get a different picture of how the crowds dynamics are changing.

And we could

model that mathematically, but just as easily someone in the crowd could have an informed notion of what it is that they're receiving and how it seems that the Markov blankets, however they are, are emerging around the crowds in certain ways.

And you could start having a discussion that maybe you can, you know, translate from the scientists doing the fancy math and the person in the crowd who's just existing.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

Very interesting.

Stephen, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just building on that, I think I'm also curious because there seems to be, there's two sides.

There seems to be this primordial soup, which is referred to in the paper as well, and the variational free energy and how that can self-organize.

And that happens at smaller distances.

And then these longer distances where you've got expected free energy because the organism is seen into the environment with sensory information.

And often it's using these partially observable Markov decision processes for modeling that.

And I'll be just curious if...

those two domains of modeling which seem to come up and i know there's more but those two seem to come up a lot in the literature how that pans out maybe with some of these questions of you know is there an intuitive feeling of how the morphology is moving towards a target which could be that deeper sort of knowing of the body and then there's this kind of

partially observable decision process which is kind of cognitive sort of looking in the world and which ones are more or less like Markovian in some ways and how does that affect how we try and play with them which is or model them or play with them which I think Shannon was saying in a way is in a good way is exploring these ideas phenomenologically thank you


SPEAKER_07:
scott and then anyone else so steven's notion got me thinking about the notion of glass in glass they frequently talk about first order second order third order order um and so you have that amorphous material it's semi-amorphous solid right so it's not really crystalline not really liquid so it has these orders that are discernible through different framings of maths and

It made me think about, Stephen, when you were saying that cognitive glass, in a sense, that we have this orders of order that we project onto disorder.

And so those teleologies ultimately roll up into things like sovereignty, which is seen as perfect order in the abstract, right?

The sovereign does not need to ask for permission or forgiveness because it is the quintessence, the fifth element.

It is not earthly.

So we have this metaphysics that happens at the bottom or top of the turtle stack, depending on which direction you're going.

And so I think that's kind of nice here.

Hey, Blue.

I think that's kind of nice here when we look at order and abstraction.

And the last point about it is that Kandinsky, the artist, said that violent societies yield abstract art.

And so one of the things I always wondered is, is abstraction the reverse of violence?

So if we look at sovereignty as being a total abstraction, as I just described, maybe sovereignty is also total violence.

And Mills said that the sovereign has the monopoly of legitimated violence.

So anyway, those are a few ideas about maybe we're looking at cognitive glass here with different orders of order that we can project onto the system.

And maybe that helps us when we look at that order as levels of abstraction, as you get further from the first and second order into the third and fourth order, maybe it starts to be something that starts to yield a more projective or teleological element.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Thank you Scott Dean and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So I I wasn't part of the the tile formation last week.

I was kind of in the background and then lost it, but I did go back and watch the the whole thing and.

I'm hoping that Chris has a few more things to say today about construal because that to me is kind of the.

the inflection point and he was starting to talk about some of those things and the separation between model and target.

I think at the end of the day, if we were to give a lay person or some, I think the term folk has been used.

I think if we give them a Markov blanket and a Pearl blanket, a lot of people will go, how does that change my basic question, which is how do I get the world?

I think that's what all of us here are trying to do.

And I think for a lot of people who aren't even aware of what a markup blanket is, or free energy principle is, they still want that basic question answered.

So I'm really interested to find out today how the paper moves us to a place where that becomes easier, that the obstacles to getting the answer to how do I get the world suddenly flatten and become

I don't know, more familiar.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.

And a thought on the cognitive glass and what you just said there.

So framing it in big terms about sense-making.

Sense-making about the world as well as about active inference is really helpful.

And Scott, when you mentioned the cognitive glass, I thought about oobleck,

It might be called different things, different places, but it's cornstarch and water.

And so when you slap it really hard, it's like a resilient boundary and your hand comes away dry and it's like you're hitting a piece of concrete.

But then if you go very slowly, it kind of is like a liquid.

So it's an amorphous solid like the glass.

Now, the boundary between the air and the oobleck

is something that is real about the world and so there's a distinction there but it's almost like depending on how the boundary is crossed not even like two different types of things they're both touch but it's actually the dynamics of the stimuli that dictate whether the response is going to be very stubborn and more like a solid

or whether it will be very giving.

And again, it's not like it's light versus sound, two different sensory inputs.

This is different quantitative differences within one interface modality.

And it just shows how even when there's a clear boundary in the world, we think like between two phases, still the behavior of the interface can be very dependent on the type of interaction.

So Scott, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_07:
made me think, is it Skinnerian all the way down?

Or do you have myriad Skinnerian vectors intersecting and we see that as complex?


SPEAKER_03:
Stephen, then anyone else?

I think you could also see this question around glass, because glass at a certain

way of freezing or becoming solid it doesn't crystallize it doesn't break up it you can still see through it so you've got this question of it being part of the medium through which information can pass because you can see through it but there's also that question around that goldilocks zone when if you want something to rearrange and be the material like happens in the primordial soup

Kristen talks about there's a, you know, too low a temperature, it sort of just becomes a solid.

Too high a temperature, it's going to dissipate and start to.

So you've got a bit of the overlap between, you know, internal, external, solid, liquid, map territory.

It's kind of interesting.

Interesting.


SPEAKER_06:
yes different phases of the mind for sense making too rigid or too fluid so um joe then scott and then anyone else who'd like to speak uh thanks yeah so this this just made me think that quite quite a few of these points for me at least come back to a kind of central thing so so shannon's question about folk psychology which i'm very interested in or kind of folk inference um

questions about teleology and questions about, you know, whether it's just something simple all the way down, which makes it look like it's complex, to me makes me think that there's an important question here about the role of perspective and kind of viewing of these systems going on.

And the way I see it, a lot of the more teleological things that we project onto these systems, even like a boundary perhaps, isn't really something we should take to be in the system, but is rather just something where kind of,

modeling the system as having.

So it comes back to that target model question as well.

So just a central question here of what we take to be really in the world and what we take to just be part of our understanding of the system of the world.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thank you.

Scott, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_07:
I love the conversation because everyone is moving so nicely and easily and with such a facility back and forth between the metaphysics and the physics and appropriately.

And I don't mean, I don't mean this is not a diminishment, right?

Because that we're, we're demarking those edges.

One of the things here that occurred to me in the last couple of notes is the notion of seed crystals, because we are talking about phase changes in system behavior, I think.

There's very often a threshold kind of trigger type of thing that happens.

And so that notion that Stephen was bringing up about phase seems interesting.

And that was implicit in what you were saying about cornstarch as well.

And so one of the things I think is interesting is what do those triggers look like and how are those encoded?

And so when you're talking about popular encoding versus some biological encoding.

So let's say I'm triggered into anger.

But then that anger takes on the symbol of a certain person in a political party or whatever.

Right.

There's different stages of phase change that are happening there of solidity that are being offered to that glass like structure of order that are being set up by those externalities.

And it seems like one of the things we just did a paper on misinformation with a group.

And one of the things that's so interesting to me is it's not a single event.

misinformation.

It's not a binary where, oh, I got misinformation.

How could I have prevented it?

Like, you know, getting hit on the head with a stick.

There's so many levels at which you can address misinformation and intercede and intervene.

And this feels like one of those exercises that perhaps we can start to identify interventions for information integrity

by looking at where might we put in seed crystals to put in phase changes at stages of that process to redirect it in ways that are more socially or productive or whatever the goal is of the group.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Scott, Stephen, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think this discussion also, it points to an important consideration.

It brings in the territory and the environment, because a lot of these phase changes are in the world out there.

But also, maybe unlike, say, the enamel of our teeth, which is maybe like glass in a sort of what you would call an equilibrium state.

OK, it's at a low energy state.

It's just there, right?

I don't expect it to keep moving that much.

But we're talking about these non-equilibrium steady states.

So you've got these kind of microstates which things can revisit, from which some are more probable, from which there's attractor states, which becomes these macrostates, which then the organism at different scales is visiting.

So it's interesting because there's both going on.

I think sometimes everything's non-equilibrium steady state.

But I'm holding a computer here.

It's pretty thermodynamic equilibrium.

object you know i'm i'm in that world even if my body has a lot of non-equilibrium dynamics going on so that maybe plays out in some of these questions thanks stephen yep a lot of uh parallels analogies cross mapping between information and thermodynamics


SPEAKER_01:
And it's unsurprising, I guess, because there's a lot of groundwork there, but it really is a fruitful intersection.

Maybe we can just remind ourselves of some of the questions that we had from last week, and then we can just continue walking along.

So anyone just raise a hand.

So these were like loosely structured by topic, but we had big questions.

How much mathematics is required to understand or work with free energy principle and active inference?

And just how shall we speak and work clearly on this issue?

then we had a few questions on a philosophical side we recalled the papers of mel andrews and ns hippolito and thomas vaness which were a footnote in this paper as sort of relevant contemporary work so definitely on the philosophical side i'm sure we could um hear any thoughts about what

next steps are on that line of research and this question of how to think about blankets for groups you know if it's groups all the way down then what's wrong with throwing blankets over groups but what kind of blankets and what kind of groups also blue if you want to introduce and give any thoughts that's cool too and of course questions about what's real or not

We had a few themes arising about, again, about math and about how there is, there's multi-directional dialogue with active inference and other fields.

So what happens when we cross over between different areas, Scott, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_07:
So I wanna talk about Markov flags for a second.

And what I mean is the flag of Amsterdam with the three Xs.

My understanding is from a tour guide that the Xs stand for fire, plague, and flood.

and so if that let's assume that for a minute and the idea was if you see that flag you better follow the club rules on preventing fire plague and flood because that's what we do here in this area in Amsterdam okay so to me that is a Markov blanket because what you're doing is you're saying hey we are projecting this out come join the club

We are doing Beijing analysis on how to prevent cholera and floods and fire in the city limits.

And that's a, the signal is there on top of every building that has an owner who conforms to the rules.

And so I wondered if we can do a Markov blanket analysis on the Amsterdam flag as a Markov flag expressing

and saying all ye who come here right it's like diogenes looking for an honest man i'm looking for plague preventing and flood preventing people here so to me that's a projection out in in in any other kind of active inference we're projecting out through a flag instead of sticking our hand out to search for a tree so that's active and then i'm doing regulatory enforcement which seems to me to be a body

that is responding to nonconformity among its members.

So could you comment on whether that's a possibility in terms of projection out of social elements of Markov blankets possibly?


SPEAKER_01:
Any Amsterdam resident is welcome to respond.

Shannon, and then anyone else who raised their hand.


SPEAKER_05:
Not an Amsterdam resident.

But yeah, so now we're talking about something like cumulative culture and our evolution of signs and symbols and how we co-construct meaning in space.

So maybe the flag, if you don't know what it means, it's just the flag.

You might not even know it's a flag.

If you see it painted somewhere, it's just something that looks cool and has some shapes.

But if you have been raised or taken a tour, I guess,

in the culture, surrounded by the symbols, surrounded by the meaning, all of those small instances of negotiating meaning.

We talked about active semantic inference.

I can't exactly remember what that conversation was last week, but this seems like it could be similar, sort of adding meaning.

And if the flag doesn't mean to the person you're interacting with what you thought it would mean to them, you take action in your world to make it mean the thing to them that it means to you.

It's an interesting thread.

I like that idea.


SPEAKER_01:
Also one thought on the flag before we go to an Amsterdam resident is like a blanket.

You think about under the blanket or inside the blanket, like there's a person or a blanket goes on a bed, but a flag is also fabric and it's flying in the wind and the borders it delineates are not on one side of the air versus the other side of the air.

But as the flag is animated by the niche through winds, otherwise it's just on the flagpole.

It delineates a social space.

barrier or social demarcation, which is an encultured and an intersubjectively negotiated experience, just like you brought up, Shannon.

So Jelle, and then Steven.


SPEAKER_09:
All right.

Thanks.

It's fascinating.

I'm not sure I know the story yet from the three crosses.

I think I have a different origin story, but maybe this is in the tour guides.

I'm not quite sure.

I think this raises also points to one of the questions Joe was raising in the beginning right which is in turn like suppose we can give this analysis of the flag of Amsterdam as a mark of blanket and we can give an analysis of the origin of life in terms of mark of blanket and lots of things in between right so what does this multi-applicability of

Mark of Blanket C. One, it could point to a very deep self-similarity that runs through nature at all possible scales, or it could mean that the toolbox is, in a sense, too coarse-grained so that it applies to everything, but you can't really make the relevant differences, right?

In a sense, you would like to think through what are the differences, indeed,

through a kind of signs of group memberships in social situations versus more biological signs versus a kind of self-organization in physics.

And I think that's kind of the tension between the kind of applicability to everything and how particularly you would like your theory to be.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

So Steven, then Scott, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, this is also brings that question, I think, like we just mentioned there around where we put things in a Markov blanket, where things are part of this external states, hidden states, internal states, because in some ways from the Markov blanket perspective, the sensory states of the epithelia, the kind of sensory organs is what's been stimulated and it's inferring an external state in the world

i.e.

the flag.

And that's having an additional inference that the flag has got this meaning at another level.

So I'm not even sure what the whole thing is called in some ways.

Because the blanket is dependent on connecting with external and internal.

But it's normally just that part of the whole active inference dynamic.

So I think that becomes interesting.

where what type of sensory input information is within the blanket biologically.

And maybe that isn't quite the same as what is thought of when we start talking about it.

And that might be good or maybe a problem.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

So Scott, then Chris, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_07:
This is this is fantastic, this discussion.

So I realized all of a sudden I thought, oh, wait a second.

I just realized that some of these folks may actually be empiricists and may believe there is a testable reality out there.

I didn't because I'm not that person.

So I I made a living rhetoric and a persuasive speech right as a lawyer.

So for me, it's all projection.

So I realized I was too diminishing of the question of whether there exists something out there to test.

And I was looking at this whole thing.

To me, this has been a candy store since a few months ago where I learned about active inference.

Because to me, it's all about avoiding avoidable harms among humans.

And to the extent that active inference is universally assertible, then it has a rhetorical power that's huge, right?

So if we can get people thinking they're surrounded by active inference blankets, and then I say, you know, you don't have an active inference blanket yet in the way you're doing business with other people in your supply chain, or you don't have active inference blanket yet in the way that you're interacting among nation states.

or you don't have active inference yet in your food insecurity supply chain or your cybersecurity, all these other things that I'm working on right now, contact tracing, it's information systems where because they're not within the same model, then they have conflict.

And those, most of those are avoidable harms because they're just humans working out stuff that we were separated for a hundred thousand years when we migrated out of Africa.

And now we're getting back together and trying to compare notes on what we came up with.

So the question or this assertion is that it's interesting.

To me, it's not that troubling a question of whether these exist or not.

And I've read lots of philosophy and I've been down the road there.

But ultimately, I say yes and on that question of whether it exists or not.

To me, it's a provisional truth question.

that's functional, sufficiently functional, so I'm no longer curious about whether it has an existence separate from the human mind.

So take my comments with a salt lick, not a grain of salt, but a giant block of salt, because I realize I'm an old person, and I just don't care if it actually exists separately.

And I'm not saying that to say this conversation doesn't matter.

It's awesome.

But it's that the dynamics of rhetoric,


SPEAKER_01:
are such that we can employ the thing to do good whether or not it's real so scott has litigated realism versus instrumentalism he's serving as the judge jury executioner lawyer um chris and then joe then blue


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, thanks a lot.

So I think there's a useful way to think of the flag metaphor, so to speak, and to bring it a little bit closer maybe to also what Scott was saying now and the paper itself.

So the question that the paper is trying to answer, right, is kind of to what extent is the Friston blanket construct or the Markov blanket construct as used by Friston a conventional thing?

You can have different views, of course, about the metaphysics of mathematics and so on and so forth.

But generally, there's some agreed rules about how maths works or certain branches of mathematics work.

And that's where the Markov blanket construct comes from.

It comes from statistics.

And there's a clearly defined way of using it.

So the convention for using the Markov blanket is very clear.

It was introduced very clearly by Judea Pearl in his article and later his book at the break of 80s and 90s.

And there's no kind of mystery or there's no question about how it should be applied productively.

So whether or not you think that science is after capturing the reality as it is, or whether you think science only gives us approximate truths or some kind of approximate models of what's out there, that doesn't matter.

What's really important for us, I think, and maybe the guys can also speak to that, is that for Markov blankets, there's a clear convention for how to deploy them.

And it's very clear what they are doing and what they can't give you.

Whereas for the way Friston applies the notion, first of all, he kind of softened the convention.

The convention is less codified, we can say.

It's less clear to what extent they apply where.

And similarly, it's less clear what you can get out of it, right?

So this is kind of the problem.

So Stephen, for example, mentioned something about boundaries and the fact that whenever there's an interaction, these blankets, let's leave the mark off,

part of the name out of it, these blankets appear, or they can be found there.

And it's not entirely clear whether, according to Friston, they will be found in every place where we have an interaction between two systems, for example, or something like that, right?

the rules in which they are applied are not as clear as in the case of the original Markov blanket construct.

And I just wanted to also to follow up on this very quickly.

In the version of the paper that's under review now, we actually realized that perhaps in the draft you've read, we were a little bit too harsh on Friston because he does impose certain rules about, for example, how to individuate different kinds of nodes.

but there's still a question of kind of what it means to individuate these nodes in a certain way.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Joe, if you wanted, then Blue and Scott.


SPEAKER_06:
I'm fine for now, actually.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Blue, and then Scott.


SPEAKER_02:
So without specifying Markov blanket or Pearl blanket or Friston blanket, I wanna touch back on what Yellow was saying about group memberships and also about what Shannon was saying about cumulative culture.

So I think this is like a really interesting notion of like a Markov blanket or a blanket,

overlying a group and, and the affordances and like what it means to be part of that group, like age specific affordances or socioeconomic specific affordances under a given blanket and how, and when this like cultural or group membership prior gets like instilled and also like do blankets then overlap?

Like I'm of this race and of this age and of this age,

So these overlapping blankets, I just think it's a very interesting idea about group membership and cumulative culture.

And we might know that we're part of this group, but we don't know all of the specific underlying backstory about why we're treated this way or we're afforded these certain things.

I just think that's a very interesting way to think about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Blue.

Scott, and then anyone else, and also anyone who's watching live is welcome to ask us a question.


SPEAKER_07:
So it's so interesting, a couple of things.

Blue, on what you just said, so I do a lot of sewing, and the notion of quilting is really interesting in what you just said, because there are actually a bunch of quilting museums that do ethnographies of quilts.

And so it really comes back around.

You have this quilt which reflects a person's history, like when they did the HIV quilt, each square represented a person.

Right.

So you actually have a physical membership instantiated in this blanket.

And then the blanket being the symbol of the community being knit together.

I mean, all these knits probably not the thing you want to do in a quilt.

But OK, the thing I was going to mention in response to Joe, I think was Joe's comment before about the.

Oh, no, sorry.

It was it was Christos about the application and the.

Alteration from the paper that notion that you have this.

There's something that's running as a scientific statistical concept that is brought out in the world.

One of the things who, as I mentioned before, I work in an applied physics lab.

Now applied physics is really funny because you're applying physics, so that seems like maybe it has something to say about what's going on here.

And I and I realized, well, what you do in applied physics and what we do in our program.

in specifically in our program we take technically feasible systems so let's say that we could describe something as technically feasible the chris the friston notion is technically feasible and you can apply it in scientific context um but what i do in my program and what the lab does generally is then we take the stuff and make it ready for adoption in the field

So specifically in my program, I take technically feasible systems and I test them for whether they're Bolt's reasonable.

And Bolt's is business, operating, legal, technical, and social.

So if something is technically feasible, like the Orion project where they were going to use nuclear bombs to loft weighty objects into space, that's totally technically feasible, but it would be unreasonable socially because you'd pollute the entire atmosphere with radioactive isotopes, right?

So it works in the lab.

It's theoretically good, terrific.

So my notion is maybe what's going on here is the applied physics, applied statistics.

And when you get it out there in the field, we can call them compromises, or we can call them realities, or we can call them affordances, or we can call them Bayesian adjustments of scientific empirical views, right?

Which when it gets out there in the reality, maybe the folk understanding is the reality of

of physics in the mind of humans.

Maybe if the mind exists in society and the brain's just an antenna tuned into it.

Anyway, just a couple of thoughts to play with.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Scott.

So Stephen, and then anyone else who has a question.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'd be interested, Christoph, just further in what you said about what does it mean to individuate a node in a particular way in this idea of nodes.

And I suppose at this larger scale, I'm seeing with these partially observable Markov decision processes being used in some of the modeling, they don't necessarily, from what I understand, talk about nodes in that way.

But at the primordial soup kind of

cellular level, they seem to often talk about modes in that maybe in a similar way or not.

But I'd just be curious what your thoughts are about what it means to have a node, what kind of node that might be and what's similar or different between different ways that this is implemented.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Go for it, Chris.

And I have figure two up or let me know if you want to go to a different figure.


SPEAKER_08:
Sure.

Thanks a lot.

I mean, those two, the last two comments and the questions even really matched nicely together, I think, because

So I mean, we can talk about variables, right?

I mean, in a graphical model, variables are represented as nodes, basically.

But what I, of course, meant is the differentiation between active states and passive or perceptual states, inner states.

Yeah, exactly.

Well, you can also use the loop, but yeah.

Internal states, external states, these things, right?

So it seems to me that, and I think, I mean, not only to me, it seems to all of us, that there's a certain degree of arbitrariness

with regards to what is what.

I mean, at least in the draft you've read, it seemed like that to us.

We then learned that after really reading a lot of Friston's papers very carefully, we actually kind of extracted the implicit rules for how to label these variables as active or passive.

in a graphical model but this is still a very arbitrary distinction one which is like the rules by which you individuate so I used individuation here maybe I shouldn't have used the word individuate the way you identify

the role played by a given variable.

That's what I should have said previously.

The rules that give you this identification are still very arbitrary and they are not actually anchored in anything very substantial.

And this goes back to what Scott said about feasibility and applicability.

Because, of course, you can take this kind of way of partitioning a system.

You can build a robot with some kind of AI system, which will be built

on the principles of the free energy principle and Friston's way of thinking about graphical models.

And it will be perfectly good at doing certain things that you build it for.

The problem is that when you're building a system for a particular purpose,

as an engineer you kind of hold all the cards you make all the decisions you know you decide like how to what like what kind of active states will the robot need or something like that and that's very that's a very different perspective so to speak from this perspective of you know let's call it the what dennett calls the evolutionary r d department right so in evolution doesn't really

plan things.

Evolution just throws things at the wall and whatever sticks kind of stays and goes on to reproduce and all the other things kind of fall back.

In this sense, it becomes very problematic when we think of, like, Princeton's grand project of explaining life as we know it, for example, as in the paper from which we took this diagram that's on the screen now, because it slowly becomes a little bit suspicious whether we can actually...

whether the way he labels these nodes and the rules for labeling the nodes will be the same on, for example, different levels of organization, stuff like that.

So whether this will be applicable to many different biological systems in the way that he hopes it will be or not.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, and just to clarify, you all wrote that spectral graph theory is used to identify the eight most densely coupled nodes, which are defined as the internal states.

So for those who think that given this soup of interacting particles, which are all the same kind, they're all following the same simple rules,

Yeah.

Eight densely coupled ones.

Okay.

Those are internal.

And then there's some downstream consequences with which nodes influence which nodes.

But it's hard to argue that choosing the eight densely coupled nodes is simply, you know, true or internal when you can look at what it is and ask whether there's a different way to partition it.

So Joe and then Scott and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Thanks.

Thanks, Daniel.

That's a very clear way of putting that point.

Um,

So just to pick up again on something Chris mentioned briefly, there is a further individuation problem, I think, which is about how to identify which nodes you have in the first place or which variables you have.

And this is a kind of grain question.

So you can always look inside a node and split up into some other nodes or some other subparts.

And this might not be a problem just that Active Inference suffers from.

It's going to be any kind of modeling

is going to have this kind of issue.

But it is going to make a difference to where the boundaries are drawn and what kinds of things you get.

So that's just to say that there's already a kind of human involvement in the model and just choosing what scale you pitch your nodes at.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Joe.

Scott, then Dean, Jelle, and Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
So in that notion, love it, this is great, and that clarification about the nodes being assigned in a sense contextually in a given system state, it seems like if we start to, that may be a pathway to revealing the self-other, or starting to unpack some self-other challenges

So maybe a node that is once characterizable as internal, then characterizable as external, is revealing something about the paradox of membership in groups.

That in fact, it's not the node that changes, but the sensation of whether it's self or other.

So you start to take that

who always paradoxically is that Hofstetter stuff and everyone else who talks about when does a group become a, when does a group form?

When does it have an internal voice?

When does it speak an extra voice?

All that stuff.

And so maybe that analysis and that reassignment possibility starts to get into that.

And maybe that also informs Blue's notion before about the group, you know, kind of the, again, I'm calling it now the Markov quilt as of that last conversation, but that group identity blanket,

where it's patched together, maybe those things are like Irving Goffman and things like that, or mirror neurons, where you want something to be recruited by others as an internal state, you project it to them as an external state intrinsically.

And so the communication, you're inviting others to encode their Markov blankets, similar to yours in a sense, or something like that.

So that is exciting to me that,

slipperiness of assignment there feels like something that offers a pathway to analyzing those dynamics of group and individual identity.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Scott.

So, Dean, Jelle, and Stephen.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So,

Back to construal and the question of how do I get the world, I think a lot of the conversation today has centered on maybe a more clunkier expression, which is how do us get the world, either us as flag conformists or us as red dots versus cyan dots.

So even Friston, Steven shared a video where he was talking to the Santa Fe Institute.

Even Friston said that things get a lot more interesting when we get to the combinatorial level and they're not the same.

as when we're talking about how do I get the world, that there is a difference when complexity arises.

So can we hold up Pearl and Markov blankets and get past the or of this or that, because we recognize that it's a little bit different when how do us get the world?

That's a construal question.

And so that's what I'm kind of curious about.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.

Really powerful and a big difference between how do us get the world, how do we get the world, how do I get the world, how do they get the world?

These are like really markedly different questions.

So Jelle, Steven, Blue.


SPEAKER_09:
So I was thinking of getting back to Blue's question and Shannon's questions on group membership, but maybe if somebody else wants to... Well, I just get talking on the...

A group membership.

So, I mean, to what extent, one, the kind of marker blanket formalism applies to groups, I think is an interesting one.

And I think that's one thing that really matters here is really how you conceive of a group, right?

I mean, you can need like a group of people.

I mean, we are a group of people that is spread out all over the world.

And you could think like a group in the more narrow sense, like a flock of birds or a school of fish.

You say school of fish?

I think so.

And...

These are entities in the same kind of spatial temporal location that coordinate their behavior with one another.

And you can think as a predator arriving or so as a perturbation for that system as a whole.

So in a way, that entity is coordinating its dynamics with the rest of the environment.

You might actually think, no, this is a group that actually two-weights.

the active inference principles do apply.

And you might, in that sense, might think as well that the group as a whole somehow has a marker blanket.

I think that analysis is more difficult to give if you think about group memberships, also kind of the graded group memberships, right?

I think Blue was talking about we belong to multiple groups at the same time and not actively acting on being part of that group, but just as a kind of label that I would endorse when you ask me.

I think there the application of marker blankets is a lot more difficult and at most more metaphorical.

So I just want to say

So exactly how to understand groups there is important.

If Shannon wants to understand crowd dynamics or so, that might be more applicable.

And if you want to really understand social membership and graded membership and membership of different groups at the same time, then yeah, I find it more difficult to understand how the active inference framework can be applied to those kind of groups.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

So Steven, Blue, Scott.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think sort of sticking with that group idea, there could be the idea of morphology and the amount of constraints and affordances in the whole environment, body, organism dynamic that's constraining and where maybe there's not that constraint.

So I'm thinking, I know someone actually is trying to do some Markov blanket meditation processes.

I'm kind of thinking someone's meditating and starting to just...

sense their states in a maybe a way that slowly is like a cloud that self-organizes in a way I could see a more plausible way where a sort of something like not obviously anything the same as this kind of Markov blanket in a soup could be emergent however when you're in a you know a more

real cognitive environment where you've got these priors.

And the only way we were able to access it anyway is through self-reported data, which were a much higher level of dimensionality.

It maybe is only in some of the temporal processes that we can get some analogies.

But I think that it may be very different at different scales.

So the way that constraints play out, I'm wondering how we think about constraints and not having constraints.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice question, Steven.

Are the constraints cooked into this phrasing and that or where are the constraints and how does that shape how we model things across different scales?

So blue and then Scott and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
So hopefully I won't go on too long, but I wanna touch back on what Steven just said and also what Yela said.

When I think about how group membership goes into active inference, like how can we relate these two things?

I think about like specifically, what is the likelihood that I'm gonna take a ride on a yacht today?

So my socioeconomic status doesn't really afford me the opportunity to ride around in yachts very frequently.

So I'd be very surprised.

And I also live in the desert.

I'd be very surprised if I was riding around on a yacht at three o'clock this afternoon, like that just doesn't go into my model.

So perhaps our group membership goes into, you know, construction of the prior and our model in ways that are maybe layered, right?

Like, you know, an onion maybe.

And so then I want to touch back on what Scott said, because this is what really made me raise my hand, about group alignment.

And we were starting to talk with Kasper Hesp when he was on the stream about inferring the states of others.

So I think this group alignment, I wonder about this a lot.

And

specifically with respect to communication, which we've talked about in relation to active inference and cooperation and, you know, building a collective intelligence.

So when we think about, you know, whether the earth is flat or not, right?

Like this at one time was like a hotly debated topic and maybe still is, but this is like, there's been a convergence, right?

So we all now align, are like most of the people in the world agree that the earth is round.

So I wonder about this time to convergence and this has been used to measure information transmission and can we similarly use it to estimate collective intelligence?

So like when we, there's a time to convergence for a swarm or this might also represent like a phase transition, right?

So there's a time to convergence and if it happens rapidly, like the idea is readily adopted that now the earth is round.

So I wonder if these divergent views that we have as people in groups, in divergent groups in a society, do they hinder our collective intelligence or do they actually assist it?

Because without having divergence, we could never actually come to the one true answer.

So is it resistance that hinders the evolution of intelligence or is it something to think about?


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Blue.

Scott, if you're... Go ahead, Shannon.


SPEAKER_05:
I'll just repeat the question you asked right there at the end.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, repeat, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I just wonder about our...

The divergent views that we hold in society about whether the Earth is flat or round, does this divergence help or hinder our collective intelligence and the evolution of intelligence overall?

Or is it resisting adoption of a new view?

So perhaps there's resistance to change.

Even when we see something is correct, like climate change, we can clearly see the effects of climate change, but there's a huge resistance to...

changing?

So is it this resistance that hinders our collective intelligence?

Like what, where is the evolution of our collective intelligence helped or hindered by divergence in views or resistance to adopting new views?

Sorry, it was long.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Shannon, you want to give a thought on that?

And then Scott.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So if we were going to talk, this would be like whether a system is resisting, it's a non-equilibrium steady state and like

moving to a different steady state.

And I guess that's a question I don't, like I've been seeing pop up in a lot of the papers recently is how can you define, not every system is going towards like a minimized free energy gradient or not every system is trying to maintain a stable state, like systems dissipate and reemerge and dissipate and reemerge.

So I don't know, is that just a way to re-ask that question but talk about something a bit more physical than collective intelligence?

And I guess collective intelligence maybe is like collective agreement on a certain set of ideas or norms or something rather than like intelligence like smarter than another person is what we're maybe talking about here.

that system arrive on this steady state of what we think that the world is.


SPEAKER_01:
thanks shannon and there's the convergence on shared generative model on shared mindset but then it made me think of ant colony relocation and over evolutionary time colonies are shaped to appropriately relocate but not instantly and not just choose the first um you know first ant coming back with exciting nest location you can't go for the first one so

how to actually bear with the process of distributed computation or distributed intelligence, knowing that it looks like disagreements at multiple levels, especially when it's not just as simple as ants relocating, but cultural values and beliefs and everything like that.


SPEAKER_05:
Can I jump in again about ants?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah.

Oh, yes.


SPEAKER_05:
There was a new paper, and I don't know who it was by.

I saw it on Twitter.

Um, but it was about ants.

Um, they travel across a scaffold and it's either it's like flat.

And so they just walk where they tilt it.

And so some ants start to fall down and they start to build this scaffold.

Um, and then when they build the scaffold ants can all walk over it.

So they're supporting each other.

Um, and I'm thinking, um, I might be diverging from our Markov blanket topic here, but I'm thinking, um, that collective intelligence is like, as long as the world

looks flat, as long as the world is easy for us to navigate, then we can all go about our day.

We don't really need to try to converge with anybody.

But as soon as the world starts to be disrupted slightly, so we've turned that scaffold, folks start to fall off.

Then we need to build something, build a shared collective notion of reality.

And then the convergence matters.

And so that could be something like as soon as there's a perturbance to the system,

then it's useful to try to recognize boundaries or try to have some sort of intervention.

I think Scott was mentioning to have a boundary that's suitable and helpful and productive.

And that could be where it's fine to diverge all you want as long as everything's simple.

And then as soon as it gets complicated or we start to have harm for people, then we need to have a system

that can result in some sort of convergence.

Happy for someone to bring that back on topic.


SPEAKER_01:
It's a great point, and I almost interpret it as, how do we help those at the fringe who might be being harmed?

How do we make that the stimuli for realignment and for rescaffolding, rather than keep on cutting off more and more?

Oh, the failing part's the bridge.

They gotta go.

They gotta go.

Well, now we have no one on the bridge, instead of seeing that those on the fringe can be part of the recovery.

So, Scott, Kristoff, and Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
So, Shannon, that was right in the middle of the discussion.

You don't have to bring back anything.

That was perfect.

So Admiral Rogers, the former head of the NSA, once said, don't let any emergency or disaster go unexploited.

And the idea is that the disaster is that situation.

People act in a disaster.

You know, Hurricane Sandy, whatever, people, you know, Starbucks, they were putting out power strips for people to share, whatever, right?

So it's exactly that.

And the rhetoric, the projection rhetoric can cause a state change, right?

The anticipation of a disaster when people are actually experiencing, they go, oh my God, this might happen to me or neighborhood watch, right?

People kind of, you know, they go in and they want to protect property and things.

So I love that point.

And bringing it with the other points before, I think it was Christoph that was asking maybe somebody else about

you know, that active inference in a group and does it dissipate in the activity?

If you're just a member of a club and it's kind of lying dormant, is that really describable with active inference?

And it occurs to me, you know, if you look at group dynamics, it may still be usefully described that way.

And here's how I would think of it.

If I, this is Irving Goffman stuff that I project myself out as I want to be perceived by others.

So if I join a club, I may join a club because I want to be like I used to be part of an entomology listserv.

I've never been a this is not about Entenmann's cakes, but insects, you know.

But I was part of a listserv back in the old listserv days, and I just was fascinating.

I sort of wanted to be involved in it.

Right.

So I was projecting myself out and I started making these connections with folks.

So in a way, you can de-risk and leverage by being a member of a group, even passively.

Right.

I can I'm extending out my feelers out there into the world by having that group membership.

I'm de-risking by having that group available to me as me being a member, if it's a group.

So I wonder if the dissipation of activity itself is an appropriate gauge of whether you're a member of a group or not.

Maybe in certain leverages and certain de-riskings, there's a functional engagement that's maybe more passive by the individual, but still may stand for something in the overall goals of that entity.

That's one point.

And one other point is the leveraging de-risking groups.

I keep coming back to eukaryotes.

And eukaryotes, you know, it's a better deal.

We've got multicellular, we've got a lot more options.

We've got mitochondria, we've got chloroplasts, we've got all the good apparatus instead of having just these compartments where you kind of do stuff in the single cell organism, right?

So it's a better deal.

And so maybe part of this thing with the groups, this goes back to Blue's notion, is it, are we resistant?

I think it was Blue, maybe Shannon, but are we resistant to, is this resisting or facilitating

the group membership what's going on here and you know the divergences and the differences and i started thinking about thermodynamics first law if you don't have if you have isothermy you can't perform cannot perform work if everyone has equal information markets don't have trading so there may be a benefit to not having to having divergence right and maybe in fact um the

that reality is there isn't a facilitation or resistance.

It just is.

And that paradox is what we're, is the reality we're seeing is that it doesn't facilitate anything.

There's no goal orientation.

Individuals may have goals, but that's a more bounded goal than the super system of biology.

Anyway, just a couple of thoughts that I gleaned from that last bit.

And also just to remark, once again, what a fantastic conversation.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Scott.

So Christophe, then Stephen, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, so I just wanted to... Well, what did I want to say?

I guess two things really.

So one thing goes back to Blue's comment about the fact that if you have some kind of a complex network, there will be multiple Markov blankets in there.

So it's completely feasible to understand membership to certain groups or something like that, or some kind of relationship structures.

to be overlapping in different ways.

So I think it's conducive to this.

But I think that we should not, like, we're very focused now on this idea of blankets as a way of thinking about some kind of boundaries again, between groups perhaps, or between different kind of units of organization.

And we're not like it's always useful, I think, to kind of go back, zoom out a little and not think about the blankets because you have the blankets whenever you have some kind of a network.

of variables interconnected in some way.

But what's really interesting is that, in many cases, the behavior you will get from these systems, if you project them onto the social domain, will be very surprising.

So one really surprising finding is something called the Zollmann effect.

It's with a Z and double L.

And it's basically a finding that shows that if you have Bayesian agents interacting in a network, if the network is fully connected, they won't actually come to a consensus about some true belief.

So imagine you have a fully connected network of Bayesian scientists and they're testing two hypotheses, right?

And they're testing these hypotheses, they're increasing their credences and they're communicating their credences with each test to their neighbors.

And what's really surprising is that the Tolman effect shows us that these scientists will not actually converge to a singular credence in the true outcome.

What is also surprising is that less connected network will actually eventually converge to all the members having a very high credence in the most likely outcome.

I just wanted to throw it out there.

Because I think that we're thinking now intuitively about these blankets as membership to groups and stuff like that.

But the kinds of interactions we might get from using this kind of formalism and projecting it to a social domain might be quite surprising, right?

I'm not saying it will be useless.

Because perhaps the Tolman effect, to go also back to what has been said about the flat earth situation and the belief in the roundness or flatness of the earth, the Tolman effect actually tells us that in a hyperconnected society like the one we are living now, even rational agents might fail to converge to the most likely hypothesis.

And that actually is something interesting that

In a way, the Tolman effect predicts the appearance of certain conspiracy theories in a hyper-connected society, because given the demographics, for example, of Flat Earth belief, it has been declining for decades until the advent of Internet.

So it only came to a sharp rise with social media, when people started to communicate in a much more interconnected way.

So I'm not saying that thinking about these systems in the social domain is bad.

No.

I just wanted to bring this, let's say, anecdotal effect to say that the kinds of behaviors we will see these systems converging towards might be very surprising.

Or they might not work exactly the way we think they do.

on like lower scales of organization.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for those points.

So Steven, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's some good points there, actually.

And I think this is where active inference and the Friston blanket has some advantages over the Pearl blanket if it's about what action.

There's a risk, you see, that information, you start to have this thing that's all information-driven rather than action policy-driven.

And by keeping it with the action policy, for instance, one of the things about having us on a planet in a solar system, which we used to have, well, now we know we're in a galaxy, in a Milky Way, blah, blah, blah, is that people have this sense of, we're almost meant to look at ourselves from space now, which is really only a proviso of modern technological perspective.

people might want to be able to stay grounded in some way.

There may be actually a psychological challenge with having to take this outer space perspective of us on a little ball going around the sun.

So there could also be an action policy perspective here around

Flat earth gives you a way to reground yourself because it's like, well, I'm on a flat earth.

So I don't have to take that.

I don't have to go and imagine myself in space looking at myself.

So there's a lot of interesting aspects to the action policy side once you start to have this scaling.

And that could be interesting to keep that in mind.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Stephen.

Joe and anyone else?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, thanks.

Just something you said there, Stephen.

When you say there's an advantage to the frist and blankets over the pearl blankets, do you mean an advantage for real systems making use of these things or an advantage for us as modelers?

This is something that I really worry about sometimes, that we slip into thinking about the practical benefits for a system of these constructs, whereas what we're really concerned with is the benefits for accuracy.

And in that context, both might be good tools, but when you use one tool or the other will depend on what you're trying to do with


SPEAKER_03:
I would say more for how we look at it as a modeler.

Although the actual thing gets called a system and then has this kind of prospectival process.

So I think it's good to keep it in mind so that action doesn't get lost and it doesn't purely start to become information.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, great.

No, that makes sense.

And I wasn't necessarily accusing you of this error, but sometimes I do worry that people...

people get mixed up over who's getting the advantage, I guess.

Who's benefiting here?

But if you mean just that it's important to keep action as part of the picture and part of our models, that's a fair point.


SPEAKER_01:
And one contribution of this paper, and we look forward to the revised and published version as well, is like, it's almost like if all we know is Markov blanket, it's like, hey, hand me the screwdriver.

Well, there's different shapes, there's different sizes.

If you have the hex, it's not going to work for the Phillips and different countries or different applications need different screwdrivers.

So now we can, with these adjectives ahead of blanket,

can start to differentiate hand me the phillips screwdriver okay you're talking about the friston blanket you're talking about the pearl blanket and so we can be specific now because it's almost like enough air was pumped into the markov blanket metaphor it was becoming too big of a tent too big of a blanket and so now we can start to be really specific and and address

Those kinds of questions.

When are we talking about utility for the system?

When are we talking about utility for the modeler?

Which, of course, maps very closely to the distinguishing in that you raised with inference with an inference within a model.

So, Scott, if any, Joe, if you want to give a thought on that.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Can I just, I'm really, so we're already pleased with the reception this paper's had, particularly among the active inference community.

And just for the reason you said there, that I think one thing we were worried about, but people have seen is that there is meant to be this more positive message that these aren't necessarily bad tools.

They're just different tools for different kinds of cases.

So I'm really glad that people have seen that and kind of taken that as a helpful message.


SPEAKER_01:
It's the yes and approach to the literature.

It's not blood sports.

It's not a knockdown drag out with citations.

We can just build upon each other and come to more useful and good ways of communicating.

So Scott and anyone else.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, just two points.

One, along those lines in law, one of the most effective strategies for disambiguating something is saying what it isn't.

Even if you don't know what it is, you can at least start to say what it isn't.

That's a handy notion along the lines here.

In the last couple of comments we're observing, we had this thing out there that was very exciting and everyone was playing with it and said, oh yeah, and it's the same thing that's happened in privacy.

The word privacy is just carrying water for all sorts of anxieties right now.

The word trust has all sorts of... The problem with language is

We got a lot of subtlety and a lot of interactions.

Interactions are increasing exponentially through exponential increase in interactions globally is an assertion that I make at least.

And if you think about that, we still have a vocabulary that's the same as it was way down the exponential curve of interaction increase.

So how do we capture our subtleties?

in our interactions, right?

How do we expand our vocabulary?

Well, it's exactly what we're talking about here is we take words, we use them by analogy in other areas,

Right.

We've already talked about blankets.

Well, these aren't really blankets at all.

And in fact, we get hijacked by the notion of blanket.

We already seen that is starting to use those.

Is it a blanket or is it a membrane?

Well, is it semi permeable?

Well, a blanket's not really semi permeable, you know, that kind of stuff.

Right.

So it's fascinating that we have this is the appropriate and very exciting.

challenge to have to the taking it and run running with it idea early on in disambiguation and it means that there's a lot of energy which means there's a lot of need for whatever it is that's being served by the concept and so what you're as modelers this gets kind of interesting kind of gets into manhattan project kind of ethics of science right because as modelers you do have a responsibility and you're discharging it here by saying hey

what does this mean for society you know should we develop nuclear energy unfettered with regard to whether it can be used as a weapon right because this is this is powerful stuff here and so that raising of the notion and the questioning of whether it's appropriate to apply these things socially is going to come up very quickly as people do things like the rhetoric that i'm talking about to start to apply it politically and start to recruit biases using these concepts

that will be seen as a nefarious application of a scientific and mathematical statistical concept.

And so your paper and the questions you're raising now are starting to lay that foundation of pause and saying to people in the future, hey, don't be so fast to run with this and just take a minute to think about the implications.

What isn't this?

And so starting to ask that question can be as important and sometimes more important than what it is.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

There's a question from the chat.

Sean Kelly wrote, are there special cases of Markov blankets that shield internal states, a Markov shield?

So would any of the authors like to just give a response to that?

Yeah, Jelle, and then go ahead, Steve.


SPEAKER_09:
I can give it a try.

Of course, this really depends on what you mean by shielding, right?

And I think in the paper, and also in statistics, I mean, in the paper, we use a statistical notion of shielding that is pretty much equivalent to conditional independence, right?

So if you have three nodes and there's one intermediate node

such that knowing the intermediate node will mean that knowing the third node does not mean anything, doesn't give you anything for knowing your first node, then that's a notion of shielding in the sense that the second node kind of epistemically shields off the activity at the third node from whatever happens at the first node.

And this is an epistemic notion of

epistemic and statistical notion of shielding and also that one right i mean shooting has a lot of kind of more everyday kind of connotations that are necessary not necessarily congruent with the statistical uh notion but if you mean the statistical notion then yes the very definition of a marker blanket is that the things inside of the blanket are given the marker blanket shielded off from the rest of the world in that statistical sense


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

That was what I was thinking.

Insulation, like a heat insulator is shielding it.

And so that is kind of what these nodes are doing statistically.

And then we're nuancing what kinds of categories these nodes might fit into.

And that's a key difference between Pearl's phrasing and Friston's phrasing is the extent to which nodes are classified into different kinds.

So Steven, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think that question about how things, when we scale up is really important and in predictive

processing and the modeling you know you have this hierarchical model of things going up to higher levels and yeah there could be this implicit suggestion that each of those steps or somewhere up there it's going to other size blankets but it may not be that blankets are needed as much um to go another layer it might be that there is some sort of

process structure that is doing the job.

At lower levels, it's a more active inference process.

And if I could give one metaphor, there was a metaphor I'd put on about if there's a flag stuck in some mud and it looks quite stable, but it's blowing in the wind.

Okay.

And then I have another flag, which is stuck in some mud.

It's actually the top of an anthill and underneath the ants are all swarming to hold it still.

So, and it's actually a little bit more still, but actually the hole's more open.

So in the first case, it's energetically thermodynamically more

an equilibrium is being held in a one place.

The second one, you think it's in more of a thermodynamic equilibrium because it seems more firm.

But actually, there's a whole swarm of ants underneath trying to hold it in place.

But none of them have got that intention.

But looking from the outside, the system is holding the flag.

But from the point of view from the ants,

they're trying to enact some sort of action policy and I suppose I wonder if there's something similar between you know the system as seen from the outside as a state and the kind of swarming that's going on underneath and that the two can get mixed up sometimes.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Steven.

Always a great challenge and eternal question, what are the ants trying to do?

But what you just pointed out there is really, it's related to this distinction they draw with these four different cases, the difference between a generative model

which is like the modeler's perspective on something versus the generative process.

And so those are two different generative processes that are giving rise to the movement of these two different flags.

Let's say there's two different processes underlying it.

Those are realist claims about what is giving rise.

And then there's all different kinds of perspectives that can be taken.

But if we mix up two people's perspectives or if we mix up a generative model and a generative process,

it's a category error.

And if we're coincidentally correct, it would be miraculous because it'd be the wrong kind of thing that's being considered.

So it is extremely important to prevent that kind of misinterpretation by really asking, are we talking about the process, the generative process or the generative model?

And sometimes even just that distinguishing as well as this fourfold distinction


SPEAKER_07:
classification raised here these go a long way towards helping model so scott and then anyone else since we have europeans on the line i'd like to talk about kant for a second and i want to display my ignorance of kant um and the categorical imperative so

I complain about the categorical imperative because can one person know enough, have enough situational awareness so that their good act can translate into goodness in the world?

And again, maybe that's a total misinterpretation of Kant or maybe just got it all wrong.

But in the same way, I wonder about Markov blankets and this notion of knowledge and awareness

Because one of the problems we see in the world is even a good actor, if they don't have good information, can do bad things.

Like in the Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations, they put in a Gujarat power plant that was funded by a UN-based financing agency.

and cost them a billion dollars or whatever, and they were crowing about the success of sustainable development goals of energy and development were being pursued and furthered.

But what they didn't talk about, and they then got sued in court over, is the fact that the local fishermen and local population, there was pollution.

poisoned the local waters and the local population with the pollution so they didn't do a sufficient analysis even in this situation where they're trying to improve the world and listing out all these goals of the world that's their declaration that's their amsterdam flag of what they're trying to do with the un right so but nonetheless they pursued one goal at the expense of other goals

And one of the things I'm interested in is your thoughts.

You can go into Kant if you want and also correct me on my bad Kantian non-interpretation there.

But can you comment a little bit on awareness and knowledge?

We talked about group and individual Markov blankets, but can we talk a little bit about that notion about sharing of knowledge and situational awareness just as a survival strategy?

The ants were surviving in Shannon's

tilting bridge example before, which was a survival thing.

In Stephen's flag projection, that was a little bit more of the answer, a little bit smarter about their externalities in that one.

Anyway, but can you comment a little bit about how do we get, how might these analyses and these models and their implementations

in reality and in the lab help us to understand the nature of group information flow?

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for the question.

So if anyone has a thought, yep, Gela, go for it, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_09:
Great.

I'll give it a try.

I'm not sure if I can tie it all the way back to the categorical imperative, but let's give it a go.

So I think the first thing that the way I understand it, the kind of active inference framework is really a theory of learning for a particular kind of environments.

So in a sense, organisms start to learn to adapt to the specific niche that they are engaged in, and then

somehow slowly build up a particular model of that particular kind of niche that you can of course and that that model you can use also for hypothetical kind of situations or counterfactuals or or new kind of situations but there's no guarantee that this kind of previous history uh uh i mean if you if you if you enter a new niche or if the world changes it's it's not guaranteed that your previous knowledge

will be specific to the new situation and will work in the new particular kind of situation.

So I guess there that indeed the kind of active inference framework gives you a perspective on situation specific knowledge and not on the kind of categorical domain general knowledge.

And so this doesn't guarantee indeed that if you

Use your model to make inferences about new situations that you will end up on the right result.

And so that gap between what will be your best action according to whatever kind of imperative you set for yourself in reality and how it works out, that's always a gap in the knowledge that you have.

which indeed is related to the difference between the causal dynamics of the world, the generative process, and the generative model of the world that you have.

And so I guess that's indeed why perhaps, I mean, speculating that different kind of ethical frameworks might fit better in such a kind of approach rather than the ontological one.


SPEAKER_01:
That was very... Oh yeah, go ahead, Chris.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, I just wanted to follow up on this a little bit because the notion of the distinction between the generative model and the generative process was brought up before and now Jela alluded to it.

And I think it's really important to keep in mind that

the free energy principle.

So maybe let's start differently.

The generative process is supposed to be the process or the causal process that produces certain sensations in an organism.

And then the generative model is supposed to be, on this framework, producing predictions, which kind of explain away, in the Bayesian sense, the sensations that the organism is experiencing.

And the idea that's implicit in a lot of the literature is that, you know, you have the generative process on this side, you have the generative model that's trying to mirror the generative process.

There's the sensory sheet in the middle and that these two things will somehow, you know, hold on to each other and they will be just perfect.

There will be some kind of a perfect resemblance or mapping between them.

And it's not entirely clear that this is the most successful, evolutionary successful strategy.

So the generative model only needs to recapitulate the generative process to the extent that it's successful in a given ecological niche or even social niche to ensure the survival and reproduction of the organism, right?

Um, and so, so, so that's one thing that I think important to remember about this, that, that, you know, the free energy principle from the get-go kind of does not necessarily produce agents that are perfectly, that will be always, um, optimally informed about what's going on in their surroundings.

They just kind of really, they, they learn just enough to stay alive and

Of course, the inclusion of active inference gives them an advantage over traditional Bayesian agents because they can also go and try things out and learn in this way.

But it still doesn't take us all the way, so to speak, to transcend our model and get to know the process that's out there in the world.

And I think this is also true in the social domain in many ways.

So in the social domain, I think it's very plausible that the same thing happens.

And we could expect that the same thing will happen for, I don't know, groups, for example, where groups will form certain models about how society operates or how the world is, which will be optimal to their given epistemic situation and their given social situation, but will not be objective models of how society or the world operates.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

And what you just said there at the end about the cultural ways of viewing the world, it's known that many cultures, their own name for their own country or homeland might be like, this is the middle spot, or this is like the main place.

It makes sense.

And it's...

It's unsurprising that it's that way.

But then, just like Scott said, we're all comparing notes.

That's the phase of our test that we're in.

And two people are mapping to a different territory with the same...

relative egocentric map and so this question about how different egocentric perspectives and at which level uh those egocentric perspectives exist at how those come into harmony is really an interesting question so steven and then anyone else who'd like to speak and yeah this is awesome times it's been a great discussion we have 20 minutes or however much more people would like


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I just like to, I really thought that was a really interesting point there about when other approaches are maybe better than taking an ontological approach.

And I suppose it, I think, and you talk about the epistemological approach, I suppose you get into this question of whether it's a more fuzzy, I'd be interested in your thoughts on like fuzzy logic and a more fuzzy based epistemology rather than maybe the type of logical approach

categorization of knowledge which ends up becoming ontological at some point and that there is this idea of ontological pluralism but they're sort of their way around this you know what third wave is that the third wave inactive consciousness has that this idea that the mark of blankets because it breathes with different regimes of attention you sort of trying to get around that problem but

It doesn't necessarily say how they do that.

So I'd just be curious, yeah, a bit more.

And the other thing, if it's tying in with other areas, is like, for instance, they're talking about affect now a lot, and affect is this kind of integration, which then ties in qualitative research where you have axiology, which is kind of normally this thing which is sort of down there in arts-based methods, but, you know, the one where it's about how people feel about things.

Well, now that starts to become part of...

a lot of what we're understanding about the world so it could actually have quite an implication for participatory interactive kind of research methods and making them much more central in a way so i wanted any of your thoughts on that about about that from the authors thanks stephen if anyone has any thoughts on that or can raise their hand yeah yellow go for it um


SPEAKER_09:
I mean, so I guess what we do in our paper is a little bit before that step, right?

So on the question of ontology versus epistemology, should you go for a kind of ontological pluralism or not?

I think what we try to say is that, look, here's a class of models that are typically used in the literature as abstractions from a target phenomenon, right?

And so if you want to understand those in kind of ontological terms, that's fine.

But you need to give a story about how that abstraction relates to the target phenomenon that is there.

So either if you go into metaphysics, you go for a kind of more kind of root, and you say, well, actually, this mathematical model is not an abstraction from the target system, but it actually

nature at its joints is somehow mathematically structured.

Or you say, look, no, these are indeed abstractions produced by us, and they're useful in predicting and interpreting the world, but they are not themselves the world.

So in a sense, we kind of offer the kind of dilemma to anyone who wants to make a commitment there were a choice there between epistemology or ontology or ontological pluralism.

Um, saying like, look, you, you, you can go the ontological route.

And, uh, of course this is the way more challenging, interesting, kind of exciting, uh, route, but then you either need to buy this, this, this, this bullets that, that, that these models are not really abstractions, but somehow on the live reality or need to give some, some other sort of story about how that's, uh, how that works.

And I think personally, I'm curious to see what response from the community will be, which of those options people will take.

But I mean, I don't think either of us is necessarily committed to one of those, but just saying, OK, look, if you want to do it, then these are the rules, so to say.

Maybe disagree with the rules.

That's fine as well.

But then give an argument for that.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

Very interesting stuff.

Anyone else have any thoughts?

Yeah, Stephen, and then anyone else go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I agree a lot with what you're saying there.

I think there are some gaps in...

And rather than saying there's a gap, sometimes it's just filled with the Markov blanket, if that makes sense.

If in doubt, fill it with the Markov blanket.

And I've been really curious.

I'm actually looking a lot in terms of how organisms structure, like the idea of peripersonal space and spatial space.

inactive ecological approaches and the way that maybe there's a way that that space is actually and there's a field called mental space psychology, which has been a very fringe field.

Actually, a lot of it based in Holland and that is

it seems more plausible now with this.

So it was a much more of a practice based approach, but, um, I thought I'd share that anyway, cause I'm presenting something this Friday.

So, um, but it's, I do think there's something missing in terms of, um, mechanisms that extend out beyond the body into the space.

And it may not have to be, um, at all levels, Kristen's blankets in, in, in the traditional sense.


SPEAKER_01:
Shannon, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_05:
I'm gonna talk about brains.

So I know we've been extending, you know, into the world and into the body, into the body and everything.

And we've been talking a lot about group dynamics, and maybe how groups behave, or how we feel like part of a different group.

And earlier, we super briefly touched on

mirror neurons.

Um, so these are neurons that fire when I observe an action, the same as when I do an action.

Um, and there's been a lot of work lately, not necessarily on your neurons, but on interbrain synergies, or you might call them interbrain coherence or cross brain coherence, where lots of dynamics in my brain are firing very similar to lots of dynamics in your brain.

And this could be because like in work from Mary Hassan on neurocinematics, this could be because we're watching a film and it's evoking similar responses.

We're all attending to the same stimulus, but the film that we're watching, it could have a structure where the filmmaker sort of designs what you pay attention to.

And so,

Most people's gazes will fall in that direction.

You'll have even more similar sort of interbrain coherence or unstructured where you're just sort of filming a scene and there's maybe some people over here, some people over there, and your gazes could differ a little bit more.

These structures could differ a little more.

And this is all to say how the film is the environment in this case.

And

if we're talking about the rest of the world being the environment or like us in this room being the environment, our gaze is structured in a certain way by there's a blue box on my Jitsi screen.

So it's sort of directing everyone's attention at my face, but there's also some lack of structure.

I don't know that we're seeing the same tiles in every space.

And there's different ways that

If we interacted, like if I interacted with one of you a lot in my daily life, like maybe Steven and I hang out and get coffee every day and we talk about something every single day.

So we have a propensity to pay attention to similar things in similar ways.

And we've been specifically talking about Yela's idea and how much we agree or disagree with it or something.

So we are continually like drawing our gaze to Yela to see if he understands or agrees with what we're saying.

Like there might be this similar interbrain coherence between Stephen and I that's different between me and Blue because Blue and I never talk.

We're not even friends.

These are all hypothetical, by the way.

And these, so a question, it's not, you know, in your paper necessarily, but like if we're looking for Markov blankets in the world, one thing that we could look at is something like a

interbrain coherence.

And that might be something real in the world, or it might be a pearl blanket, something that we use to describe how people interpret something the same or how their brain activities are synergistic in a certain way.

And if you can be empirical, I know we were being rhetorical a lot of times, but if you can be empirical and look at these signatures of either

you know, conversation dynamics or brain dynamics and can relate them to how the world is structuring them, then that's a way that you can look for, you can still keep looking for Markov blankets in the world or find it useful.

It's definitely, I think what we keep coming back to when we're talking about these blankets as a metaphor, these blankets as something real is that we can totally have both as long as we're specific about

which one we're referring to.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Shannon.

Jelle, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_09:
Thanks, Shannon.

That's really interesting.

And I think that there's a couple of things there, right?

I mean, in either one sense, if two people have the same

same background, same experience or so, right?

They might parse a particular kind of movie or scene in a similar kind of way, such that if you put them in rooms separate from each other, you will indeed see a similar kind of neurodynamic going on in both cases, maybe tied indeed to attention, where you pay attention, you gaze, et cetera.

The other one is indeed kind of

on-site kind of interpersonal synchronization that might be happening right and i know there's this kind of it's kind of second-person neuroscience kind of approaches that that try to capture those kind of things in the experimental setting and see how how how in what particular kind of settings brain waves synchronize and etc um

And that kind of second perspective reminds me a lot of the kind of discussion that's there in active inference on generalized synchronization.

So these are the kind of examples that you get when there's two coupled clocks standing on a table, and they tend to synchronize after a while.

So this is a very simple causal mechanism, causal structure, where synchronization just occurs over time.

And when I first started thinking about marker blankets, I used that kind of example as a kind of reduction at Absurdum, saying, look, if these things even have a marker blanket, then it's an empty notion.

Now, having worked with these philosophers of science here, I think we need to be a bit more specific and indeed say, look,

Whether that thing has or has not a Markov blanket, that's a different question.

But there is a point that there is a very

simple structure of kind of causal dependence and causal independence such that if you would fix the table perfectly the things would not synchronize and if you would let it slide a little bit and wobble a little bit then they would they do synchronize so there is a kind of thing like this intermediate factor that mediates a causal relationship between those those two things now the question is is that do you need to have a marker blanket for that does marker do marker blankets add anything there or is it kind of

story about kind of causal dependence and causal independence enough.

I think that, well, causal dependence there and causal independence such that if I would do this, then there would be no synchronization.

I think that's enough.

And then whether you call that a kind of marker blanket is a second kind of question.

You need to translate it back to the kind of world of causal models and see how they relate to that.

But I think there's a clear case to be made that this is parallel between the kind of cases you're describing and the kind of synchronization settings that are there in this kind of corporate clock example.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

And one interesting aspect to kind of bring it back to this discussion about the internet, you know, what kind of beliefs propagate culturally on what kind of connectivity.

just like Shannon was saying with the video chat and with the live stream, what somebody sees, it's not just like they're sitting in a different chair at the theater and they're watching the same play or they're in separate movies, you know, rooms watching the same movie.

And so cultural cues might lead somebody to look into a correlated position as another person.

But when there's the customization, it's like each person is in their own theater, which takes it to another level because it's actually different inputs and the inputs can be targeted in interesting or new ways.

So it's kind of stretching the limits of our social cognition because it's not just a bunch of people asking what they just saw with a shared event.

It's like trying to come to a shared understanding when people are seeing different events.

So...

yeah there's some new fun things we're learning on the internet i guess well in the last couple of minutes if anyone has some thoughts i'd be curious to the authors or non-authors where do we go from 20.2 where's our momentum or direction or curiosity

One thing I'll bring up while someone's raising their hand is without buzzing in the middle of a conversation, how can we be really clear when we're intentionally or unintentionally slipping the difference between a Markov for Pearl first in blanket and generative model, generative process with a model within a model.

We don't want to police

subtleties of language, but at the same time, somebody can really build a bridge that leads someone to nowhere if they're unintentionally not sure of the difference between these concepts.

So I'm just curious, how do we promote rigorous and accessible norms around talking about these ideas, recognizing that we're all like totally learning this and formalizing the project around us?

Jelle, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_09:
Just a small note.

I don't remember exactly who mentioned this, but at some point we talked about two phases of research, right?

And one is taking an idea and running along, pushing it along as far as you can.

And then there's a new kind of phase where, okay, now we ended up in a completely new place.

uh how how are we going to kind of substantiate this how can i make and formalize this a little bit and i think this is the kind of the i guess over the last few years active inference and also the philosophy of active inference has kind of been just and also i mean also in my own earlier papers kind of been running as far as possible see how far we could get this and see what would happen as a kind of creative kind of kind of

startup stage of research.

And I think both in this paper and in a number of other papers that are currently kind of coming out,

I think this kind of more kind of consolidatory phase is happening where we're like, okay, this is where we ended up.

Does it really make sense?

Do we need to make some more fine-grained demarcations?

Do we need to tweak the conceptual apparatus to have it all make sense?

And it's a different kind of work, but I think that's really important for the next kind of phase for active inference research.

So I hope

These kind of discussions can contribute to doing that kind of work.


SPEAKER_01:
We're consolidating Bitcoin to the key $20,000 level.

You know, let it rest before the next... Maybe, yeah.

Whatever metaphor works for people.

But any other thoughts?

Because that's very nice yellow.

Thanks everyone for sharing.

This was an awesome sequence and it really helped take our lab and our discussion to another level.

We would always welcome any of you to come back to continue the conversation, come for a guest stream, come as a visitor to be on any conversation you'd like.

So thanks again to everyone and for listening.

Peace.
