## _zW1BrLwACY

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome this is active inference live stream 58.0 october 29th 2024 we're discussing the paper from pixels to planning scale 3 active inference

So welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on the slide.

This is a recorded and archived live stream.

Please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.Institute to learn more about the Institute, get involved with projects like live streams and a lot of other things.

Okay, before we jump into the paper, let's say hello.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and really looking forward to this discussion.

Arun, want to say hi, give any context, and thanks again for contributing to the .Zero.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, everyone.

My name is Aaron.

I'm a software engineer in the UK.

I did my PhD a good few years ago, in which I touched on dynamicals with modeling and active inference.

I've been thinking about it for a long time since then.

I came across this paper and thought it was really hard.

And so I requested, guys, can we do a live stream on this?

I'd really love to understand this paper properly.

And now I've somehow ended up contributing to the live stream.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
okay so we're discussing this paper from july 2024 from pixels to planning scale free active inference by carl friston and colleagues the rest of this video is going to be some background and context and an introduction and an overview

of the ideas it's not a review it's not comprehensive it will be part of an exciting series where in the coming weeks in the dot one and dot two we discuss with the authors and the dot two is going to fall during the applied active symposium so that'll also be really fun

Okay, let's go to the big questions.

What are your big questions around whether it's about the paper specifically or what are the big motivators that made you excited and want to pursue these affordances?


SPEAKER_01:
So I think the big one is the title, right?

And I think the question of scale is one that's plagued a lot of Active Inference implementations and previous papers in the past few years.

Everyone's like, oh, yeah, I'd love an Active Inference agent that can do stuff.

But if I have more than a few states, I get a combinatorial explosion.

and things either fall over or they take a very long time compared to alternative methods that are out there.

So the question of scale is a really important one and I think this paper nominally looks like

There's a way around that.

Also, the renormalization group as a way to do that is, I think, a very interesting one.

It draws from a lot of physics that I actually studied a very, very long time ago.

So that really spoke to me and I thought it was really, really nice to see some things that apply to also like Ising model of ferromagnetism.

some other key parts of thermodynamics that now come into AI, which active inference has been doing for a while with the free energy minimization part.

But I think the renormalization group is a really interesting part of maths that seems to get you a lot further.

I also had some much more technical questions, which maybe don't fall under the big questions, which you'll definitely come on to later when I was reading this paper and looking at it and I go, I don't understand actually what's happening here.

So I'd really love to dive into those and particularly catch up with the authors in the later episodes to get some of the more technical answers on how these matrices and tensors play together, which seems to defer a little bit to the textbook by Parr and some of the other formulations by the RxInfer group as well.

So actually getting into the nitty gritty of how we implement this will be really fun for me.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Blue also contributed to the .zero, and so she wrote, what is a path?

More specifically, how are paths related to the renormalization group?

How is the renormalizing generative model, RGM, different from the active inference generative model that we usually study?

And how do paths tie into transitions between categories?

And I had similar questions.

What is the renormalization group?

How is it being used here?

How does that make the generative models structurally or functionally different?

How does that have implications for different media?

Few key claims.

They're considering one solution to the implicit scaling problem with scale-free generative models that are linked through the renormalization group.

They're going to explore generalized MDPs, Markov Decision Processes, as discrete models that do functional cognitive tasks like compression, content generation, and planning.

They're going to pay attention to universality and scale and variance for specifying structural form of generative models.

And then there will be a sequence of worked examples that we're going to spend most of the dot zero walking through.

And they highlight that these kinds of RGMs with quantized paths may or may not be useful in certain application domains.

So that's kind of the meta ML question is where, or how would we know where this would or wouldn't be more effective than another given kind of model, no free lunch at all.

Could you read the abstract?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, sure.

So this paper describes a discrete state space model and accompanying methods for generative modeling.

This model generalizes partly observed Markov decision processes to include paths as latent variables, rendering suitable for active inference and learning in a dynamic setting.

Specifically, we consider deep or hierarchical forms using the renormalization group.

ensuing renormalising generative models can be regarded as discrete homologues of deep convolutional neural networks or continuous space models in generalised coordinates of motion.

By construction, these scale invariant models can be used to learn compositionality over space and time, furnishing models of paths or orbits, in other words, events of increasing temporal depth and itinerancy.

This technical note illustrates the automatic discovery, learning, and deployment of RGMs using a series of applications.

We start with image classification and then consider the compression and generation of movies and music.

Finally, we apply the same variational principles to the learning of Atari-like video games.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Okay, moving on to... Daniel, you're on mute.

Thanks.

To the roadmap.

The first section is the introduction.

Section 2 is the background formalism.

This is going to make connections with the generative models from the textbook.

Then section three, four, five, six, we'll go through a sequence of worked examples.

We're going to front load the focus in the dot zero on sections two and three, and then four, five, and six unfold kind of naturally.

Three is a static image MNIST handwriting dataset task.

Section four is a cyclic video that then slides into a chaotic attractor dynamical system.

and a natural video.

Section five goes into sound, and six is the general planning case from pixels to planning, and seven's a short conclusion.

So it's pretty much introduction and conclusion like bookends.

Section two is where the general formalism is, and then three through six take us on from handwriting, several kinds of videos, dynamic images, sound, and then gameplay and planning.

Here are the keywords of the paper.

Active inference, active learning, Bayesian model selection, renormalization group, compression, structure learning, RG flow, renormalizing generative model.

So those are good terms if you're uncertain about to jump into.

okay we have a few slides on some of these background concepts just to get it up front so we can proceed with the paper when we get there let's start with what is renormalization so of course much could be said but what what would you say what is renormalization


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I think this is in itself quite a loaded term.

There's a lot from physics.

And if you look at the Wikipedia page, the third link that's there, there's a lot in that Wikipedia page.

It's very confusing.

A lot of quantum electrodynamics coming in.

And I think Feynman has an attitude on it.

He says he's not a fan of it.

um but uh i think for our purposes the top quote that's there that's coming from the paper is actually good enough for a large part so we basically take some sort of system and we say this is way too hard this is way too complex there's way too many moving parts what is a like a take-home message what is the summary of what this is doing

at a macroscopic level compared to the micro level.

And there are some examples in the upcoming slides on particularly talking about thermodynamics and materials where this will become more obvious as to how this might work in practice.

But I think the coarse-grained version that retains the properties of interest is really what to focus on going forward.

And yeah, lossy compression for the signal processing engineers in the audience.

This is very much a case of you're not keeping everything when you renormalize.

You're keeping what's important.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah.

As you coarse grain, so spatially, like thinking about a radius or like a convolutional diameter getting larger and larger, you're choosing a bigger chunk to grain over, coarse graining, and renormalizing what those edges and relations amongst blocks are.

So you have one model, it's a...

10 by 10 square so you have blocks of size one and all those edges and then you decide okay we're gonna look at blocks of two by two you have fewer blocks fewer edges so you have to renormalize all of your parameter estimates and then you end up with hopefully capturing some of the signal with fewer parameters aka compression whether it's lossy or lossless

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm going to pick up on one thing quickly where you said spatially, and you can renormalize through space, but you can also renormalize through time.

You can renormalize through any dimension you want.

It's just easier to imagine the space and time ones.

So the time analogy that I think they use in the paper, which is quite a good one, is thinking about if you're, let's say you're watching TV and you're watching something.

And in that moment, there are two characters talking that might form part of a scene.

which is one renormalization, and then you have a series of scenes, which would be an episode, and then you'd have multiple episodes in a series.

So the time one, actually, I find a bit more intuitive to understand what renormalization is.

And you can say, oh, yeah, something happened in a particular episode.

You can say something happens in a particular series, something happens in a particular scene, but that thing you might be describing might actually be more fine-grained or more coarse-grained.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome yeah the examples will start with the static handwriting and move on to include time and you're totally right about the time scales it's like saying what's the transition matrix from minute to minute or hour to hour or day to day but each moment is measurable with seconds minutes hours or so on okay how about the spin block transformation


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so now this is sort of back to material science and magnetism.

So there's a fairly well understood model of magnetism called the Ising model and physicists generally quite like it, mathematicians quite like it.

You imagine a big magnet, there's lots of little magnets that will line up in a grid, and each magnet just talks to the little magnets around it.

And you can recover quite a lot of actual behavior of magnets in the real world with a fairly simple model for this.

But the spin block transformation is largely going, well, if I have lots of little magnets together and they're all pointing the same way, I can just think of it as one big magnet that's the sum behavior of all of these little ones.

And this is a trick that we play a lot in physics of going from the micro to the macro.

The micro is too hard to model.

It's too painful.

You've got all these particles.

They could all be doing, you know, spinning every which way.

all their speeds and velocities and if you had all of them then you could add them all up and you could figure out what's going on or you can just you know get a thermometer measure the temperature right and the temperature that one number tells you a lot about how this thing is going to behave so you can get a lot of value just from the macro but if that macro is composed of all of the micro so depending on where you are in your core screening of your scaling behavior uh you can get either a lot done or a little bit done and it's just what's useful to you

So I quite like this sort of quote at the bottom about the magnitude of an observable of a physical system undergoing an RG transformation and whether that observable is relevant or not.

I think that's quite important to bear in mind for the future examples of, well, if something is always increasing, it's always getting bigger, then you're going to see it on the coarse grained transformations that you see later.

but if it's always decreasing at a particular level you're not going to see it on the higher levels you're only going to see it on the lower levels so it'll have so this gives you some uh understanding of causality of when you're going up or when you're going down uh on the core screening um so yeah like particle speeds and temperature is a nice uh a nice uh example of this and similarly magnetism with the spin block transformation

But by and large, what are these transforms doing?

If you take a grid of lots of little things, you just go, well, I'm just going to summarize this with a single thing that represents that behavior and then move on with my day.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

okay quick on the singular value decomposition there's a nice interactive explanation this is related to principal component analysis and it's a way to proportion variance and to take the biggest cut of variance

for a given decomposition for a dataset.

And you can take, we'll look at it in application a bit later, but it's used to assess the vectors of variance, and then you can truncate them and use that to capture increasing amount of variance for a given dataset.

We'll look at it in a specific case.

And last kind of background topic on locality principle.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I don't actually know a huge amount about the locality principle, but I think it's a general intuition that things next to each other affect each other and things far away, in theory, don't affect you.

There are definitely some things where if this is violated, this feels very weird.

I think quantum entanglement is probably an example of that.


SPEAKER_00:
uh but i'm gonna stop speaking there because we've hit the limit of my knowledge yes i think wittgenstein wrote something about that okay and this is just a few of the other links but there was a ton of other links that people brought up over the months preparing for this okay onto the paper so

here's the link to the coda i'll put this in the youtube live chat right now just if anyone wants to follow back to the workspace where we did the preparation work if you're watching live write any questions in the live chat and we'll check it at the end

What we're about to do is go through much of the paper, pulling out some of the key quotes in the main thread, and we show most or all the figures and some of the formalisms.

Of course, they're all there in the paper.

This is just the highlights so that we can get this done in a reasonable linear amount of time.

in preparation for conversations with the authors further open source development and all that so okay here we go onto the paper so first three sentences of the paper this paper considers the use of discrete states discrete state space models as generative models for classification compression generation prediction and planning so for context we're in the discrete time setting

Figure 4.3 from the 2022 textbook.

We're in the top setting.

The inversion of such models can be read as inferring the latent causes of observable outcomes or content.

So this is the tale of two densities, meaning that generative models can be used to generate synthetic observations from latent state estimates, that's the generative direction or decompression, as well as infer latent states from data, that's the recognition direction from observations to latent states.

And then last of these three sentences, when endowed with the consequences of action, they can be used for planning as inference.

So in contrast with sort of a sterile sense-making or perceptual inference task,

Active inference considers action as part of a joint inference distribution or problem, which constitutes the agent.

So think about how the agent is defined as ABCDE matrices as sensemaking, latent state transition operations, and the consequences of action.

so improvements to generative modeling technologies have wide-ranging implications for a variety of both sense making perception tasks on the inbound as well as decision making and action tasks on the outbound which is kind of the theme of active inference that action can be treated as an inference problem any thoughts on these first slides um no i think we should keep going cool okay specifically

This paper explores the use of generalized Markov decision processes.

This generalization in question rests on equipping a standard, partially observed Markov decision process with random variables called paths.

this affords an expressive model of dynamics in which transitions among states are conditioned upon paths which themselves can have lawful transitions so we're going to return to this figure again but the big picture is that from the sort of textbook basic pomdp we're going to add some sophistication which is that variables called paths

will condition the state transitions and those could fall under the agency or the efficacy of an agent or not there can be lawful probabilistic transitions among paths which are like transitions amongst actions in a policy sequence except that actions in a policy sequence would be understood to be under the control of an agent and and those paths states influence transitions of latent states

Figure one shows that several concepts of depth in generative model.

We have temporal depth, which means a deeper unrolling through time.

So this is just predicting more time steps deeper into the future linearly.

So if this was each one was one day, this is just going rolling out for a bigger number of days.

hierarchical depth would be if we had a model that had days months and years and the way that it could deal with longer time scales would be have 30 days within a month and then 12 months within a year so nested hierarchically recursive layers

deal with deeper time scales instead of needing to unroll 365 days.

And factorial depth can be thought of kind of like a multi-sensory model.

So here's an observation of sound and here's an observation of light.

And then those different modalities can be factorized separately from each other, like the what and the where in the brain to simplify.

And that's another way in which generative models can have depth.

Any more thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_01:
I think one thing to highlight is first of all, the notation is quite difficult to understand in this figure.

I found it really hard.

There is also a...

I think there is a difference, at least in my mind, when I read this figure in the caption compared to, say, the textbook, which is the C matrix.

So I think previous formulations of actor inference, the C matrix tends to represent the prior preferences of an agent, sort of its goals, its values.

It's like, I expect to see these observations.

so if i don't then i'm going to experience a higher free energy so i'm either going to change my mind or change take some action to change the world so that my observations match my priors better and i get a lower free energy here the c matrix seems to be encoding probabilities of paths it's not entirely clear to me how we get value into that as opposed to just

what it expects to see.

So maybe there is a distinction here that I haven't understood, or maybe it is genuinely a shift.

I'd be really curious to ask the authors specifically


SPEAKER_00:
in the future episodes yeah pending authors accounts but two things I would note to echo that first is every variable through time can be understood as a trace or a path whereas path is also being used to refer to just this specific upstairs string

And then a second case of overloading is C, while in previous situations, like in figure 7.3 or 4.3 from the textbook, we have C as playing a role in expected free energy calculation, pragmatic value, the preference over observations.

Here, it's not the same C. C as preferences is over observations.

Here, transition probabilities are encoded in C. So it's kind of like a B, but this just goes to show letters are just letters and future software will be able to flip out and have different shapes and notation and all of that.

So don't get too attached to the letter.

look at how they're locally defining things even though that can be really challenging learning too okay the generalization becomes particularly important when composing markovian processes in deeper hierarchical architectures this follows from the use of states at one level to generate the initial conditions and paths at a lower level this recursive aspect speaks to a definitive feature of the generative models considered in this paper renormalizability

This is the big idea.

Multiscale hierarchical models can be built using this paths-on-states-on-paths-on-states-on-paths-and-dot-dot-dot-dot method, which describes this renormalization happening across scales.

you could have the inch by inch path and then that's nested within a foot by foot and mile by mile or you could have the minute by minute path and that's nested within hour by hour and day by day so by having this layering of states and paths and states and paths there's a clean way to get the separation of spatial or temporal or arbitrary scales so

that's the big background formalism one other way to get an intuition here's from our paper on the renormalization group in free energy principle applied to multi-scale biological systems

On the bottom, we have the kind of figure that we've seen in many active inference papers, where we're thinking about the cognitive behavioral entity like a worm, where the sensory states can be associated with perception, the active states with action, internal states with cognitive states, and all of that.

At the end of the day, there's also this nested, extended evolutionary process that is happening at the population scale.

So that's kind of like nesting the phenotype of individual worms within a population of worms or within an ecological distribution.

And then last note here, in this setting, a policy is not a sequence of actions, but a combination of paths where each hidden factor has an associated state and path.

This means there's potentially as many policies as there are combinations of paths.

So because these paths are kind of like context combinations, it means that there's a double explosiveness to them.

So understanding how do you handle that and understand the computational complexity class, and again, where it wouldn't be useful, those are key questions.

Any thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think that last bit, especially in a paper that's talking about scale-free active inference, and then now we're not just combining states for that combinatorial explosion.

Now it's combinations of paths of states and actions.

In theory, this should be much worse.

So I think

At the moment, I'm reading this and I'm thinking we're going to pay even more of a cost in terms of computing what the hell is going on.

But I think the renormalization group and making these models hierarchical pays for it.

That's my intuition of reading this paper.

So yeah, there's a good quote to have there and it's a good thing to have bolded.

I don't think you're ever going to get a free lunch, but you have to pay for lunch.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah the number of ingredients for lunch um okay in what follows we illustrate applications of the renormalizing generative model rgm in several settings um

The renormalization group requires the functional form of the dynamics, in terms of belief updating, is conserved over levels or scales.

This is assured in variational inference in the sense the inference process itself can be cast as pursuing a path of least action, where action is a path integral of variational free energy.

Another classic term overloading action here isn't like the robot moving its arm.

This is the physics action, sometimes with a capital A.

because all inference under free energy principle is considered in terms of the path of least action we can be assured that arbitrarily thick wide thin tall small world however you want to create the topology of a generative model we can be ensured that we're in an analytical setting where the models are quote doing the same thing

at different scales and then this takes us all the way from the first principles framing of the problems all the way on through the software tools like rx and fur which might be implementing these kinds of generative models also in this kind of ecumenical way the only thing that changes between levels are the parameters of the requisite action eg sufficient statistics of various probability distributions

That's to say, the functional properties of the RGM are simply determined and described by how it's parameterized.

So was it statistics all along?

And that's what we have in figure three with showing what that blocking looks like.

These are statistical parameters that are learnt.

So the description of the topology of this graph is the structure, which is either fixed or designed or set or learnt as a structure learning problem.

And then there's the values for a given situation that these variables take on.

and here's that state path essential coupling that's the state paths state path so compare this with hierarchical or multi-level Bayesian regression compare this with hierarchical predictive processing architectures state path state path and each of those constitute a separation of scales all of this is a statistical model any thoughts on this


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think the hierarchy part is absolutely key here.

There is a little aside in the paper about which things in a hierarchy can affect which things in the lower part to make the inference actually possible.

So this is the idea of the Markov blankets and whether a child can have multiple parents, that sort of thing.

I think we possibly will come onto that later.

But overall, the main critical thing is

stuff happening at a higher level in your hierarchy is determining a lot of what's happening at the lower level, but information can flow back up with the observations that you get at the lower level to infer those parameters at the higher level.

So that's the classic active inference sort of top-down, bottom-up approach.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah awesome okay next section active inference learning and selection this section overviews the model which is used in the numerical studies of the following section and figure one provides an overview of the generative model that's considered in the paper we already took a quick look outcomes at any time depend upon hidden states that's the a matrix that's the partially observable part

while transitions among hidden states depend on paths and that's this sort of way that we see the transitions amongst latent states so that's the B matrix which is intervening between hidden states S B is being imposed upon by this path happening so it's almost like this is a this is like a rail or a guide up top

that's influencing how the actual latent state ends up unfolding through time.

And at each time point, there's the emission of an observation, that's the generative direction, or it could be taking in an empirical data point and then updating beliefs through time.

They describe the variables just like in the caption

The tensors are generally parameterized as Dirichlet distributions whose sufficient statistics are concentration parameters or Dirichlet counts, which count the number of times a particular combination of states and outcomes has been inferred.

We focus on learning the likelihood model encoded by Dirichlet counts, A. And that's known as learning by counting.

So that's the kind of classic case of pulling balls out of an urn.

and then tallying every time you see a certain kind of ball coming out of an urn or here it would be like pulling balls out of an urn and it's either cloudy or sunny and then you're doing learning by counting on the context and the outcome and then you're using that to parameterize everything else

carrying on a little bit with this and again connecting back to the 2022 textbook compare with figure 7.3 pomdp

The details are basically the same, except notice that paths U are described, as we mentioned earlier, C in the textbook, just the letter C, it's not actually that variable computationally, but the letter C is being used for preference distributions over observations.

Here, C is playing a role in the transition.

It's kind of like a B, but for this meta path.

In the textbook, we have a single-layer model.

Now, it has compositionality, but it's just a single-layer model, whereas in the paper we're discussing today, hierarchical levels are described in terms of this state-path-state-path alternation approach, and there's factorial depth.

Here, the procedural order of operations for the generative model is provided as policy selection

generate hidden state sequences and generate expected outcomes.

This is the forward or generative direction.

We could also go the recognition direction from real observations to policy inference.

So they're unrolling a policy centric approach that yields expected outcomes.

That's like running the generative model from policy inference out

as opposed to running a generative model from data processing to belief updating about policy going in.

Just to highlight some kind of points of contact, similarities with the textbook for those who dapple.

Any comments?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I think that was really good.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Equations 1, 2, and 3 in this paper are akin to equation 2.5 and 2.6 in the textbook on variational free energy and expected free energy.

So to learn about the different decompositions of variational free energy in terms of the ones that look more statistical, like divergence minus evidence, complexity minus accuracy, or the ones that look more statistical physical, like energy and entropy,

that's variational free energy and then analogously with equations two and three in the paper or equation 2.6 in the textbook we have expected free energy with the classical decomposition into epistemic value pragmatic value okay now we get to active inference um there's a lot we could say here

they describe that first sentence of active inference section in variational inference and learning sufficient statistics encoding posterior expectations which could be about sense making as well as action posterior expectations about what i am going to do pi

are updated to minimize variational free energy.

So that's the idea of seeing everything it is that the agent is and does on the inbound perceptual and outbound action selection as part of a joint distribution that's undergoing variational free energy minimization.

That's the active inference concept.

note the circle with a dot notation so the notation implies a sum product operator the dot or inner product that sums over one dimension of a numeric array or tensor so note the difference between circle with a dot as the inner product or tensor contraction while circle with x is the outer product so to look at the figure with message passing

and which brings in this circle with a dot notation.

Here we see the same graph that we saw in figure one.

In figure one, we have a Bayes graph.

So the nodes are variables that we would encode in our program, and then the edges are causal relationships.

So that's the kind of classic systems modeling kind of flow interaction mind map.

Here in this figure, we see a factor graph representation.

Now, in Livestream 55 and in the Realizing Synthetic Active Inference Agents discussion and other discussions, we've talked more about the relationship between Bayes graph and the Forney factor graph representation.

Suffice to say that what it is that nodes and edges are basically get flipped, but there's a full reproducibility.

so that here we have ways to look at the logistics of message passing amongst these nodes.

And it turns out that under the hood, this is what RxInfer is doing when it's being implemented.

So maybe if we get more into implementation, we could talk about that.

This figure is just showing that for that POMDP,

which is going to be doing the real work of active inference on the perceptual and the action selection side.

It's not just that we can link up the variables on the base graph that account for what we want to do.

It's that there's a specific logistics and we know exactly which messages to pack and send in order to get this whole variational inference done at the graph level.

And that can be done with either a determined logistical schedule

or it can be done in a reactive message passing setting.

Okay, active learning.

Bayesian model reductions a generalization of ubiquitous procedures and statistics.

In the present setting, it reduces to something remarkably simple.

By applying Bayes' rules to parent and reduce models, so a model of k parameters and of k-1 parameters, it is straightforward to show that the change in variational free energy can be expressed in terms of posterior Dirichlet counts A, prior counts A, and the prior counts that define a reduced model.

So A' corresponds to the posterior one would have obtained under the reduced priors.

The alternative to Bayesian model reduction is bottom-up growth of models to accommodate new data or content.

If one considers the selection of one parent model over another augmented model as an action,

These two equations in the active learning section are like the add and remove variable operations and ultimately what allow us to compare any Bayesian model.

So model comparison amongst nested, strictly nested models can be done in the fully parametric setting using the hierarchical likelihood ratio test.

Bayesian models allow model comparison amongst models that differ in only one parameter, like adding or removing one parameter as part of structure inference, or there could be radically different model topologies underneath.

And that can be evaluated in terms of like a Bayes factor support for one model over another.

It also connects to a lot of work, theoretical and applied in sleep-wake type models, where parameters are added, fit increases during wake cycles, and then synapses are pruned, models are reduced, core screening occurs during sleep.

And the big picture is you can use Bayesian model comparison

framed as a free energy landscape optimization just as always comparing different base graphs comparing different generative models and then this results in the expression of a log base factor or an odds ratio comparing the likelihood of two different models so this allows comparison of different models and the selection of different models as its own inference task

Any thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just one thing I want to pick up on is I actually can't remember, like, I guess with this paper, I think they were just doing sort of like, it's almost like just purely the bottom-up approach, right?

They're not starting with like a massive model and then

You couldn't start with a very big one at the top and then coarse-grain down.

You have to coarse-grain sort of going up the hierarchy, as it were.

So I think we end up going with this bottom-up growth of models because you don't want more levels than you need necessarily.

Or if you have an image and you're trying to classify it and it's, I don't know, 32 by 32 pixels and you just subdivide it by two,

you need to start with your pixel, you need to start with your full image width first and then coarse-grain, coarse-grain, coarse-grain up, rather than going, ah, A4RI, I'm going to have N levels and then cut them down after.

So I think that's probably going to be more on the bottom-up growth of models for this particular paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, good point.

How do you know how big to make each scale and how many scales?

We won't read all the text on this page, but big claim.

Renormalizability is feasible under the models in Figure 1.

So that's kind of the rhetorical chain is, here's the models that we're working with in Figure 1.

These models have renormalization properties.

That is what makes this state path, state path layering amenable to scale-free or scale-friendly or multi-scale generative models.

claim is that given the renormalization properties of base graphs like or including the ones that they're describing with this state path state path nesting there can be computationally tractable possibly multi-level renormalization and the rest of the paper they're going to be explaining and unpacking that and adapting it to specific settings

These renormalizing transformations have the effect such that the dynamics slow down in time and space as one ascends levels or scales.

So compare that with other work on information theory of individuality, bottom-up and top-down information flows and causality, gapping and laddering.

And also they're saying that the structure and the tuning of the variables in the graph, which would yield the full reproducible description of the renormalizable generative model, itself can be reached through this Bayesian model comparison.

We had some questions about how the discrete and continuous time are different.

A more intuitive view is that successively higher levels encode sequences of sequences and implicitly composition of events or episodes.

In other words, at a deep level, one state can generate sequences of sequences of sequences, thereby destroying the Markovian properties of content generated at the lowest level.

So this is like encoding or sedimenting nested sequences or paths in event-based or order structured narratives.

Deep structure is what allows

or possibly advanced or naturalistic, interpretable, fill in your preferable adjective there, models of complex phenomena that do have deep structure like speech and writing and story.

and they're going to be walking through renormalization through space in terms of pixels time and in general spaces so it's cool to think about like chris fields and mike levin's work on competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as an invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments

So the idea that space and time are just some state spaces, but other state spaces like semantic embeddings from an LLM or other kinds of state spaces might also have these abilities to yield to the renormalization operation.

Any comments?


SPEAKER_01:
No, that was all good.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Figure 3 is a graphical model, which we looked at a little earlier, where groups of states at a lower level are generated by a single state at a higher level.

So here we have a state at a higher level, S sub 1 superscript n plus 2, and then flowing out of it, we have the state and the path at a lower level.

Higher states only change after a fixed number of lower state change.

So that could be two.

It could just be twice as fast, like a frequency doubling every time there's a time scale separation, or it could be fixed like 60 minutes per hour, and or it could be fully reactive in terms of using Rx and Fur for a just-in-time type responsive updating.

And this is somewhere where I think that generalized notation notation will be really helpful because talking about what these variables are in detail gets pretty messy.

um because each state and path has only one parent the ensuring markov blanket the blue circles of each state red circle ensures conditional independence among latent factors there is a strict uniparental inheritance factorization pattern in the hierarchical model so can latent factors remain conditionally independent so note that the s and the u here are not connected

Conditioned upon the higher S, they are conditionally independent.

That simplifies the runtime inference.

In sum, a renormalizing generative model, RGM, is a hypergraph parameterized by two sorts of tensors, the A and the B, in which the children of states at any level bipartition into initial states and paths.

In this example, the blocking transformation groups pairs of states and paths.

so here it's kind of like a and b again not exactly the a and the b letters from the textbook but note that a describes the likelihoods or empirical priors and b is the dynamics so a is broadly referring to like this instantaneous sense making like relationship between

latent states and observations whereas b is describing the dynamics and the transitions through time so i'm not sure if it's exactly that simple but a is kind of describing synchronous attributes of the model whereas b describes diachronous through time aspects of the model okay anything else


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, I think one thing to really hook onto is the uniparental inheritance thing.

So I think you're correct when you say, yes, that makes everything faster and less computationally difficult.

That is a good thing.

uh but i think there's a more philosophical thing to raise as well which is when we're talking about causality going up and down the levels uh and learning should in theory be a lot easier uh when you only have a single cause for something so that means that when you make an observation it's much easier to infer oh

the parent must have been this in order to cause what I see.

And you don't have to consider multiple factors coming in and going, ah, well, it could have been any one of 10 different factors that mean I saw what I saw.

So that learning process as well, when we talk about the direct line counts earlier, should be a lot easier to do when you have only a single parent for a particular variable.

um so yeah that conditional independence among latent factors i think also features into the locality aspect as well of uh when we're talking about the very beginning of the session but i'm not 100 sure on that but that's my intuitive understanding of what's going on there cool okay one can also regard rgm as an expressive way of modeling non-linearities


SPEAKER_00:
In the limit of precise likelihood mappings, this can be viewed as the composition of logical operators.

One can see why an RGM can compose operators to represent or generate content that has compositional structure.

The inversion of an RGM could be construed as a simple form of abductive logic.

Okay, now we're going to get to the examples.

Here we go.

First example, image compression and compositionality.

So first it's helpful for background to look at variational autoencoders.

These take in some input observations, they project down to a latent space that's smaller and then decode out to reconstruct.

So it's really similar to a variational autoencoder.

And look at the first word, variational free energy, variational autoencoder.

They just call it the ELBO, not the VFE.

There's so many similarities between this method and active inference that it's really helpful to study up.

It just sometimes uses a little bit of a frame shifted ontology.

Here's what they do.

They're studying the classic MNIST handwriting data set.

They map continuous pixel values to a discrete state space, and then they're going to learn the structure through recursive applications of a blocking transformation.

They group together local pixels by tiling or tessellating the image.

So that's the first step, is they tessellate over the image at multiple scales.

So the smallest dots is a 4x4 cluster of pixels.

Then the medium-sized dot is four of those.

So then one, two, three, four, these get clustered into this one.

And then one, two, three, four get clustered into that one, and so on.

So that's the spatial static renormalization via spin block locality principle process.

Each group is then subject to singular value decomposition.

given the training set of images to identify orthogonal spatial basis of singular vectors.

So this is the grouping and the reduction.

Grouping is the tessellation.

It's like a convolution.

We'll talk more about how it differs from convolution, like a convolutional neural network.

And then they truncate.

So here's an example from the form index project, but there's many other places you can look at this.

This is what, for a principal component analysis or for an SVD analysis,

every single time it selects the vector that explains the most orthogonal variance and then it takes that profile out of the original data and then it takes the next most variance explaining vector and so you end up with something that looks like a variance explanation curve so the first 10

components explain 70%.

To get to 90% on this data set, it took 50.

So if you say, well, my computer only has space for 10, just take 10.

Or if you say, well, I'm interested in this kind of Bayes optimal, Pareto optimal crossover point,

you can solve it that way or maybe you have other constraints so that's pretty much how it's working is they're structurally using the nesting with these four by four spin glass blockings and then they do a SVD truncation compression method on each level of that blocking

this is how the path state path state path state works it's a multi-scale blocking convolution tessellation operation to group then svd with truncation to reduce to a defined state space they only retain 32 of the variables from the svd at each level um

There's more on this slide, but one thing that'll certainly be interesting to discuss with the author is, at first glance, this procedure may appear to generate likelihood mappings of increasing size because the combinatorics of increasingly large groups could explode at higher levels.

However, by training on a small number of images, one upper bounds the number of states at each level.

In other words, one can effectively encode a finite number of images without any loss of information such that RGM inversion corresponds to lossless compression.

So, what's the deal with training data?

How do we know about what is going to be an optimal or effective data size, variability, information content, or curriculum for the dataset?

How do we address that data selection problem, sometimes called active data sampling?

And then to the point about the lossless compression, one can effectively encode a finite number of images without loss of information.

So how can or does this do compression better than, for example, Gzip or LLM?

That was a great moment in computational history when people realized that in certain ways, these models are doing information compression and that even Gzip or just file compression utilities have attributes that trained machine learning models have because of information theory.

And how do we know and infer or describe these trade offs related to the training data set and the structure of the model all these different things.

As we expand the scope of our modeling degrees of freedom and how has this problem been solved similarly or approach differently in other work on information geometry in variational auto encoders.

And then just last piece on working through this example.

So again, they pre-processed the MNIST images.

The images were downloaded from the link here.

They were converted to the format that they needed.

Then they say an exemplar image is shown in figure three in the paper.

I think that should be figure four.

And then they're showing the centroids of each of these groups.

So this is just to get an intuition for what this multi-scale spin glass blocking is doing with the success of clumping and grouping into these multiple spatial scales.

Okay, any comments?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think I'm still very confused as to how this ends up being from the previous slide, how you get lossless compression if you're also doing the singular value decomposition and truncating some of those vectors.

I definitely want to follow up with the office about when are we lossy and when are we lossless?

And as you said, the question of training data and how much, what goes in your curriculum, that's going to be huge, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah good point there's a truncation of variance so it's if it's close to lossless that's also known as lossy compression um here is figure five that's describing these concatenated likelihood matrices this is a common method in a lot of

models where four separate matrices can be included as sub matrices in a bigger matrix that can make it simpler to deal with in programming it might make it amenable to sparse matrix methods or compression methods it might make it just easier to visualize but this is kind of a classic trick going back to the spm days um okay

if we had imposed an additional constraint or structural prior that likelihood mappings are conserved identically over groups so for example if there was the prior that um let's just talk about these four major quadrants that's the third level of the model if we had said all four of those are the same

versus a situation like it was which is it was left open upper left quadrant of five could be different than the bottom right quadrant of five if we had imposed that additional constraint that the likelihood mappings are conserved identically over groups one would have the discrete homolog of a convolutional neural network with implicit weight sharing

So this is a super key point because people might have a lot more familiarity with convolutional methods from computer vision.

In the case where the mappings are constrained to be the same, so it's a situation where we're learning a single filter that optimally sweeps across a whole image, this is the convolutional neural network case, convolutional case.

Here in the multiscale RGM, the learning space is more complex.

it's more general so the advantage is we could possibly describe more conditional relationships like oh the upper left quadrant of five looks like this but the bottom right looks like that what's the disadvantage you know where is this lunch getting paid for it massively expands the search and training space as always you can have a more expressive model has more options bigger search space less expressive model smaller search space

And then figure six shows more about what these scales look like and connects it also to receptive fields in the visual processing.

But just like the four by four spin block window or the 32 truncation dimensions for SVD or the 10 levels of this factor, that's a big question is like, what about three by three with 25 dimensions of SVD and an eight factor or eight levels for the factor?

How much meta optimization do you do to determine what these variables should be?


SPEAKER_01:
One thing to pick up on that, which maybe they don't do in this paper, but I'm sure they've done in others is, well, if I need to optimize something about my model, why don't I just

create a bunch of them and then check my free energy and just pick the one with the lowest free energy.

So parameter optimization through free energy minimization happens everywhere else in Active Inference.

I'm not sure why we couldn't also do it here for some of these.

So you'd set up your RGM, but you could have different parameters on how many principles components to keep, how many levels to do, et cetera.

And so long as you can generate observations and see which ones are the most internally consistent with the probabilities based on the training data, you could probably learn how to do your RGM.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that's the dream, is you say, here's the meta structure of the 1x1, 2x2, 3x3, 4x4, mxn.

grouping and then we'll learn how many n should be grouped by on how many levels per factor with how many variance retention elements from the SVD and then you say okay well should we retain the same number of SVD variables for every level

Or should we open up the possibility that, well, maybe the first level we retain 10, but the second we only retain three.

Again, that might be more expressive if there really was 10 variance contribution in the first level and three in the second, but it's a bigger search base.

So that's the sort of meta question, but that's cognitive computing.

So it's exciting times.

Figure seven, getting to the performance on the MNIST.

So figure five, it says in the text, illustrates the results of active learning, but I think here they mean figure seven, during exposure to the first 10,000 training images of the MNIST dataset.

So in this example, images were assimilated if and only if they increased the expected free energy of the RGM.

In the absence of prior preferences or constraints,

This ensures minimum information loss by underwriting informative likelihood mappings at each level.

So my question was, does this address the data sampling issue?

It seems like they're selecting from a larger data pool the informative examples which improve the performance of EFE.

So how much to threshold or how to prioritize that?

How do you deal with a path dependence in training?

the order of the curriculum of the points that are seen, or does it not matter?

But for real time and online inference methods, it often really matters.

It's a complex landscape, so if you head out left or head out right, it's gonna make a big difference.

And isn't this substituting another possibly quite challenging inference and data selection problem just so that a special smaller RGM can be made?

So there's gonna be situations where it is worth that entry cost to set up a smart active data sampling method to train a powerful RGM.

There might be another case where that data sampling component is challenging and it's not worth it and there's another simpler way to do it another way.

So of course, in any specific situation, it's an empirical question

how these different methods perform.

And then just again, with these images, figure eight, the thing to note here is classification accuracy increases with a marginal likelihood that each image belongs to the class of numbers.

So here they're showing that their accuracy is very high where they're most confident and their accuracy drops as their confidence drops.

And from a quick perplexity search, I'll also be curious to see what others have to add, classic shallow machine learning algorithms can easily achieve 97% accuracy on MNIST.

In 2015, convolutional neural networks approach achieved an error rate of just 0.29%, so 99 plus percent.

So especially at the way that they're presenting it here without code and things like that, keep in mind that it's more of a proof of concept in analytic foundation, not necessarily being described as a computational advance, which would have a lot more details on what was run rather than just saying it was learned automatically within a few seconds on a personal computer.

That's kind of a casual way to describe it.

I think it's very...

colorful and inspirational, though more assessment would need to be looked at.

How does the fit relate to other methods?

And so this is a super exciting open source direction to support empirical reproducibility efforts to establish how and when and where different code bases do differently on different datasets.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Yeah, 100% just want to echo on the

It can't just be in a MATLAB script on Carfridson's computer.

It's got to be out there so that we can use it and build on it and understand what's going on.

One thing I think that's also worth highlighting is this classification and confidence question.

I'm not sure if the convolutional neural networks will also give you that.

So if they classify something, maybe they just say, oh, I think it's the digit zero

And I'm like, 95% confident?

I don't even know if you get that necessarily.

I think maybe you get something that's a pseudo confidence number on a scale between zero and one, but it's not really confidence in the same way that this is.

This is like, you've got a probability distribution and you can do a credible interval on it if you want.

So I think that's something to really highlight, the explainability

is often in many cases worth swapping a few percentage accuracy points so that you know why your algorithm has suggested something.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, earlier work by a lot of those authors have highlighted that true element of interpretability and uncertainty.

For example, in a LLM today, even if it does say something like, I'm not sure about X, that string, I'm not sure about X, was actually achieved as a high confidence outcome.

And so it doesn't actually reflect an introspection of the uncertainty intervals on x.

fun topics to go into.

Okay, that was the first example.

Now we're gonna go faster through the next examples because they're structured much the same way.

It's just each of these following examples is gonna bring in a new dimension.

So the next dimension is gonna be video compression.

Generalize the renormalizing procedures of the previous section to include dynamics for recognizing and generating ordered sequences of images.

So video is sequence of images.

Also algorithm one has the fast structure learning, even just copying and pasting this into perplexity and working in cursor from there does amazing things.

So I'm super excited for what people come up with in terms of using the algorithms that are laid out and implementing them in different languages and so on.

So this section is gonna generalize the static univariate grayscale example of MNIST.

into an rgb three color three channel plus time time color pixel voxel tuple structure here's where we get to time time wasn't present in the mnist example but by partitioning each sequence into non-overlapping pairs during the time scale transformation at successive levels one effectively halves the length of the sequence when ascending from one level to the next

So we talked about different ways to do nesting in time, 60 minutes in an hour, 24 hours in a day.

Here is going to be a strict frequency doubling.

This means that higher levels encode sequences of sequences of sequences, paging exhibit, that can be regarded as episodes of successive events.

So key idea.

State path, state path, state path, encodes transitions through time.

And there's this enforced frequency doubling.

So processes are encoded relationally.

Look into something like successor representation learning or cue learning to see some other approaches.

During inference, the separation of temporal scales manifests as a particular kind of reactive message passing.

So it's possible to define and use message passing among levels.

It could also be possible to provide alternative operations orders, or like in RxInfer, use graphs that have no preset order of updating or other rules for how updating occurs.

Okay, here's where in figure 10, 11, and 12, we get to the example.

We used a short video sequence of a dove flapping her wings.

The original video was downsampled to 32 frames and they describe a little bit more.

They use the same four by four blocking.

So this is key information on the video processing.

And it's really exciting to think about what they do to these file formats

as analytic affordances i found this actually more from the discourse analysis area and rhetoric studies but if we think about the choices and the degrees of freedom that are made in the data processing and meta modeling those are analytical affordances and it relates to how we were talking about you could do inference on those variables

And so here we see analogous to the images that were output for the MNIST summaries and performance.

Here we similarly have prediction through time of this dove flapping the wings.

It's a cyclic generated video.

And for example, the stimulus here is just if like a spotlight is only on part of the dove and then it can reconstruct through space at the same moment

and through time, how it will continue to unfold given the patchy observations that it gets.

So that's the kind of dove video example.


SPEAKER_01:
I think there's some background on why does that matter, that you can just do the spotlight thing and recover the original in a way.

So this is a fairly common way of understanding unsupervised learning.

Has your algorithm actually understood the data?

And so masking parts of the image and asking it to infill it is a very common way of testing that what you've got actually understands what's going on and it's not just going to hallucinate anything random.

So, yeah, when I first came across it, I thought, oh, this is a bit odd.

But then, yeah, it's worth looking into just as background of like, well, if you have an unsupervised learning technique, how do you know it's actually doing a good job?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah cool okay the next example in the video section in the preceding example the sequence of the image constitutes a closed path namely a simple orbit so it's like a gif of the dove flapping the wings it returns to the same spot and then it continues again this can be regarded as a quantized representation of a periodic attractor in the section paths orbits and attractors

They use the same procedures to compress and generate stochastic chaos using images generated by a Lorenz system.

The aim of the example is to show how active learning after structured learning furnishes a generative model of chaotic orbits.

So Lorenz system and active inference is discussed in the four-part series on Livestream 32, Stochastic Chaos and Markov Blankets.

And here we see an analogous process to the MNIST, analogous to the DOVE.

We have an image or sequences of images through time.

It's traces from this Lorenz chaotic attractor.

Similarly, there's this grouping and reduction operation happening through space and time.

And then parameterization of those models, that's the structured learning followed by parameterization, results in the ability to have, even when there's a gap in the observations, like in figure 15 on the right,

here we have a gap in the observations but the predictive posterior is able to continue it's an empirical question how well it lines up but this is just really fascinating because it shows well even though the generative process we can say has this chaotic instability

that might make it analytically intractable.

From the generative modeling perspective, the RGM enables a really nicely typed way that can accommodate systems that have these chaotic properties.

What was exciting to you about this part?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, exactly that.

It's, you know, chaos is fascinating, and modeling it, famously very difficult.

So yeah, I think this is actually, I feel like they should be shouting about this more in the paper, in a way, like, maybe they could have opened with this, I don't know.

But

I would really like to see some more like actually simpler examples of chaotic systems being modeled in this way.

And maybe that could be a separate paper entirely.

But even just, you know, one dimensional signals that change in time that are famously quite chaotic that we don't do a very good job of modeling would be really interesting to see how

getting that into an orbit modeling procedure using this would be and see how that goes.

We were very excited to try that.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah, totally agree.

The next example continuing in the image and video sequence is a bird, so a natural extension.

Figure 16 illustrates the spatial blocking of a more natural video, a short sequence from this website.

So that URL was no longer active.

but either way it was just a search url so it'd be cool to see the exact video maybe it could be uploaded but either way this is a short video of a bird in a natural setting and again figure 17 staying with this theme there's a latent state prediction ongoing even though the stimulus the observation is withheld sometimes so in a way that's like what happens when we blink or have an isocate

We have this ongoing posterior prediction of the visual scene, which is what's being experienced or attended to, with color everywhere and equal precision everywhere and all this stuff, including continuity when we blink or have an eye saccade, because it's basically what's happening here.

There's just transiently no stimulus, but still the likeliest thing that's happening is the latent state prediction.

So that last little sequence took us from

handwriting static images grayscale into three video settings which was a cyclic oscillatory synthetic video a synthetic chaotic video and then a natural video so you could imagine if this was more structured natural video it would be easier to learn with probably any method

If this was a more complex scene with multiple different things switching positions, it would be a harder video to learn.

Any more thoughts on the natural extension?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, actually, so if it's trained on this particular video, one thing I wasn't sure is what frames does it predict at the end?

So we talked about if you miss some frames in the middle, and then it can catch up and keep up.

But if you just run this indefinitely,

I'm not actually sure what the bird would be predicted to do.

And would it just eventually loop back?

Because it's sort of like if you had that chaotic path in the previous one, it's still in orbit.

It still returns to the same attractor states.

Whereas here, I'm not sure what the bird would do when it's predicted to be doing stuff.

Maybe it just flies off the screen and we don't see it anymore.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
It's kind of like a sci-fi simulation to run.

It's like a sci-fi, like what if it's like the movie's an hour and a half long and then you keep watching.

It's like, wait, it's still going.

What's happening?

Okay, the next case that they study is sound.

So the video examples in the prior three were just transitions.

It was an ordered sequence of images.

Whereas the video more broadly understood like the live stream that you're listening to now is video as image plus audio.

So here they just kind of leave the video behind and say, let's just look at the audio.

In this setting, pixels, and there's an analogy for the multimodal LLMs,

where the tokenization methods that work for natural language in the discrete setting also work for tokenization of image and audio like GPT-4.0.

So in this setting, pixels, i.e.

picture elements, are replaced by voxels, volume elements over frequency and time.

These constitute time frequency representation of time series or a continuous wavelet transform, CWT.

Renormalizing generative models for sound are simpler than for video content because there's only one metric dimension, frequency, that accompanies time.

Using a spin block transformation to coarse-grain over frequency reflects the factor assumption that neighboring frequencies fluctuate in a correlated fashion.

So kind of similar data availability setting, URL provided, but unclear what the songs were.

And then we see the similar visual representations culminating in, for example, 20, where predictions, latent state predictions are able to continue even though part of the stimulus has been redacted.

So it's kind of like a video chat or a phone call and then someone drops out for a few seconds, but you're able to still have your unrolling expectations about what did happen, even though you might be missing some observations.

So any comments on this first sound part?


SPEAKER_01:
No, let's carry on.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

From sounds to music.

One might ask if RGMs could be applied to language, perhaps in the spirit of hierarchical Dirichlet process models.

We will not address this here.

but provide an application to music to illustrate the generalized synchrony that accompanies communicative exchange, Fristin and Frith 2015, the classic songbird dyad.

So keep in mind that the birds that are in this dyadic songbird setting, which is also reflected in the 2022 textbook, are literally singing from the same sheet music.

They have the same single fixed song.

so it's not modeling the flow of language as conversation at the level of new lexemic information provided like go to the store and get me milk or meta lexemic like prosodic or stylistic elements of language

It's a very restricted sense of language, but it's part of the tech tree of building towards models that capture more sophisticated elements of language.

But here is more structured than this sound example.

It'd be interesting to hear some of these songs in their

original versions and in their generated versions.

And like, how well does this do from a performance and file size perspective?

How well does that do to MP3?

Which is another example of data compression.

And that's exactly like the Gzip and LLM comparison earlier.

If at the heart of a variational autoencoder or an RGM or something else is using a structurally determined model as parameterized to have a smaller representation of a larger space, how do these

physics inspired first principles of intelligence models or classical machine learning and compression related models do are we getting what fraction of compression how good is the performance all these you know can you tune the bit rate all those kinds of questions okay on to the last section from pixels to planning so

In the final section, we turn to the deployment of RGMs for planning as inference and implicitly their use as synthetic agents and decision makers under uncertainty.

So we're getting to the generalized active agents, which is to say the capacity for control and navigation in arbitrary spaces.

And so here we also see a comparison or juxtaposition of active inference and reward learning.

And Ran Wei gave a great guest stream recently on similarities and differences there.

And they make some more comments about how the RGM

has relationships with generalized multi-level learning.

So now we're kind of briefly dropping any specific case, like a data set of images or video, and just thinking more generally about how this RGM could be used for multi-scale active agents.

Any comments?


SPEAKER_01:
No, Scario.


SPEAKER_00:
um procedurally this looks very much like conventional reinforcement learning however it is simpler and more efficient because it learns a compressed representation of and only of paths that link rewarded states so that might have some connections with the inductive behavior paper that they also wrote another way of looking at this is smart data selection that relates to my earlier question of well if you knew which data to select and in what order

for free, then maybe the model can be trained effectively.

But if it's a hard problem to determine which data to sample or what order to do it in, then it's just substituting one type of problem for another, which might be effective in a situation, but that's not a general approach.

Effectively, this leads to the automatic selection of model structures that can only recognize and predict rewarding episodes, thereby eluding subsequent parameter learning.

This rests upon the fact that one does not need to learn how to maximize reward if one has a generative model that can only predict paths that lead to reward.

I was a bit uncertain about this because different paths may probabilistically lead to different reward.

And then I thought, well, wait a minute, that's just pragmatic value.

What about the automatic selection of model structures that can only recognize and predict epistemic information?

Isn't the expected free energy gonna be able to select data, active data sampling, live stream 57, smart data selection, according to epistemic plus pragmatic value?

And thereby specify the next action.

Again, reinforcement learning selects the next action based upon highest expected value or reward, but expected free energy has epistemic plus pragmatic value.

In what follows, we will illustrate this approach in sequential policy optimization and unpack some of its corollaries.

Games and attractors.

So here, they use simple Atari-like games to show how a model of expert play self-assembles given a sequence of outcomes under random actions.

The first simple game in question is the game of Pong.

They describe how they coarse-grain the blocks.

And then they selected frames that started from a successful outcome.

So they trained on successful examples.

In short, we use rewards for and only for data selections.

That's kind of an interesting possibility that there's a pragmatic filter on training data followed by then an epistemic openness to whatever it is that that data has.

um and renormalization happened through space and time like the video examples and through the action policy that's the section that we're in here where we're saying in the general case we're also able to do rgm on nested policy but here there was just one time scale of policy um

figure 25, 26 and 27 go over some of those representations.

So any thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think it's the training part is really interesting.

And what I think maybe possibly as well, we're getting a bit closer as to why they use that C letter for paths, if it's only ever

encoding paths that are rewarding, then we sort of go full circle back to the definition in the par textbook of C is like rewards.

It's just rewarded paths rather than rewards of observations.

But I think they come onto this later on in the paper.

This feels like a very brittle way of training a model.

If it only ever encounters positive states or like things that it likes or things that we want it to like,

What happens if you drop it in a situation that it hasn't seen before, where there's a negative state and it has no way to recover back to a positive one?

So if you think of like for training on a game, if you start in a losing state, how do you bring it back?

How do you recover?

So I think that's something that we will come onto later, but it's a really interesting thing to bear in mind of, well, what are you training on?

Are you only training on success?

How do you deal with failure?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah great point that also makes me wonder about the transfer applicability so we trained on that bird video but then what if it's the same bird but it's just a little bit darker light or it's a different angle what are the transfer limits or what is it really training on

And then especially if there's a sort of data filtering or selection to pass data, that is one of the critiques of large data set related training.

So maybe this uses a subset of it, like a filtered subset,

since there's already a database of successful and unsuccessful plays just selecting the successful ones and then at the same time there's this interesting biological tie-in which is like the organism's training data through life in a way is all successful with respect to survival

so by having the training data only reflect a certain kind of success perhaps with a lot of variability still it it's an interesting question what it learns and how transferable that could be

And then this is the last of the worked examples.

Figure 28 shows the same simulation using a slightly more complicated game based upon Breakout.

So what's happening in these gameplay settings is gameplay is like a video plus controllable state transitions.

So it'd be like if there was a dove flapping its wings,

And then also there was another parameter which was lights on or lights off.

And then there's one latent state which is where is the dove's wings really?

And then how does the dove's wing state get emitted to observations when the light is on or off?

then that would be like a simple example where the dove does not respond to the light and then a more complex example would be oh it flaps differently in the light and the dark and so that's where you start getting into these factorized models and paths on states on paths and states

So here they study this game Breakout, where there's, in a way, niche modification happening.

It doesn't show any of the cells on the top getting broken, but that would be interesting.

How does it represent, down into the really fine scale, what numbers represent the presence or absence of a block?

And how does that really get encoded

So any last comments before we go to the conclusion?


SPEAKER_01:
I actually found this example the most difficult to follow in the paper.

I think it's still not entirely clear to me how this RG operator handles the action inside this as well, and how you...

coarse grain the effects of action that might happen at a particular time step that then gets sort of diluted out as it were so uh that's just something i think from for this uh for the game section that i'd quite like to ask the authors about is uh to go to a bit more detail on the rg operators when action is happening but that action can only happen on a particular time like uh what's the word uh sort of period as it were uh


SPEAKER_00:
yeah also i wasn't sure if these were meant to be empty or if something but then i wondered well is there a natural interpretation of levels one two and three and do these scale separations capture some natural components of the game or

is there a possibility that by using like a four by four or any n by n or using a strict doubling of time that there's kind of an aliasing where real natural scales of analysis get sort of chopped up strangely with different time scale separations and so then it depends a lot on what spatial temporal scales are divided on

And then there'd be some training data for some partitionings that would work really well.

Like if you had a ton of good information on the structure of a problem, then maybe one measurement would be all you needed.

Like if you knew the whole class schedule of the university and how all the class beginnings and endings were related, and then someone said, there's a lecture in that hall on Tuesday,

And then you could have a ton of information about how that was correlated with everything else.

But then if you were studying it on a meter by meter subdivision on a timescale that wasn't related to the timescale of the classes were happening, you might need a ton of data and still be shocked with the next time step.

So that's just the structure learning challenge, and I think that is the hope and the question, how can automated, semi-automated, and ultimately unified methods for structure learning be applied?

Okay, conclusion.

The paper has showcased several applications of a generative model for discrete state-space approaches based on the renormalization group.

The appeal to the apparatus of the renormalization group is relatively straightforward in the setting.

This is because active inference is an application of the free energy principle, which is itself a variational principle of least action, whose functional form is conserved over scales or hierarchical levels.

Having said this, the restriction to spin block transformations and pixel spaces could also be regarded as a limitation.

Classic answer.

In principle, any outcome space could be a candidate for coarse graining.

How do we know, understand and balance where and when these spin blocks would work or not?

We've discussed and in other conversations, the applicability of the viability of doing sweeps and structure learning and act-inf, on-act-inf, on-act-inf, on-RL, on-act-inf, on-RL and how many layers back before your data science team is just like, I think this is fine.

RGM with quantized paths may or may not be useful in certain application domains.

The applications above illustrate the simplicity and efficiency with which the structure of the models can be learned.

So that's the key claim.

That's the key point.

Further limitations of the approach described above rest on the efficiency of the accompanying methods.

The efficiency is both a gift and a burden.

Again, great.

Clearly, in terms of sample efficiency and compression, the schemes described above are designed to outperform conventional learning schemes.

Okay, but designed to outperform is something that anyone can say.

So did they outperform when other learning schemes weren't presented in the paper?

This follows because model construction procedure is constructive as opposed to the reductive approach of Bayesian model reduction and related procedures.

enabling the self-assembly of a minimally expressive model to recognize, generate and predict the content at hand.

So that's this bottom-up construction through tessellation that we've discussed.

This should be contrasted with the reductive, but not to be confused necessarily with reductionism or reductionist account, but reductive in terms of starting with a large, overly expressive model that's reduced or pruned, minimizing complexity to recover predictive validity and generalization.

So one way to think about that is like in the VAE, the latent space is a bow tie.

it's smaller in the middle whereas for an image processing neural network you might take in 64 pixels output 64 pixels but then the thickness in the middle is huge so these are the approaches saying well you can kind of have this constructivist approach to building a smaller latent space that's projected down to and then unpacked from that's the vae rgm type style

another approach is to start with a massive surfeit of parameters you know 70 billion 405 billion and then use that as a function approximator to fit an approximation to some other function but more generally how could efficiency be a burden um

They make some more points about learning and skills.

And this gets to our question about the successful trials for training.

So these such models are necessarily brittle in the sense they will not recognize or respond to events they have not previously encountered.

That almost seems like too far to say.

I mean, the MNIST model will be able to respond to a digit it has never encountered.

It won't be able to respond to a temperature reading because it just doesn't even have that capacity, but it's like out of sample learning or out of structure learning.

A useful heuristic here is learning to ride a bike.

In this kind of procedural learning, we learn from a starting position and accumulate successive cycles of pedaling until we avoid falling completely.

But we do fall and we learn from when we fall.

In other words, we retain only experiences characteristic of successful bike riding until we can ride fluently.

However, we would not be able to ride a bike starting from any arbitrary state e.g.

falling over.

We would have to return to a known starting position to recover our flow.

Flow is meant in manifold, which itself is a pun, senses here, the fluency associated with being in the flow, control flow, dynamical flow, and of course, RG flow.

So what is really being claimed about what are the situations where successful examples are enough, where negative examples are and aren't learned from or recovered to, and then how well did these methods work within and out of sample

After all, that is what the whole question is in training a model is how well do you do on the training and the test for different kinds of out of sample being from really similar, but not in the exact training data itself all the way on through totally different kinds of work.

So we don't know the next steps or implications.

We have a lot of questions and hopefully do too.

What are you looking forward to?

Or just what are your thoughts having now gone through all this?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I'd love to see some code.

I'd love to see some implementations that we can hack around with ourselves.

And yeah, I think it's a really because a lot of

what's come in the past for Active Inference has been, it's felt very like, I need to write my generative model down on paper.

I need to really sit down and think, undistracted, and think, how do I model this problem?

What are the causes?

What are the observations?

How might they relate?

and then I create a function which will generate these observations.

And then you can plug it into active inference and go all the way.

But often the hardest part is writing down those A, B, C, D matrices.

It's actually really difficult for lots of people.

You can be a trained physicist and it's still really hard to think, how do I model this problem in the real world

in terms of mathematical matrices.

That's really hard.

So in theory, if your RG operators are good enough, and you just you can just chuck some data, maybe it has to all be positive data, all the happy path stuff.

But that's already quite powerful, I think, and moves, I think, active inference closer to more traditional machine learning in terms of accessibility and ease of use, so that data science teams could just use this in

does represent quite a significant step forward for that.

And I think with all the work that you've done on this channel of just making active inference more accessible and easier to play around with, easier to try in new scenarios, that's such a good thing.

So very excited for the future livestream sessions on this paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah, great point that how much of the modeling specification

today and tomorrow will be manual semi-automated automated like would you just put in the eeg data and just say go for it or how would you embody side information about the eeg problem and then how would it do on training tests and how would it transfer all these different questions so it's great do you have any last comments


SPEAKER_01:
Uh, yeah, I just think the explainability thing is going to be the key here.

So as soon as you go to unsupervised sort of structure learning, what did those levels mean?

And what did those factors mean that it's learned from the data itself?

If I, if we go the old fashioned route, if I come up with a generative model and I say, this is how I'm modeling the system, I can explicitly say this level, this latent variable is for whether it's raining or not.

And this observation corresponds to water observed on the grass outside.

But because I'm coming up with that model, I can use words to communicate that to you, and you have that full explainability of this model.

With this approach, we are going to lose some of that, and it'll be really interesting to see whether we can recover the explainability of, well, what does this factor mean when I did a principal components transformation and ditched half the components?

What does that actually mean?

You can sort of look at it on the MNIST example and go, oh, yeah, it's a digit, right?

But we still have to look at that.

So getting that in a semi-automated way would be very exciting as well.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that makes me think about what

natural joints of the world handles for the world will

a possibly automated method fail to find?

And then conversely, what new natural scales might it come up with?

For example, just doing PCA analysis on natural language.

It's like, okay, principal component one is whether it's happy or sad or whether it's written in this language or that language.

But then you get to principal component seven and it's like, huh?

does that eigen term mean something with it a little bit more of this and a little bit less of that does that what does that really mean and then the further you go out usually the less reliable those variance components are across different data sets so then that comes back to how do we interpret

and set up systems that have few or many, you know, when shorter lists are more interpretable.

But then when you clump under fewer things, they have more

grouping of dissimilar things so it's like lumpers and splitters the neets and the scruffies those those are all coming to play right on that field so thank you very much arun and also to blue and to courtney for the contributions to the dot zero so looking forward to the next two weeks peace thanks very much

## OPapscuD05s

SPEAKER_02:
Hello and welcome.

This is Active Inference live stream 58.1 on November 7th, 2024.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at links here.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.Institute to learn more about live streams and other projects.

We are in the second in the 58 series.

Arun and I last week did 58.0 with some background and context, kind of the approach to scratch the surface.

And today we're going to pick it up with Lance and looking forward to this discussion.

So people watching live, please write any live chats.

Arun has also prepared a bunch of questions.

Let's begin, though, with Lance, if you want to say hi and welcome back.

And then any overviews or any introductions, anything that you feel will help set the table for today.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, thank you so much.

And thank you so much for having me.

So, yeah, I'm super excited about this discussion.

And I feel a lot of us are trying to understand renormalizing generative models.

So I'm sure I'm going to learn a lot as well.

Yeah, so just to give a little bit of background.

So now Carl Fristen is the chief scientific officer at Versys.

And one of the challenges that we are moving towards, and this is public information, is, of course, scaling active inference.

and uh there's one particular challenge that we're looking at it's uh atari um so for those who don't know atari is just a suite of um of like about 30 31 games uh they've been around for a long time maybe since the 80s or i don't know exactly it's a famous benchmark for reinforcement learning

now there's been a lot of work in rl solving atari and maybe stuff even like 10 years old already that you know solves atari so the question is why are we trying to do that with active inference and the answer is uh all these rl methods they use a lot of data they're super data hungry and they're not uh so they don't have this human level efficiency that that we're looking for

And so that's where active inference could potentially come into play.

So one of the things that we're looking at at the company is scaling active inference to show that we can solve Atari with human-level efficiency.

And so this scale-free approach, planning from pixels, emerged out of these efforts.

And this has been work led by Carl.

So he's come up with the ideas and the code and so forth.

and um and yeah and and so now we're still pushing with this approach and and other approaches uh so yeah it's uh super exciting and um there's uh many many research questions of things we could explore uh so very excited to discuss it today okay do you want to


SPEAKER_02:
Give any connective tissue between some of your previous conversations or papers or streams.

And then we'll jump into the listed questions we have.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure, so for those who don't know me, so I'm Lance.

I've been working on the Principle of Active Inference for a long time, primarily on the mathematical side of things.

So back when I started, possibly the only person understanding active inference was Carl himself.

and a few privileged people around Cal.

And so a lot of the work I did was to try to understand things and put them on a more rigorous mathematical footing.

And so we've had a few conversations here, a few live streams speaking about some of that.

So, I would say the RGM work that we're discussing today is a bit different from what I've been working so far.

So, previous work was mostly on the theory of literature principle, theory of actual inference, to read the math.

Today, it's more about a piece of code that does things, and it does really cool things, also has some interesting limitations.

And it's a much more pragmatic agenda.


SPEAKER_02:
and i'm personally moving in this more pragmatic set of things but i have a lot to learn uh yeah so this is this is how things stand at the moment yes it was live stream 52 on the geometric methods for sampling optimization inference and adaptive agents that was a great and very uh epistemic setting and then also now that i'm seeing it

also 26 so it was sort of a 26 52 full card lance situation but both of these were some of the clearest and most fundamental papers and unpackings in the series um arun anything you want to begin with or we can just jump into the questions you wrote


SPEAKER_01:
First of all, just to say I need to catch up on those, because they sound great.

Also, I think some of my questions are still fairly... I don't want to say towards the end of the paper, they're much more like discussion points, but I don't know if maybe for some people who might not have been able to catch the first session, to maybe go into a very high-level summary of the paper first.

and then set some background that might make the discussion points a bit clearer as they happen.

But very happy for you to take the lead on that one, Daniel.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Lance, what would you say is the overall summary through LINE?

And then we'll turn to the specific questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

So should I give a quick summary or?

Yeah, right, so.

Yes, so the problem that we're looking at is planning from pixels.

So you have a bunch of pixels and we want to, you know, deep decision making.

So for those who are familiar with active inference, there's typically two flavors of active inference.

There's the reflexive.

Type of active inference where you're not really planning in the future, but you're like.

If I infer that I'm in this state, then I should do this.

And if I infer I'm in this state, I should do that.

That's typically what we see in continuous active inference.

And then there's the other flavor of active inference and also sophisticated inference, which is typically in discrete states.

And that has planning, that has expected free energy, it has expiration and so forth.

And here we are in a setting where we are doing things in discrete states, but we are reflexive.

So this is just to situate with the other things that are in the literature.

and so what happens is we we get a bunch of pixels so yeah just to go back a little bit this is the pixels for planning paper is a way to learn from expert data

So if I look at expert data of an agent doing something, I'm going to be able to learn that with an RGM and reproduce it in some kind of a habitual reflexive loop.

But I'm not going to do any kind of de novo learning.

um and and yeah and so then there's like a very specific um architecture for the rgm generated model uh that allows it to do what it does and there's a way we can you know learn these things but that's kind of like the goal idea or a little context okay awesome yeah just we have the figures if there's any to jump to let's go to the first uh question so


SPEAKER_02:
are renormalizability and sparsity linked and also if you could connect that to how else we've seen sparsity discussed in the markov blanket concept what's sparsity in a graphical model how is renormalizability doing something similar or different than the sparsity conditions that we've studied before right um so


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just to give a bit of context on that question, because you talked about marker blankets.

So, Carl and a number of people have this idea that living systems, and I guess systems in general, are made of marker blankets.

I mean, they are themselves marker blankets.

and so if you take an organism it would be composed for example of organs with their own marker blankets and themselves made of cells with their own marker blankets and you can you know subdivide many many times sort of zoom in and you'll still see marker blankets everywhere

And so what you get from that, or probably what Carl got from that, is that there is some kind of a spell-free invariance about the nature of things, which is that if you zoom in or if you zoom out, arbitrary zooming or de-zooming, you would still have this kind of fundamental structure.

And I should say the renormalization group is the mathematical apparatus for zooming in or zooming out on things.

and and so basically these are renormalizing generated models they have this um assumption that the world is renormalizable that the world has some kind of a spell free information uh within them and and so we can get more into the details of that but basically long story short is that this renormalization aspect it gives you a very powerful inductive bias on the structure of your journal model

In this case, it gives you this kind of renormalizing genital model, which is a genital model that looks the same at every scale.

So it's a genital model that if you give it pixel data that's sort of very zoomed in,

That part of the model that feeds that data is going to be the same in terms of its structure than the high-level parts of the model that look at much more coarse-grained features.

And these models are very sparse.

Yeah, just because when you look at the representations in the model, there's many, many connections that are missing, but by design on purpose, right?

So we have a lot of sparsity.

uh so it means that they're very lightweight um and yeah i would say that's kind of um the main advantage right uh so when we when we compare with the traditional machine learning architectures this is not to say that you know this approach has a lot of limitations but one one of the strengths is that we we get some very lightweight models that can learn things with a relatively low number of states

And I think that goes back to sparsity.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, let's look at the figure and talk about the architecture.

Maybe...

continue a little bit on what what specifically can can uh where how can we see that renormalization structure in figure three and how does this have similarity and differences than like the textbook generative models that we've worked with


SPEAKER_00:
Right, so so I should say a full disclaimer.

I don't think the explanation of renormalizing data models is very clear in the paper.

And some will say it's extremely unclear, so I'm going to try to to clear some of that confusion, but there's also part of it where where I'm probably still confused.

So apologies in advance if I cannot clear all the confusion.

But.

So I can try to describe the figure that you have here, and then I can also give you my own kind of personal summary of genitive models, of renormalizing genitive models.

So here we have kind of a classic hierarchical partially observed Markov decision process.

And the special feature is that there's a time horizon of one at each layer.

um and then you have this renormalizing scale free aspect where as you can see at the bottom level you have two states two actions these are grouped into one state one action at the level above and if you go one level even even further above there's again two states at the level below and two actions that are good to do one state and one action the level above and you can go like that for as many layers as you want

In the current code, what you do is you specify the number of layers that you want to start with, and then you would kind of learn the transition mappings and so on and so forth.


SPEAKER_02:
What aspects of the code are available or what languages or timeline for overall applying it?


SPEAKER_00:
You mean for applying it to machine learning tests?


SPEAKER_02:
Or just for any of these settings, what is the code availability or what do you think are the promising ways today and going forward for people who are interested in the open source active inference implementations to work with it?


SPEAKER_00:
But yeah, so I'm not entirely sure as to the kind of privacy constraints on the code right now.

I would assume there's a link in the paper pointing to a repo.

But if that's not the case, it's not the case.

Okay.

Well, so I know it's on a private version of SPM.

And so if it hasn't been released yet, then there's surely talks inside the company of like when to release it, how to release it.

Yes, I'm not exactly sure about the timeline of that, unfortunately.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, all good.

Yeah, I mean, it's an interesting meta piece with the research and being able to share that and...

with this information here from the pseudocode it it gives a lot of the recipe and the anatomy of the uh model but let me just uh is there is there another part of this figure or another figure to continue specifying a little bit more about what's happening or do we want to jump back to the questions


SPEAKER_00:
Um, yeah, so, uh, there, there's a presentation by, by Tim Ferberlin that, that, um, um, that, and there's a useful slide on, on that presentation, uh, that, that could potentially show.

I don't know if I can share my screen here, but I think it would be quite useful to illustrate a bit more in detail what's going on.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh yeah.

Share your screen.


SPEAKER_00:
And, uh, let's see if I can do that.

This is a new computer.

Okay.

Yeah, unfortunately, I'm not going to be able to do it.

I mean, I could, but I need to fiddle with the settings.


SPEAKER_02:
Or you could email it.


SPEAKER_00:
And I don't have admin rates.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

You could email any slides if you wanted to admin.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'll check and I'll get back to you on that.

But I'm happy to explain.

yeah continue what i was going to show so the idea and and here i'm going to have to wave my hands a bit but hopefully it's clear so um you get some pixel data you get a movie but basically that's what

You get a movie of an agent doing something, and you're going to learn a generative model that learns that and is able to reproduce the agent in the movie.

So it's able to learn its actions and reproduce its actions depending on the state.

So the way it works is you take one frame of the movie and you take the next frame,

And this would be like your low-level observation for the renormalizing giant model.

So why do we take two consecutive frames as one observation?

Because we want to extract position but also momentum information.

So that's our observation, two consecutive frames.

Then each frame, we're going to divide it into several overlapping patches.

So this is like a convolutional neural network.

So yeah, you have multiple patches that overlap, each centered, for example, around pixel.

and then each of those patches you do a singular value decomposition which is that you uh you take the eigenvectors you have those pixel vectors you take the eigenvectors and you essentially do a pca

And the reason why you do that, so just to give a little bit of context, well, first of all, planning is much easier in discrete states.

So somehow things work a lot better, or at least that's what we think at this moment.

So once you convert this kind of like very high dimensional kind of continuous data that are pixels

into some more manageable size, low dimensional discrete representation that we can then work with in the RGM.

And so there's potentially many ways you can do that.

And one way would be to use a kind of a, for example, a variational autoencoder where you would then discretize the latent space.

that would be one way to get from continuous to discrete.

There's many, many ways you can do this step.

The reason why I suppose Carl chose SVD is because it's very lightweight and it's also very, I would say, context sensitive.

If you give one bit of data, it will adapt to that data.

If you give it another bit of data, it will adapt as well.

There's arguably also pros to using a deep learning architecture.

The cons is that it would need to be trained.

So lots to explore there.

But for now we use SVD.

and so um so once you've done your your singular value decomposition you get these eigenvectors that um just to get a list of eigenvectors for for each patch that tell you okay well this is like the most important feature in in the patch of pixels this is second most important feature third most important feature and so forth what you do is you truncate that so you take the most important features

And then you discretize that.

So it's a lot of stats, I know, so hopefully I can send you a picture.

But the point is that you extract the features using SVD, so you get a much lower dimensional representation of the data, and because you truncate it, you kind of eliminate the noise, you eliminate the things you don't care.

And then this low dimensional thing, which is still continuous because these are eigenvectors, you can discretize it using multiple bins.

So now you have discrete data.

And once you have your discrete data, then you can fit it to the picture that you have in the slide right there and do your hierarchical NDP, kind of like much more classic


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, awesome.

Yeah, in the .Zero, we talked a little bit about that process, about going from the continuous to the discrete to enable planning over the discretized form.

Arun, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks for that summary, Lars.

It was really clear and informative.

One question I have just to follow up on that is something you said quite early on, which is that planning in the continuous space is really difficult.

Um, could you say a little bit about why that is?

So the reason I ask is I think it's a very common thing that people would want to do is have an agent that can plan an action to do this thing, but control the degree at which it does it.

So I would like to move, but by a certain amount, how do I choose how much to move in a continuous distance?

So I guess maybe could you say a little bit about why it's so difficult to plan in continuous space?


SPEAKER_00:
It's a really good question.

So planning is always about doing things.

So when I talk about planning, I don't talk specifically about action selection.

I talk about imagining what will happen in a certain time interval in the future.

So it means that you're looking at what would happen if I did that in terms of what is the trajectory of what would happen if I did that.

Now, if you're in discrete space in discrete time, you're looking at a sequence of future states.

But if you're in... And so your space of trajectories that you're kind of like planning over is discrete, because it's like possible steps at the next time step, and then times possible step at the next time step.

So it can be huge, but it's discrete.

When you're in continuous space, if you wanted to plan in a certain time interval in the future,

you're looking at trajectories of what would happen if you took a particular trajectory of actions.

And so if you're in continuous space, continuous time, the space of trajectories is infinite dimensional.

So I think that's kind of like the, well, it's infinite and totally infinite dimensional, so it's kind of like really bad.

and yeah and it's probably i mean there are algorithms that kind of do this i'm not really an expert on that but i think that's kind of like the underlying limitation the the fundamental mathematical limitation and so the thing you can do then uh to plan in continuous space continuous time is you abstract away on a discrete space

And then you go back down.

And this is what we've been doing.

I mean, as you know, in active inference, it's kind of like the hat.

There's probably other ways to do it, but yeah, that's where we're at.


SPEAKER_01:
So maybe something just to clarify there is the nature of these infinities, right?

So you said infinite dimensional.

but then also it's almost like infinite values for each of those dimensions.

So that's why it gets really explosive in the number of things you have to consider.

One of the things that we talked about in the dot zero was the path-based formulation and how that seemed to be even more combinations you would have to consider

compared to the textbook formulation, where now we're considering paths over states and actions, and there are as many combinations of paths of combining states and action choices, which already sounds quite difficult to solve relative to the toy examples of just what's in the book.

So maybe you could say a little bit about that.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

So just to make sure I'm on the same page with you, what do you mean exactly by the path-based formulation?


SPEAKER_02:
So I think it's when we're now... Just figure 4.3 from the textbook is kind of a good touch point.

On the top is the discrete time explicit states and observations at time points are considered.

Time point one, two, three, four.

In a continuous time, future time points are only predicted through a Taylor series generalized coordinates expansion, which is something we talked about in 52.

Or continue from there.

Just wanted to bring in those two textbook figures and how they can be combined in a hybrid architecture that kind of presages what we're talking about today.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

It's interesting that you bring up generalized coordinates because

Yeah, when I was mentioning myopic active inference or not using paths, I wasn't specifically referring to generalized coordinates.

Kind of like the more simpler version without the generalized coordinates.

Because you're absolutely right that when you have generalized coordinates,

you do get trajectories again.

The difference, or one of the differences, is in discrete states you may have a limited computational budget that kind of limits you in several ways, but at least theoretically you can plan infinitely or arbitrarily far ahead in the future.

even though your beliefs would get very imprecise.

In continuous states, when you have generalized coordinates, you have this notion of encoding implicit trajectories in the future through these Taylor expansions.

But the Taylor expansions are only, by design, only going to be accurate on a very small or small time interval.

So already, theoretically, if you have only finitely many generalized coordinates, which is what you always have in practice, you are now able to plan very fine the future.

This is much more sophisticated than any kind of active inference without the generalized coordinates or the things I was mentioning before.

the yeah one other thing um is so so when you do planning in the sweet states here like comparing multiple trajectories of actions if i remember right but but correct me here if i'm if i'm wrong when you do planning in the continuous state for generalist coordinates so then at the bottom of 4.3 you're always minimizing the gradient of the free energy with your actions

So even though you plan the trajectories of states in the future, if you did that, you don't plan for sequences of actions.


SPEAKER_02:
I believe that that's true, or another way to say that is that the continuous time formalization, even if you do have a high degree Taylor series expansion or a lot of generalized coordinates, it isn't explicitly considering counterfactual scenarios.

Like tree search in chess, it's like seven moves down the road.

If 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, then 8A, 8B, 8C.

Whereas in a continuous time expansion, you get one polynomial approximator, but it isn't saying, well, what if time point 12 were different?

All you could say is something about the statistics of that path as interpolated, but you wouldn't be able to directly make strong guarantees outside of following the gradients around that inferred path.


SPEAKER_01:
So maybe I've mistaken something, but either in one of the points that you've written there, Daniel, or something Lance said, I remember the word reflexive for the continuous time

Is that what we're saying here is that, yeah, there we go.

Without planning, at least with the continuous time formulation, yes, it's sort of doing something with the expectation of what's going to happen in the future.

But as you say, it's not considering counterfactuals.

We're not considering if I do this, then this, if I go 10 meters rather than 20 meters, this will happen, etc.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think it would be interesting if you asked that question to Carl, if he draws the same distinction, but I would totally agree with you.

I would say, so at the beginning I was referring to continuous active inference without the generalized coordinates as being reflexive.

I would say that with generalized coordinates it's still reflexive, but you're right that it's still, it's already much more sophisticated in a sense.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, the generalized coordinates are like a way to bring the depth in.

It's like doing momentum trading on a stock over multiple time scales.

you're still making an instantaneous decision in the sense you're looking at a vector of the current moment and then looking at different trends and first, second, third, et cetera, higher moments.

However, again, there's not explicit planning.

So this sort of gets into the functional underpinnings of anticipatory behavior and whether anticipatory behavior can be loaded up

into a sort of reflexive intuitive moment or and or to what extent it involves explicit tree-based search of branching possibilities yeah totally

Okay, but just to close the loop on the sparsity, could we say generative models are defined by their sparsity?

We're literally talking about some set of random variables, nodes, and their edges, which defines their sparsity conditions.

Any node interpolating between two other nodes is a blanket.

People often are interested in the agent environment blanket as interface.

However, taking the graphical model as a Bayes graph itself, we can think about the B matrix here as being a blanket, for example, between these other two nodes.

The sparsity conditions of figure 3 and the, I mean, whatever model you design,

the connectivity is the sparsity condition.

Renormalization generative models have a special template or recipe for how the sparsity conditions are related within and across levels.

Okay, Arun, wanna pick one of these or which one to go to next?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, I actually think the next one is they're sort of roughly in an order.

Uh, so yeah, I think talking about the RG operators, because it is the really new thing in this paper, what makes a good one?


SPEAKER_00:
What makes a good RG operator?

So, um, yeah, I mean, I'm assuming if you ask this question, you probably know more about RG operators than I do.

Um, so it'd be interesting to know what you think about this.

Um, yeah, to be honest, like, uh, yeah, just, just to give like a comment, um, this is one of the things that I really need to read up on.

Um, Kyle repeatedly says there is this universal aspect to renormalizing the models.

And I agree that there is some part of nature that seems to be scale-free in terms of like these marker blankets at different scales.

But to me, there is also a lot of nature that is not scale-free.

I mean, not everything that you look at is a fractal.

So, in what sense are RGMs universal?

The super cool thing and surprising thing for me in this paper is that there's a lot of things that you can do with RGMs.

There's a lot of things that you can learn.

I'm not sure to what extent.

I mean, I would really like to know, okay, well, this is one thing that you cannot do with RGMs in terms of like, I cannot memorize this.

Yeah, that's something I'm not sure about.


SPEAKER_01:
so maybe i can sort of come back on that uh so i think the use of the svd and effectively principal components analysis and this paper is actually like a really nice introduction to renormalization groups if you don't know what they if you haven't heard of them before uh it's very common in other

aspects of more like traditional pattern matching and machine learning and there's loads of good tutorials uh just out on the web we've got a couple linked in the slides uh to explain what it does so i think just saying like to summarize that very quickly pca is uh

you do a transformation on your data to maximize variance amongst particular dimensions.

And then you can do a dimensionality reduction by throwing away the dimensions you don't want.

So that really neatly leads into the definition of RGMs in this paper, which is the core screening.

It's the critical part is that you are throwing bits away that you think aren't important at particular levels.

And then as you go up

into the lower levels.

But I think there's also a lot of talk in this paper about the spin block transformation as well, of how the pixels are sort of blocked up, and then you say, okay, we're going to coarse-grain in space, and also coarse-graining in time.

That's in a couple of the examples in the paper as well.

But I guess my question is, particularly on the

Like, how do we know our core screening is not throwing away actually useful information?

And how does that relate to the data that we're putting into the training as well?

I think that's because I know you mentioned before this is all about learning from expert play.

But are we also possibly throwing away some of the expertise when we core screen?


SPEAKER_00:
Totally.

Yeah, totally.

I mean, as far as things stand at the moment, this is more of an open question, a research question.

So some of the things that we're doing is testing RGM on different kinds of expert play for different games or for different environments outside of Atari and looking at how well it works.

um so my own take right now is that rgms are pretty good at memorizing uh really a bunch of things a bunch of expert play the well two things um the for for rgms to do well the the game or the environment needs to have some kind of orbits some kind of um orbit structure that um

Yeah, the RGM would learn.

So that's like one thing that's pretty important.

The main challenge of RGM that we've kind of been looking at or looking into is generalizability.

So one of the things that we show in the paper, which is pretty cool, I think, is this DOVE example.

So we learned this DOVE video with the RGM.

then we occlude the dove and the rgm is able to infer oh um i'm actually so it's going back to its training data it's reconstruction of the training data and reconstructing the dust um so that's one type of generalization that works very well but it kind of highlights um perhaps i mean what seems to be a drawback as well so the rgm

uh learns representations of the training data which means that when you expose it to non-training data so such as the dog which is occluded it will go back to training data and be like okay well this is the dog that i saw in my training and so i'm going to reconstruct it

What if you train it on expert play for a game or expert something for something, and then you initialize the RGM at a different condition?

So let's say you train the RGM on walking data, some robot walking.

The RGM will learn the orbits of walking, and it will be able to reconstruct the motion and the actions of walking.

but now if you initialize the rgm of like i'm lying flat on the ground it won't be able to stand up to go back on the walking orbit it will infer that it's walking and it would execute the actions of walking even though it's flat on the ground so you can imagine the motion the motion that you get out of it and this is a kind of a generalization aspect where rgms are really lacking

is if you're outside of the training data, you're going to infer that you're in your training data when in fact that you're not.

How do you go back to the things that you've learned?

How do you pick up the orbit?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

This definitely came up in the previous one, the point zero as well, Daniel.

We're talking about resiliency of models and

This is, I think, a really interesting question of, yeah, how do you know if you're out of distribution?

There are other sort of machine learning applications, maybe like kernel density estimation or whatever, where you might say, okay, I've trained on this data.

I get this new data.

Can I compare it to a probability distribution and say, oh, wait, this doesn't look like anything else that I've seen before.

I'm now very uncertain on what to do.

Is there a way we could apply those sorts of principles here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I suppose so.

So this would be a very interesting project because, yeah, I mean, this is the main limitation with RGMs right now.

And yeah, there's possibly many routes forward.

But yeah, at the moment, that's the main challenge.

So taking inspiration from the things that you mentioned would be super promising.


SPEAKER_02:
one way that active inference models at least have a diagnostic is surprise bounded by variational free energy does give you a measure of overall how likely something is apt to be so if you have a training on driving safely

then you're minimally surprised by the safe drive you have a measure at least this kind of threat agnostic measure of something different is happening however it's almost a general information theory problem

of the space of what you don't know is always going to be so much larger.

There's always more that you could be surprised by.

Like for all the combinations of valid English sentences that language models are trained on, there are more combinations of gibberish sequences.

So then how to make something that can weave its way back into the orbital zone

or into a zone of control and that's that's where some of the multi-scale architectures and switching architectures come into play because the the variational free energy value itself isn't gonna say what to do when the car is off-road

But at least it would be a diagnostic of how, like a kernel density estimator, how similar it is to training information.


SPEAKER_01:
Just another thing to bring in as well.

I think we're still bringing all the questions in at once, but it's all related and it's all relevant.

The question of how, if we are only training these things on expert play, how can we create resilient agents that can recover from unseen positions to, so quote unquote, get back on the path?

So I think one of the things that came to my mind when I was reading the paper was that

If you give it data where it starts off in a losing position and you can show it ways of going, oh, if you are losing, this is how you get to winning.

Then that would become a new potential attractor set.

that, okay, if I am losing, I can then move to another sets where I'm winning.

So you explicitly give it that journey as data that it sees.

But then I think we come on to one of my other questions, which is how do we then tell an agent that has learned the structure from the data itself

which attractor sets are good and which are bad.

How do we inject value into these to say, okay, we've given you this data where let's say the self-driving car is a really nice example.

Driving safely is great.

If you are in an accident and you drive off road, this is how you get back onto the path.

But if it's learned the structure of those actions from the data itself, how do we then inject the value that actually driving safely is good and being off-road is bad?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, really interesting questions.

So I have a few thoughts that I think echo what you said.

I don't have specific solutions, but just to echo what you said.

So for example, in the case of walking, we might ask, OK, well, if we have the training data for a walking agent,

And somehow the agent is like down, either sitting or lying down.

We should teach it how to stand up.

And then once it's recovered its starting position, we can go back and use the RGM policy.

So that's one solution.

um uh yeah going back to to the starting point of the orbit that that works um and but but there are there are challenges so for example and this is maybe a slightly different challenge but also coming back to self-driving cars um a self-driving car is a very very high dimensional system lots of uh moving parts actions uh things that are going on

So if you give the RGM a lot of driving data or driving safety,

I'm assuming the RGM would learn it comfortably.

But now, if you expose it to a new situation it hasn't seen before in the training set, I would assume this would just happen very easily, right?

Because we're in a very, very high dimensional space.

When you think about it, it's kind of a personal dimensionality problem.

Because you're feeding trajectories to the RGM.

So trajectories or orbits, these are one dimensional objects.

And you're in a state space that can be very high dimensional, for example, in a self-driving car.

And what you want is to get full coverage of the underlying manifold of state driving.

um and and what you also want is if you're in an unsafe driving situation you want the trajectory that gets you back to the manifold of cell driving so you have these two problems um and and yeah so one problem coming back to the curse of dimensionality is that if you have this extremely high dimensional manifold of slave driving you want to cover it with one-dimensional trajectories

The higher the dimension, the harder it's going to be because you're trying to cover a large n-dimensional thing with one-dimensional objects.

Computationally, it's going to be a problem.

There's this generalization that doesn't work.

As you said, within data distribution generalization, that's a problem.

Because if you give it a lot of data of the driving safety situation, we would want it to kind of extrapolate over all safe scenarios of driving.

And we don't really see that at the moment, or at least maybe it happens, but it could be a challenge in some situations.

And the other one, which is maybe the more fundamental problem, is you have this huge region of driving not safely.

How do you go back to the driving safety situation?

Also, coming back to the example of walking, how does that happen?

And that's also very hard, right?

Because

potentially would want to you know have a trajectory back to the safe situation from every possible starting location but as the state space becomes very large that also becomes very difficult yeah when thinking about all the angles your joints could be in all the muscle energies there might be a very small Zone


SPEAKER_02:
So how to really think about adaptive active inference agents at the agentic level, and then also more at the systems design level, how could components be robust and adaptive and simplified components doing better on a subtask and then design

a composed system where the sort of low energy efficacious operation of the smaller units is designed in a way where they are not dealing with that massive overall computational challenge they're dealing with local computational challenges

However, that moves the design challenge to, or moves the functional challenge to design time rather than inference time.

But most morphologies don't walk.

But if you have one that walks through evolution or whatnot, then it may be a relatively simplified inference problem at runtime.

However, the challenge is

Basically figuring out which of those sparsities and message passing schemes would result in tractable node level inference.

Otherwise, it would be hard to do on a relevant hardware.


SPEAKER_00:
And adding to that, if I may, so going back to the walking example that you mentioned, and also the generalizing within data distribution.

So there is evidence, and it's also something that we've encountered empirically, that walking is a chaotic orbit.

Which means that if you, so let's say I'm here and I'm going to take some actions and I walk.

Now, let's say I start from a slightly different, infinitesimally different initial condition.

And I take the exact same actions, I'm going to fall at some point.

And that's like the chaoticity, right?

So if you take the same actions, but you start from a different initial condition, you're going to diverge very far away at some point.

And so we have, I think we have this problem in RGM that if we teach the agent to go back to the standing position and then take the RGM policy, if the agent has a slightly different initial condition than what the RGM was trained on, the RGM will infer that it is in the true starting position, even though it's slightly different.

And then it will take the actions of the RGM and it will fall at some point.

So you have this idea that just memorizing just doesn't work in that situation.

And yeah, that's also an issue.


SPEAKER_01:
So maybe just a small question there.

Is the issue there with the coarse graining part in that a slight change in initial conditions is being thrown away by the PCA and throwing away dimensions early on.

And then when we go back and do the inference, we infer that we are sort of in quote unquote the same place because we've thrown away like something that is actually signal has gone into the noise part of this.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I imagine that's one way to look at it.

The way I've been looking at it, but I haven't been thinking about it in those terms, is just if your training data is one particular, you know, orbit trajectory and you start slightly different, because you're inferring where you are based on the training data, based on the structure that you've learned,

You're going to infer that you're on your right trajectory, even though you're not, and you're going to reproduce that, but you're going to land arbitrarily far.

But yeah, I assume it's the same phenomenon.


SPEAKER_02:
This kind of gets to the whole structure determination question.

Um, chaotic systems are sensitive to small changes near critical points, but then there might be another zone of the system that isn't so susceptible to critical points.

So like, let's look at the chaotic attractor example from the paper, um, in figure 13.

If we were to make a small change while we were out on one of the arms of the attractor, it might not change things that much.

But then there might be some other points where it does lead to taking a bifurcation.

So if you can break up systems so that the coarse graining captures those bifurcations,

into two discrete categories then it discretizes a continuous chaotic system well but then if you are applying a grid that's incommensurate with what's actually happening

then any grid you draw is going to include trajectories that that have radically different outcomes so the overall predictive efficacy or the variance retention of the svd is going to be low like if there's actually two zones in a city

they're one mile squared and they have different properties and you have a one mile grid and you actually capture it you you carve nature of the joints or articulate it at the joints but if every block has mixed zoning and all you have is a one mile grid it's that you could do the best placement of your one mile grid but it still is always going to capture something that's kind of mixed and this kind of related to a few of our thoughts and questions like

how how do we determine what window to use just just from a generic perspective like there was 10 levels in the discretization of a grayscale image or there was a four by four or the mnist images were pre-processed to 32 by 32 pixels and then they were

blocked in four by four grids so how much sweeping or how do you do inference on the number of discretizations and then and the window size and all these other features

like what kinds of trade-offs computationally do you look for or how many levels of meta modeling do you feel like are relevant to engage in when you could sweep across discretization of n and windows of m and then you could have well window size of six with a discretization of three gives this performance but something so

How do you even navigate through that combinatorics?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah, really good question.

So, yeah, at the moment, it's very much... I mean, because this is very much a new thing, for the moment, these are hyperparameters, and we're very much in the exploratory phase of...

Okay, well, this works and this doesn't work.

I'm assuming for... I'm thinking for the paper, there wasn't much hyperparameter tuning.

It was all powers of two that were chosen and a small number of layers.

um but when you think about it i mean you could uh do renormalization by powers of three powers of four um you could choose to have smaller or bigger patches um increase or decrease the number of patches so there's many things you can be looking at um and i would say that's also a problem that you would get if you were to do structure learning with a genetic model that are not specifically

renormalizing terms and models.

You also have the problem of, okay, how many patches, how many layers and so forth.

So this is not a problem that's like specific to this approach.

What this approach has, which makes the problem a lot easier, is that there is a lot of interplay between the number of layers and the number of patches, right?

So if you choose, I'm going to renormalize by two.

So it means that two states at one level become one state at the next level, and two states at that level become one state at the next level.

This gives you a relationship between the number of states and the number of layers that you have, and also implicitly the number of patches that you have.

So you have this big constraint that comes in Renown Residentiality Models that makes the search a lot simpler than otherwise.

But I think ultimately what you would probably want is to infer, and I think you hinted at that, infer the number of patches and so forth.

Yeah, we're not doing that.

It would be cool to do that.


SPEAKER_01:
I think another possible thing we could try is maybe start with a budget of this many

layers, patches, like basically combinatorics and said, OK, you have this much computational power for understanding this data.

Figure out the best way of allocating that, because at some levels you might have more variability than others.

And maybe you want to allocate your computational budget at the higher abstract levels than you do more so than you want to do at the pixel level.

And perhaps we could learn that from the data itself, given a constraint of this many parameters.

And I think you could probably code that up multiple ways.

But one way you could have priors on those hyper parameters, and then

I think as Daniel suggested in the point zero, do a free energy calculation on that compared to your priors on those hyperparameters and just minimize free energy that way.

But you could also probably do a hacky approach as well and just go, well, what gives me the best performance?

Call it that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and just to kind of echo that and complement that.

So, as you both mentioned, the issue is, well, there's so many hyperparameters.

I mean, there's so many quote-unquote, right?

Because if we're using general models that we're not, we don't realize there would be even more of them.

But even here, we have a lot of them.

hyperparameters.

And so that's a separate thing that we're also working on, which is, can we infer the structure of the model?

Instead of just saying, oh, well, we have this data.

This is the model that we get.

I think we need to be recognizing the fact that with limited data, you're always going to be unsure about the resulting model.

And so we need to have probability distributions of the models.

And so, one instance of that is what you mentioned, like, we have probability distribution prior over the number of patches and we optimize that with respect to free energy.

But we could also have probability distributions over three layers or four layers and so forth.

I think this is where we, this is kind of, I mean, yeah, beyond this paper, but where we need to be going is having uncertainty about the model.

And so then if I have uncertainty about the model, I can take actions upon the world that maximize the expected information gain about the model.

So I'm going to get data that's maximally informative to refine my beliefs, ultimately converging about the best model of the world, or maybe a set of candidate bests, if there is a fundamental structure where you cannot find which one fits best.

But the point is, in this approach to structural learning, and I think in every other approach that we have in active improvement so far, we're not recognizing the inherent uncertainty about the model.

And so what we're doing in all these structured learning approaches is a kind of... Well, imagine if you have a prior over model.

And if you have data, you have implicitly a posterior over model.

Now this is what I think we need to do and what we're currently doing implicitly by taking the model with the lowest free energy when we actually do that is taking a flat prior over models and then taking the most likely model in the posterior.

So we're doing this maximum a posteriori estimation when we're optimizing model free energy.

And yeah, ultimately we want to have a distribution of a model and also recognize that a priori models are more likely than others.


SPEAKER_02:
That's funny about having a flat prior over models.

It's almost like return of the frequentism.

all models within this class are equally likely so that's the special case of bayesianism where it sort of anachronistically is frequentist again because then you're selecting the maximum likelihood model structure or weighting model reliance in a portfolio on its

maximum likelihood estimation but then rather than using an ml value the the model itself is actually engaging in a bayesian inference process um how about representations of uncertainty within the model like just taking a given architecture as fixed i'm curious about

how are uncertainties represented there was some discussion of lossless and lossy compression and and do we have any way to to have interpretability of the uncertainties across layers

Like, do you find that you can trace those state estimations and uncertainty estimates and they ring true?

Or once we're past the pixel level, is through the SVD and all of this, are we already in spaces that are not human semantically interpretable?


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

So coming back to one of the points that Arun made, because we do this SVD and we throw away some less relevant components, we are throwing away information.

And so we're always in this lossy compression kind of setting.

now what we've done in this paper and also in other experiments is to just try to reconstruct expert play or any other kind of video or agent from the rgm and usually it works pretty well so we as you can see with the dove or with many other examples

The RGM does a good job at compressing and reconstructing, but we haven't actually looked into mechanistic interpretability of like this state in the RGM actually encodes this and this state in the RGM actually encodes that.

So that would be interesting to look into.


SPEAKER_01:
I think in the MNIST example, there is a little section where it said like, okay, at the very top level, we say there's basically a value per class of digit, which feels very much like, okay, in the intermediate stuff, it's very

we're designing a classifier uh it's a i think it's a really interesting question that's not just specific to this paper or to active inference i think it's a semi-supervised also self-supervised learning in general which is how do you interpret that if you're learning the structure of data from the data without anything labeled how do you get that interpretability um and i don't think there's an easy answer to that


SPEAKER_02:
yeah like duh so here at level four okay so so um this this also notes the matrices in this figure are not simple likelihood mappings they're concatenated likelihood mappings from all hidden states at one level to all hidden states and paths at the subordinate level where the sum to one constraint is applied to states each child could be in so we're taking some higher level

path trajectory and pulling lower level observations from a probability distribution sum sum to one at that lower level for the child so here at the top level there's 10 states so it's almost like if you came across an alien handwritten text how would you know how many letters there were

or if there were several writers with different styles, how would you say how many discrete symbols?

Because that's kind of like this unstructured or semi-structured learning question.

You have cursive handwriting from a language where you don't know how many discrete symbols there are.

You know there's a discrete compositionality at the level of the word, let's just say.

However, you're getting the raw data and then the pixels to planning in the linguistic case or the phonemes to planning is like, how do you go from a continuous visual or sound data to inference and planning over language production?

But then you don't know how many discrete elements to have per se.

But if you can be making a domain specific model, that may not be a relevant question.

You may just be able to say, we know we're gonna get to 10, find me the best 10.

But it's interesting that the compositionality of the RGM could extend to higher orders of structure

with the trade-off that there's just more and more as you continue to expand how many states there can be it doesn't escape the curse of dimensionality it's like swimming in the curse of dimensionality or casting the spell of the curse of dimensionality but at least in a way where the model architecture is going to be able to be implemented using the inference methods that are the same across different scales


SPEAKER_01:
Quick question on that.

Do we think that the PCA part of this could give you a clue as to how many values a particular state could have in a layer?

I think, Daniel, you had this idea in the point zero of saying, well, maybe we just have as many values a state could occupy that explains 80% of the variance at that level.

So then you could say, then, I mean, we're sort of moving the complexity from this part into construction of the training data, which we should definitely talk about at some point on this call.

But you could then say, yeah, exactly.

That's the graph that I wanted.

If we're going to just say, I only need to explain 80% of the variance on this stuff.

Chuck some training data at it.

And then we say, ah, this training data had like 10 digits.

And then you basically end up picking 10 values because that explains enough variance in the training data to do the good, a good enough job.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, for sure.

And I would say that's also implicitly what happens when we're optimizing model free energy, right?

Because we're trading off accuracy and complexity.

And what you're mentioning

maybe a more deliberate way of saying, well, we have this target.

What is the minimally complex model to achieve this accuracy target, for example?

And yeah, that would be super cool to do.

I think specifically for more like engineering and industry applications, that would be something that people would be very interested in because, for example, regulators, they don't talk in terms of, oh, your free energy should have lower than this value, and then you can use your model for self-driving cars, right?

You're approved.

It's more like, oh, when some kind of accuracy or some kind of explanation of some data about a certain threshold and, you know,


SPEAKER_02:
would be very worthwhile for this kind of application yeah how to how to convert from a sort of model intrinsic currency the way that different structural models are compared with each other or the way that alternative parameterizations are compared within the same active inference model through comparison of their free energy values how to convert that into

a value or a currency that matters like an actual risk profile or a cost or a time estimate that's the critical question how does the reliability of the inference translate um

What would be an interesting way to go, Lance?

And then for those in the live chat, please feel free to write some specific questions that I'll ask.


SPEAKER_00:
Sorry, specific interesting way to go far away?


SPEAKER_02:
Or just what do you feel like we should continue with?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah, okay.


SPEAKER_02:
also how do how do others pick up and continue with this work beyond studying the background 11 and a half phds needed to continue with this knowing that better and more advanced open source tools are under active development here and elsewhere but i mean

What's the way to engage with this material with the current state, or what are your next plans for how it continues from this pre-print form?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so good question.

I think there's already a lot of...

ideas that have come up in this role.

I think my interesting idea is what Arun mentioned, like using tools from machine learning to improve generalizability in RGMs.

um more broadly my personal take-home message uh because we we've been talking a lot about uh well first of all how our gems work but also what their limitations are so uh this is my understanding is that this is a very new kind of model and there are a lot of limitations um

But the really cool thing about this paper, and this is why I'm personally excited about RGMs, is this universality claim.

The fact that RGMs are super expressive.

You have this one architecture that can learn many, many things that are pixel-based, as we've seen in the paper.

and so this is what we've seen empirically here and in other places then there's the more theoretical reason for why that's the case and I would say that's more of a physics question of like understanding renormalizing groups and

why the world may be or may not be renormalizable to some extent so I think it would be super cool from a theoretical perspective to have a better understanding of that from an applied perspective so we've seen all these limitations

um and it was already clear on this call that for each of these limitations we don't know exactly whether it's a fundamental limitation whether the limitation lies from the current implementation or maybe from the current instance of rgns but we can modify them in some clever way to actually overcome the limitation so there's many different places where improvements could come

code, the actual structure of the thing, or maybe even the theory.

Maybe we need more than renormalizing general models.

Maybe renormalization is not all you need.

You need something else.

So at the moment, I think we should be looking at where each of those limitations are and how to go forward from there.

The other thing is classical active inference, like the discrete planning, does actual planning.

It plans multiple steps ahead and it has this counterfactual aspect.

in rgms you don't have that you just learn the transitions from state to state at each level and then you infer them from the data so you're just like you're like in this uh self-fulfilling prophecy mode where you've seen your training data and you're reproducing that from the rgm

And it would be cool to know if you can combine the strength of classical active inference and the RGMs to have some planning at one or multiple levels, some actual planning with information gain to actually help this generalization aspect.

by by improving the model with some you know new relevant data so there's many many uh you know directions this work could be taken in personally the direction i'm most excited in is this idea of a moral uncertainty because in

So, I mean, a big question in machine learning and also developmental cognitive science is this idea of structure learning.

How do you learn the structure of your model of the world?

Now, there's a lot of papers, evidence, and I think there's also a lot of debate, but one interesting paradigm is this idea of model inference.

And

uh the way we've been thinking about structural learning and active inference so far is about optimizing model free energy so we take the model that that has the lowest free energy when we do that we are frequent we are basing in the states and parameters but we are frequentest in the model

And that goes exactly to what we were saying before, this idea that you have this flat prior and you're doing maximum posterior estimation.

And so we know that being frequent is fine, but this means that you can overfit.

um it means uh yeah basically you're selecting the model structure that overfits that best fits the data and which may overfit you're not recognizing any kind of uncertainty and there's actually a lot of theorems that show that uh with limited data but even unlimited data

there's many instances where multiple models could explain the data equally well which means that they would have the same free energy now which one do you pick and and two different models could yield two different decisions so if you're in a real world scenario one model may be you know the true model or what one of the agents have

the other one would be wrong and could have some you know unsafe decisions being made down the line um so what we want to be moving to is this idea of full model inference not just uh not just map estimation but actually having a full procedure over models and this would be for example a particle approximate posterior where you're entertaining a mixture of models

and so basically it means that we would be doing Bayesian model averaging for all your of your predictions and yes we want to be moving towards that in my opinion and what this affords which I think is super important is so when you have this uncertainty about models you have this idea of taking actions that maximize the expected information being about your model

and and so now you can start to learn your model in a self-supervised way and hopefully in a way that also generalizes because you're making this epistemic search that informs your model which we're currently not doing at the moment we're seeking data that's informative for the states and parameters and we're overfitting the model and we want to be moving beyond that


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Yeah, very interesting.

It's like equivalent to only doing policy selection on pragmatic value is just utility seeking.

So then if the utility of the modeler is model fit, they have entered into a pragmatic only analytic mode that in...

single-minded pursuit of what appears to be a totally valid defensible analytic goal of accuracy or of data poster posteriori fit ironically produces local overfitting

so it's like exactly why we use expected free energy for policy inference because it does have the epistemic value component and then now with this level among portfolios of models it's like we need to remember why we put the epistemic value into the architecture at the base layer because it isn't enough to just have the epistemics at the base layer

and then forget about it at the modeler's level there's actually a role for the epistemic value and and also for the lifelong learning whereas in the examples here there was a training phase and then a test phase as opposed to like sleep wake type train and test and updating with online inference

like if the rules of the game changed or something like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, totally.

Yes, you want to be able to handle environments.

Let's say, going back to games, because I guess we love games, but it doesn't have to be games.

Let's say you're in an environment

um and you learn how to play the environment you learn the genetic model and then you you get to the end of the level you get to a new level and the environment changes somehow the number of categories changes and so forth you want to be able to handle that in a in a graceful way and you want to be able to handle the inherent uncertainty about the world um so there's a lot of um

Worked on AI driven scientific discovery.

And you can argue that, I mean, science is about understanding the mechanisms that generate the data that we have.

And in particular, the mechanisms of cause and consequence, right?

What causes what among our leading states?

So this is like.

a totally uh i mean like an example that all of us can relate of the fact that we have uncertainty about causal structure and we may also have uncertainty about the number of representations uh used to explain a particular data set so let's say i'm i'm a young child or my zoologist and i'm in the forest and i see an animal i've never seen before

is that animal part of an existing species that i know or is it part of a totally new species and and there's two hypotheses at this moment i don't have enough data to decide between either of them i'm going to conduct as a scientist experiments well just going back a little bit it means that i have a posterior with two different models that are equally likely or somewhat likely

And then I'm going to conduct an experiment to decide whether this animal is part of an existing or new species.

Which means that to do that, I need to have some notion of what would happen if I did that, like information gain about the model that I'm using about the world.

this is like a super simple example of like we fundamentally need that in a for one in a biomimetic agenda of like creating agents that you know resemble us and modeling and so forth also from a statistical perspective of like not overfitting but it's like pretty hard to do in practice how about coming back to one of arun's questions um


SPEAKER_02:
in what ways is time a special dimension we talk about planning through time and and that's intuitive from a folk psychological perspective how does the model handle time similarly or differently about rgms or just in general i mean what what what is time how is it being treated similarly or differently to other dimensions


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, good question.

I think it's a very fundamental and also physical question.

But just in terms, I mean, very, very simply in terms of the model, time is the only direction that we can control.

I mean, we can't control the flow of time, but we can control the evolution through state-space as time unfolds, and those are actions.

Now, one interesting thing about the paper is that we not only renormalize in space,

in space-space, but we normalize in time.

And so we have this, in the current architecture, this one step ahead actions at each level, time horizon of one, it could also be two or four or whichever you want, as long as it is the same as at each level.

um but yeah the point is we renormalize both in space and time and uh i would be i think this would be a good question for carl of like why is it important to renormalize both in space and time i don't really have a sense for uh why that is but he probably has a very compelling reason for for what that is


SPEAKER_01:
I'll give a little bit of detail as to why I asked the question.

So there's a very technical reason and then there's like a wider reason.

The very technical reason is to do with the overlapping part that we talked about before.

And I noticed in the paper that doesn't seem to be overlapping time sort of factors.

You go from one state above to generates the initial state at the level below and then a transition.

and then you do the next pair.

But the pair of observations at the level below don't overlap.

Whereas in the MNIST example, there were radial basis functions that were like four pixels wide or whatever, but they overlapped, which I thought was really interesting.

So that was the very technical reason why I asked, oh, is time separate here when the pairs don't overlap as you're doing the renormalization?

But I think the wider question of why it's interesting is that I don't really understand how you would plan with respect to space.

But as you say, with time, it's the rollout.

That's the critical dimension of you go, if I do this, then in the future something happens.

but my brain doesn't compute what planning would look like in space.

But yeah, we'll definitely ask Carlin the dot too, and probably be just as confused at the end.


SPEAKER_02:
That kind of makes me think of a wave propagating out, like in a game of life situation, a wave is propagating out at one click per time step.

So it's moving, it's a wavefront in space-time.

From the surfer on the wave, they're not moving, but then renormalized over space.

It's like, what will happen to that time step at the next time step?

Well, if the wave's going to hit it or it's going to leave.

But from the wave's perspective, renormalizing through space-time, it's stationary.

it's a stationary traveling wave that still is treating time in a little bit of a different way than space but for all systems that we're studying in time which basically are the natural systems we can't really get away from it but maybe there's like a hyper time crystal view on some of these systems that spatializes time

Okay.

In some of our last pieces, again, if anyone has questions, feel free to write it.

Okay.

Rex asks, how has the progression been with the Atari challenge?

Encouraging results?


SPEAKER_00:
um yeah i mean really good question i'm not sure how much i'm able to share um just because of confidentiality issues but i would say um overall it's quite challenging uh definitely very interesting results um many different approaches that are being tried because of course you could i mean you have this rgm approach but there's many other types of generative models that you know you could be exploring for solving this type of task

The really interesting question is what kind of structure or structures is sufficiently universal to be able to express any kind of Atari game?

And the day we solve that, we'll actually have learned a great deal.

At the moment, we have some leads, we have some promising results, but we are still far away from being able to solve all the games with the same structure.

So I think there's a very interesting progress in terms of scaling up.

And as always, with these research questions, it is always hard to know, you know, how long we'll need to actually solve the challenge.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah maybe just think of the game how children pick up games and calvin ball making up games and what cognitive capacities support the idea like maybe there's a game hanger or high level game

virtualizer that then can be like a sandbox for creating games with arbitrary structure.

You know, you're going to tell me a number that ends in a seven and then I'm going to do this dance.

It's like, that's our game.

But because it's a rule set within a space, within a container that's understood.

And so although generalized coordinates, RGM and so on,

in theory can go for infinite number of dimensions for any finite system it may only be several levels of generalization or path extraction or just in the example of time even with two time steps per level at some point with time doubling you're talking about a transition that's longer than a lifetime

So it becomes a kind of an extraneous inference.

And similarly, making it finer scale, you're going to quickly get to the state transitions of walking at a picosecond, which again, don't really matter.

But if there were either automated ways or interpretable human in the loop type ways to say, okay, the SVD is looking pretty

pretty uninformative at this small scale and at this large scale.

Here's the bulk of the mesovariants that we're working with.

Here's the information content across these coarse grainings.

Here's sweeping across different windows and grainings.

This looks like a good graining approach.

Here's where the meat is to chop up.

And that relates to the focusing the computational resources on where the information content is.

Focus the resources on where there's information to glean and then truncate the model's dimensionality

beyond the point of diminishing returns,

It goes without saying, slash is hard to say sometimes, but that's an extremely different paradigm for fitting small to very large models than coming with a fixed number of parameters of a large model and a fixed data set as much as you can and then colliding the two until you can optimally reproduce the training data.

While there is this element of parameterizing it on training data, in principle, you can just specify generative models and generate synthetic data.

We do this all the time for different models.

You don't have to train them on anything.

You can just make a thermometer in a synthetic room and just let it play.

So it's just interesting how with these new Lego toolkits and new composabilities that can deal with data and play in that sort of empirical test train mode, but they also lend themselves to a lot more dynamic reconfiguring that I think is the main piece we've been

wrestling with which is it gives us more affordances in building and modulating these models but every degree of freedom in the modeler's toolkit is double-edged because it expands the combinatorics of what is possible possibly diminishing the proportion of good solutions

but maybe those good solutions get better and better, though they're rarer and rarer.


SPEAKER_01:
Just want to come in on a quick point, which I think you've talked about the... at the very high scale, nothing really happens across, you know, beyond a lifetime at the very small scale.

You don't want to consider walking on picoseconds.

From a practical point of view, I guess that's going to be very limited by your training data.

So, for example,

on the spatial point of view, what does a pixel mean in your training data?

And presumably you have to normalize across all your different samples to be a pixel means the same distance in an image regardless, potentially.

Or do you have to do some sort of pre-processing to mean that you're only ever taking data from the same, pictures from the same camera at the same distance for that to mean the same thing across the different bits of your data?

Or if they are different, does your model then have to learn that from a structural point of view?

And then going on the time one, I think that's also quite interesting.

Maybe it's another reason why it's different.

If you're introducing videos of different lengths.

So if you say, okay, here's some data where in this particular video, it's 100 frames and this one is 200 frames.

There's different levels of... You're limited in how...

far up you can go if you're just going to continually pair and pair and pair if you've only got 100 frames compared to 200 frames.

So there could be very practical considerations here for the number of levels you can have and what time scale you can operate on.

But then also I think it does beg the question at the very top level, if you've only got like, I think, let's say for the music example in this paper,

you've if you've got a length of music and you it breaks it down like it was jazz music and you break it down to like notes and bars and potentially you could go up to a movement but you can only go up to the maximum level like length of your like a piece of music

that is that you're that you're exposing in the training data you can't go a level above that and that sort of like highest level thing could only really have like one value so you might as well get rid of it so there's some there might be some redundancy at the very top there that you just sort of can always implicitly throw away yeah I think so I mean when


SPEAKER_00:
yeah um and and when we have the current architectures i mean we always show the the top level as having for example one state or or two states with a transition to another two states but then implicitly you have this um even higher level that has one state uh and that's static but yeah somehow you i mean it doesn't do anything so

But yeah, there's many things, I guess many questions and many things that can be explored.

The other thing, another question that I have is, so intuitively, let's say we're thinking, okay, I need to go to work.

I need to take a certain amount of actions to go to work.

Intuitively, when we plan in that setting, there's several actions that happen at the same level.

Or arguably, maybe not everybody's like this, but it's like, I need to go down, I need to take my car.

and then I need to go up the elevator at the workplace and so forth.

It seems that this plan maybe happens at the same level of abstraction, or like there's many cases where we plan on the same level of abstraction.

And in the current RGM architecture, we just have one step ahead or like a fixed amount of steps ahead that are reproduced at each level.

So,

Yeah, I mean, you can definitely reproduce the example that I talked about by saying, okay, well, we're going to find, you know, 10 steps ahead at each level, and then it would fit with more complex plans.

But, you know, how can we allow some flexibility there?

Or is there some flexibility that we need for the time horizon at each level?

Should it be different from one level to another and so forth?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah well it's like the controls in the studio are being explored and fleshed out because you could sweep across different planning horizons or you could plan for the same amount across horizons like just like it's brought up with the when it's connected to the convolutional neural network

it talks about how the special case where the likelihood mappings are conserved over groups, one has the discrete homologue of convolutional neural network.

So if you're just trying to make the best single filter to pass over an image, you have a CNN.

Whereas if you open it up to different locations of the image having different filters,

That's the blessing and the curse.

Now you have that many times larger of a state space, but for problems that have that statistical structure, that would be the way to go.

So that's what motivates this metamodeling question of how would we recognize whether we're in a situation where

single filter is better than n number of filters like these are where the modeling questions quickly rise in a way because where our inference hits the metal we know how that's going to happen in terms of bayesian graphical model and variational free energy it's just how

to know what level of abstraction to enter into the problem and really what's the purpose of the model.

Because it's really easy to set up a situation where the, for example, policy inference is a slam dunk.

And it's easy to set up situations where the policy inference is hopeless by design.

so what is that sort of goldilocks zone where if you could curate only the expert gameplay examples and do resemblance modeling but if you already knew who is expert then you already have those traces so it's like just it it's interesting how with a strong floor

and grounded in a really low level way to balance accuracy and complexity, we really quickly hit these data science questions about what the analysis is for and what structure the model should be taking on.

Um, okay, in our last minutes.

Okay, another question.

Are any other benchmarks being looked at?

Or just what kinds of benchmarks?

Do you think for the open source community would be interesting for us to pursue?


SPEAKER_00:
We've had given from searching and with our gems.

So

With RGMs, so yeah, I mean, there's several things, right?

So there could be imitation learning benchmarks.

I think this would be very interesting to go into because arguably this isn't, I mean, the current state of RGMs, it's an imitation learning tool.

It's not really a planning tool.

It's also a compression tool.

In terms of

So there's Atari.

But arguably, if we really want to solve Atari, we want to put a planner in the RGM.

So we don't want to learn necessarily from expert data.

We want to learn in a self-supervised way.

And so the very things that we're exploring there, extensions of RGM in various ways.

um and then and then you know i mean there's uh there's so many benchmarks out there uh one thing that's interesting for going to atari is mini atari um and then there's uh all the robotic uh benchmarks that i think are quite interesting

um i mean you probably know uh many many other interesting examples that yeah i think these are the most yeah interesting ones at least from my perspective

It also depends on the feature that you're developing, right?

So maybe RGNs are particularly good for imitation learning.

But if you're in multi-agent active inference, then you probably want to look at multi-agent games or things that require cooperation to solve certain types of problems.

Yeah, I would say it's very much open-ended and depending on the strength of the particular approach.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, what are your next moves?

I mean, how will your year proceed and what are you excited for?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm super excited about this model uncertainty thing.

this idea of how do we do Bayesian principle models in a way that's fast, fast enough so that we can plan to take actions that improve our model over time.

And this is also interesting, I guess, from bridging multiple fields together, because when we look at, for example, the work in computational cognitive science by folks like Dustin Brown, Sam Gershman, they think very much in terms of inferring the model of the world, I mean, the distribution of the models of the world.

It's not something that we're doing again at the moment, and I think this is a limitation.

When you look at other folks like Yoshua Bengio, who are interested in AI safety and also AI-driven scientific discovery, they also have this uncertainty about models and this Bayesian inference, which is very important and interesting.

So then when you accept that this is the way that things need to be done, then there's the question of how do you infer, how do you do the Bayesian inference in practice?

And there's a wide set of tools for doing approximate inference of the models.

It's still a relatively young field, so there's lots of

improvements to be done there.

Lots of hardcore statistics and machine learning, very deep questions.

So this is like one direction that I think is interesting to pursue.

And then once you have that

working well and by working well I mean you want a method that's able to infer models very fast it doesn't need to be super accurate when you think about humans we typically

only have uh you know a few hypotheses about the call structure of something or something in the world so we don't necessarily need to have a super complex approximate posterior models also that would be very computationally complex so we want to look for uh things that are fast and that operate online

And so once you have these kind of methods for inference about the model, then putting that into an agent and having the agent learn to know, you know, in a self-supervised way in its environment.

And the other challenge for that is

because you're doing model inference there's no it's not strictly speaking it's not model growing or pruning anymore you're just doing model inference so your space of models is fixed from the outset

And so therefore, if you want developmental agents or lifelong learning agents, you want a space of models that can pretty much explain anything the agent would ever encounter.

Or you want a space of models that is able to express anything that the agent would need to survive.

um so you don't necessarily want something that's very incomplete but you want something that's you know a classic model that's pretty expressive but it should also be sufficiently coarse that you're able to do efficient inference on it so you have this trade-off which is very difficult to navigate of

trying to find a class of models that is universal in some sense, but also sufficiently coarse that you can do things manageably.

And I think this is where RGMs can potentially be very fruitful.

because they are very expressive and they're also I mean they have very powerful inductive biases this like renormalization aspect that makes your model space a lot smaller than it would be with other methods so this uh yeah this is a one way forward and like particularly excited about


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Yeah, expert learning is kind of the inductive side, and then the creativity and the abduction, and being able to jump to an adjacent possible from what has been induced.

That's exciting.

Arun?

And then we kind of have our last thoughts here.


SPEAKER_01:
I thought that all of those directions of future research sound really interesting.

I had a very possibly silly question, which is on when we're talking about learning about structure, are we also learning about potential new actions that an agent could take?

And I think that ties in with the AI safety part quite nicely of currently in Active Inference, if you come up with your own generative model, as the modeler, I can say, these are the actions available to my agent.

It can only do these things.

It has to pick one of those things and it can't do anything else.

But if we're going to learn online about possible actions, like new actions I could take, suddenly now I've learned that I have the choice to drive a car.

Whereas before I could only walk, then suddenly the range of impacts that I could have me as the agent can have on the world massively increases and is possibly not predicted by the modeler at the time they're creating their agent.

So I think that, so yeah, my question is sort of about what type of structure do we want to learn with these new models?

And does that include actions that an agent could take?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah um i mean really interesting question and um so so i'll give you a couple of thoughts um there is a toby sinclair smith uh which you've probably had had here on the show um he

Yeah, he does category theory, and in his latest formulation of structure learning, active inference with category theory, he talks about blankets that change over time.

And so this would be this idea of adding or removing actions of observations.

So I think that's interesting, and he would probably have some really cool thoughts about that.

The other perspective is, let's say you fix the observation space and the action space, and let's suppose that I as a person exist only in a small part of my head,

And my observations and actions are the information that's coming in and out of this small part of the head.

Now, when you're a baby, you don't know

that you can act on your body right so you don't know that your foot is you and your arm is you but you're gonna learn eventually that there is a very precise mapping from the information that's coming out of your action neuron to what your arm can do and so eventually even though your arm is a latent state you're going to associate moving my arm with an action that you're taking because there is a very precise mapping from your neuron to what the arm does

And I think this would be, basically, when you think about it this way, there is maybe a lot of actions that we can lump into the latent states of the environment that we have direct, very precise control over.

That's the way I'm thinking about things.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah that's that's the babbling it's interesting i'm also just thinking of expert video of figure skating but then there that doesn't mean it's safe for a non-expert or there could have been a body position that was safely reached but then if a different object in a different context is so there's so many interesting um fundamental

issues and that is the sort of benchmark and reproducibility question is how can we compare models with these radically different forms possibly in the future also radically different substrates solving these problems in different ways such that

The ways that benchmarks are even conceptualized in terms of like CPU or RAM may only be a constrained way to think about how some of these embodied problems are solved.

lance thank you for this and all the authors for the work we're very excited to uh talk with carl and others in 58.2 during the applied active inference symposium so good luck with your works see you next time thank you so much thanks everyone
