## cLe-rBtRXiQ

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It's April 28th, 2022 and we're here in Act-Inf Lab live stream number 43.0 discussing predictive coding, a theoretical experimental review.

welcome to the actinv lab we're a participatory online lab that is communicating learning practicing applied active inference you can find us at links here on the slide this is recorded in an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams

Head over to ActiveInference.org if you want to learn more about how to participate in the live streams or anything else happening in Act In Flat.

Okay.

we're here today to learn and discuss the paper predictive coding a theoretical and experimental review by baron millage anil seth and christopher buckley the video is just an introduction and a contextualization for some of the ideas and some of the details of the paper and the broad sense it's not a review or a final word

It's, as with some of these other technical dense papers, it's like an opening for those who have technical questions at the learning side of things or at the more advanced research side of things to come get involved because this is a technical paper, but also hopefully as we'll unpack, it has a lot of cool biological and philosophical implications.

So in 43.0, we're going to say hello and introduce some big questions, then cover the aims and claims of the paper, the abstract and the roadmap, and then pretty much just jump right in.

And we're going to focus a lot on the introduction, the context, and the single layer predictive coding model.

And then we'll go a little bit faster through the later sections of the paper, talking about some generalizations of predictive coding and some important points that the authors raise.

So if you want to participate in 43.1 or 43.2 in the coming weeks, just let us know.

Okay, so we can say hello and give any information that we'd like and also just maybe something that we thought was exciting or something that motivated us to get involved in this quite involved paper.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California, and I was curious to learn more about how predictive coding and predictive processing related to active inference, and also just about how different models framed anticipatory systems.

So over to you, Maria.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, Daniel and everyone.

I have a bachelor degree in psychology and I am a master's candidate in philosophy of science in the University of São Paulo, Brazil.

And I am researching the relationship between predictive processing and illusionist theories of consciousness.

And I think what brought me here today was...

my wish to start learning about the formalisms because I don't really see it in philosophy and I don't actually need it for my dissertation but eventually I wanted to continue my work on predictive processing so eventually I had to start it and I just thought well maybe that's a good idea to come here and minimize my uncertainties


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome, through inference and or through action.

And also thanks a lot, Brock, for helping in the dot zero.

So we'll just start with the big questions.

And these are the kind of questions that might motivate someone or interest them in this paper without even mentioning active inference per se.

But these are like some big questions that get touched upon.

What is the formal basis of predictive coding?

How is predictive coding used or useful?

What are some areas of current and future development?

And what is the relationship between predictive coding and active inference?

And hopefully we'll draw out more questions.

Anything else to add about this?


SPEAKER_01:
No, not really.


SPEAKER_00:
The paper is Predictive Coding, A Theoretical and Experimental Review.

I think the first version was from 2021, but the second revised version was 22 by Millage, Seth, and Buckley.

And just to review the core claim and then some of the aims and directions they set out, they write that no comprehensive review of predictive coding theory and especially of recent developments in the field exists.

That's their claim.

And then they aim towards providing a comprehensive review, both of the core mathematical structure and logic of predictive coding.

So there's a mathematical review and summarization aspect to the paper.

And then they also review a wide range of classic and recent work within the framework, ranging from biologically realistic microcircuits that could implement predictive coding to the close relationship between predictive coding and the widely used back propagation of error algorithm,

as well as surveying the close relationship between predictive coding and modern machine learning techniques.

That's how they set out where they want to go.

Would you like to read the first slide of the abstract?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

predictive coding offers a potentially unifying account of cortical function, postulating that the core function of the brain is to minimize prediction errors with respect to a generative model of the world.

The theory is closely related to the Bayesian brain framework and, over the last two decades, has gained substantial influence in the fields of theoretical and cognitive neuroscience.

A large body of research has arisen based on both empirically testing improved and extended theoretical and mathematical models of predictive coding, as well as in evaluating the potential biological plausibility for implementation in the brain and concrete neurophysiological and psychological predictions made by the theory.

Despite this enduring popularity, however, no comprehensive review of predictive coding theory and especially of recent developments in this field exists.


SPEAKER_00:
Here we provide a comprehensive review of both of the core mathematical structure and logic of predictive coding, thus complementing recent tutorials in the literature,

And we also review a wide range of classic and recent work within the framework, which is what we had read previously in the aims.

So that's how the authors describe their own work.

And now we're going to see their roadmap, see how they went about getting there.

And then we're going to jump right into the introduction and then the formalisms.

So here we see the roadmap.

and the rough outline of the paper is as follows.

Section one provides an introduction that contextualizes predictive coding and we'll also be unpacking it in a philosophical and historical view.

Section two provides an initial pass on the one level predictive coding model, sort of the kernel or the archetype or the motif of predictive coding and connects it importantly to variational inference.

Then predictive coding is generalized or extended or elaborated in a few important directions.

So like in section 2.2, it's generalized into a multi-level case.

In section 2.3, the concept of generalized coordinates are introduced.

In section 4, precision is introduced as a concept.

And in section 2.5, it's connected back to the brain.

Section three discusses paradigms of predictive coding, both unsupervised and supervised, and also connects it through those sections and others to some research in machine learning.

And then in section four, there's connections between predictive coding and some other algorithms,

both those algorithms that are common in machine learning and computational statistics, like the error backpropagation, linear predictive coding and common filtering and normalizing flows and biased competition.

And then in section 4.5,

explicit connection is drawn between predictive coding and active inference, which brings in the cost of action as well as the idea of PID control.

And the discussion section closes with just a few other thoughts and summaries and directions and challenges.

there's several appendices so it's a long ish paper or monograph but it's an excellent paper and we're just going to cover more of an emphasis on the context and the beginning and then sort of skip over or trail off over a few things but there's a lot to unpack so i hope that we can like learn more in the coming weeks if the authors want to join or if anybody else wants to join

Anything to add on roadmap or ready for introduction?


SPEAKER_01:
Let's go.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Awesome.

So I'll just add some notes from this section of the introduction and then Maria, feel free to add anything.

So how do they introduce predictive coding?

They introduce predictive coding theory as an influential theory in computational and cognitive neurosciences, which proposes a potential unifying theory of cortical function.

That's like related to the cortex of the brain.

Namely, that the core function of the brain is to minimize prediction error where the prediction error signals mismatches between predictive input and the input actually received.

Minimizing the divergence between expectations and observations is going to be a big theme.

And approaching that minimization, it can be achieved in multiple ways, and they're colored differently here.

Through immediate inference about the hidden states of the world, like I thought the ball was over here, I'm getting evidence it's over here, so I should just update how I think about the world.

which can explain perception like the perception of a ball moving across the visual field through updating a global world model to make better predictions which could explain learning like learning a little bit higher level than just where the ball is in the visual field but like where balls tend to be in the visual field or how fast they tend to move around

and finally through action to sample sensory data from the world that conforms to the predictions and that's when we'll introduce action into predictive coding in the latter sections of the paper and then just last point they say that predictive coding boasts an extremely developed and principled mathematical framework in terms of variational inference as well as many empirically tested computational models that have close links to machine learning

So that's how they introduce this is as a unifying theory that integrates inference as well as action, inference of different kinds, more like perceptual and more like learning.

And they're saying that it has a very rich mathematical framework and it's been connected to insights in biology and in machine learning.

Anything to add?

Nope.

so they write predictive coding as a theory also offers a single mechanism that accounts for diverse perceptual and neurobiological phenomena such as end stopping by stable perception like illusions repet repetition suppression illusory motions and attentional modulation of neural activity

So they're pointing to the integrative nature of this theory or framework to model all of these diverse phenomena as being an advantage.

Like we could have a special theory for just bistable perception, a special theory for just repetition suppression, and so on.

But this is a framework by which those outcomes are occurring as kind of

outcomes of an underlying framework predictive coding rather than needing special theories.

So that kind of like parsimony or consilience is pursued in the areas like cognitive neuroscience.

And they write, as such, and perhaps uniquely among neuroscientific theories, predictive coding encompasses all three layers of Mars hierarchy by providing well-characterized and empirically supported view of what the brain is doing at all of the computational, algorithmic, and implementational levels.

so mars very influential hierarchy it's kind of like tinbergen's questions or a little bit like maslow's hierarchy you can think of it as like an organizing or a sense making framework again to the question what are brains doing and so we're going to have like three different kinds of answers to what brains are doing there's going to be an answer at the level of computation

algorithm and implementation.

And so here with the example of a bird flying, the computational level is like flight.

It's like the why.

What is the algorithm doing?

It's a sorting algorithm.

What is the brain doing in this situation?

It's tracking a moving object.

Then there's the flapping level, which is the algorithm, which is kind of like pseudocode, and that's suggesting the what of how that why is realized.

Like what is happening in this sorting algorithm?

Well, it's doing this, this, this, this, this.

What is the flight function being realized by?

It's being realized by flapping of the wings.

And then there's the implementation.

So it's not just the flapping of anything,

it's the flapping of something specific and so that's the implementational details and those levels of analysis have been helpful and provocative in connecting computational cognitive theories to neurobiological theories so it's been a very influential and um discussion

provoking framework that has helped people connect as well as challenge some of the similarities and differences between computers and brains.

Great.

This is still in the introduction and they're going to kind of give us a qualitative perspective on predictive coding and then we're going to be diving into a lot more historical and technical detail.

But how does predictive coding work?

The core intuition behind predictive coding is that the brain is composed of a hierarchy of layers which are each making predictions about the activity of the layer immediately below them in the hierarchy.

So there's two directions in this predictive coding multilayer scheme, which we're just introducing here as kind of a heuristic.

And then we're going to zoom in to just what's happening at one level.

And then we're going to pull back out to kind of recovering this multilevel formalism.

The downward descending predictions at each level, that's the blue arrow, are compared with the activity and inputs of each level to form prediction errors.

This is the information in each layer which could not be successfully predicted.

These prediction errors are then fed upwards, that's the red arrow, to serve as inputs to higher levels, which can then be utilized to reduce their own prediction error.

So that's kind of the bigger picture.

Like the idea at the top level is like, I'm tracking a soccer ball that's moving from the left to the right.

And then that gets transduced in certain ways.

And that is in this case, resulting in kind of a visual perceptive level prediction about what one should expect to see.

And this is again, just the multi-level predictive coding scheme that is often used, but

We're going to zoom back to just what's happening at a single level, and then what is happening at multiple levels.

Awesome.

Here's a fun 2018 paper by Carl Friston, Does Predictive Coding Have a Future?

And this is going to provide just a little bit of context, and then we're going to jump more into, though,

Carl wrote, in the 20th century, we thought the brain extracted knowledge from sensation.

That's like the recognition model.

And that's sort of the incoming sensory processing model.

The 21st century witnessed a strange inversion in which the brain became an organ of inference, actively constructing explanations for what's going on out there beyond its sensory epithelia.

One paper played a key role in this paradigm shift.

and carl goes on to write that a 1999 paper by rao and ballard which we're going to talk more about for him was one of those papers that's a once in a decade find

So we're going to talk more about it, but this is just kind of connecting it early to Carl Friston's line of research, the connection between active inference and predictive coding, and the idea that sometimes it's these early transdisciplinary papers that can stitch two different fields together, and that that can have long-term consequences for essentially perennial questions like how do perception, learning, attention, and sensation

all work together and under what imperative might they work together.

And then the authors provide a very preliminary discussion that they're going to go into more later about how predictive coding matters for machine learning.

And so they write, predictive coding proposes that using a simple unsupervised lost function, such as simply attempting to predict incoming sensory data,

is sufficient to develop a complex general and hierarchically rich representations of the world.

They're suggesting that this has found support in the successes of modern machine learning models that are trained on unsupervised predictive or autoregressive objectives.

So here's some of the papers that they cite.

This is the Brown et al and the Kaplan et al.

And these both have to do with the training of what are increasingly becoming important modern machine learning methods, which are the language models.

In contrast to modern machine learning algorithms, which are trained to end with a global loss at the output.

So, given the total big dataset, give me the lowest total error on the whole dataset.

In predictive coding, prediction errors are computed at every layer, which means that each layer only has to focus on minimizing local errors than global loss.

This property potentially enables predictive coding to learn in a biologically plausible way using only local and Hebbian learning rules.

And this is going to connect to common filtering and PID control.

So they're kind of laying out the land and showing where they're going to connect in the introduction very, very qualitatively.

And then again, we're going to zoom back down to find out what's happening at one level of predictive coding, and then try to rebuild some of the formalisms related to Kalman filtering and PID control.

and the bigger questions that people might be curious about asking would be like what does it mean for computation to be biologically inspired what is possible when we're thinking about some of the similarities and differences and complementarities between biological and different kinds of conventional and unconventional computation the next

heart maria please take it away i'll be changing slides so thanks a lot for adding a lot of the historical context and looking forward to learning about what you have to share here


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so this is actually the paragraph that is in the paper, okay, that they start talking about the history of predictive coding.

So, while predictive coding as a neuroscientific theory originated in the 80s and 90s with Monfort, Rowe and Ballard, Schneveson...

or something, Laughlin and Dubs, and was first developed into its modern mathematical form and comprehensive theory of cortical responses in the mid-2000s with Friston, it has deep intellectual antecedents.

These precursors include Helmholtz's notion of perception as an unconscious inference and Kant's notion that a priori structure is needed to make sense of sensory dictum, okay?

and as well as early ideas of compression and feedback control in cybernetics and information theory.

And on the next slides, I will be talking a little bit more about history and philosophy of predictive coding, and then some core formalisms and various generalizations and elaborations of predictive coding.

If there is anything you want to say, Daniel, just feel free to jump in, okay?

So, the historical and philosophical background of perception is huge.

However, seen in the context of predictive coding framework, authors usually come up with a similar reasoning about perception.

And then we can start thinking with the Greek philosopher Plato on his Allegory of the Cave.

from 514 to 520 before Christ, which he said basically that some people would be trapped in a cave forever watching shadows cast by objects moving near a fire behind them.

And then they would like be there forever, have children that would grow like that inside the cave.

And, you know, eventually these shadows would,

from the objects near fire behind them would be the real thing and the only thing for these people.

They wouldn't believe that there is anything outside the cave.

So this would be it.

These shadows would be the only thing.

So what Plato would claim here is that our own conscious perceptions are just like these shadows, meaning that they are indirect reflections of hidden causes that we can never directly encounter.

A few centuries later, the Arab medieval scholar

Al-Hazen wrote a lot of interesting notes on visual perception.

Actually, he wrote six volumes, if I'm not mistaken, of his book of optics, where he explored the view that human perception often depends on mechanisms of judgment and inference instead of providing access straight to the world.

You can see that very early in our Western thinking, we have this notion that we do not have direct access to the world, okay?

That there is some inference going on.

Okay?


SPEAKER_00:
Great.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Jumping to the 18th century, we can find two important philosophers, the English David Hume and the German Immanuel Kant.

Hume, in 1739 to 1740, explored the inductive inferences and causation.

The problem of induction that he brought was an analysis of cause and effect in perception and the conclusion

that he gets is that all our mental life could be traced back to the effects of such experience because since we do not have direct contact with the world we could never have one-to-one relationship with the objects there and therefore it is possible to have one effect with many possible causes and one cause with many effects

The solution here would be then extracting statistical regularities and imagining what happens when the world is intervened upon a controlled manner, as the philosopher Jacob Howie developed in his book, The Predictive Mind, in 2014.

Equally important in the critique of pure reason in 1781, Kant will add an important element to this story among

you know, countless other elements to this story.

He will add that the brain uses existing information regarding space and time to make sense of the chaotic sensory data it constantly receives to provide an organism the perception as they know.

So all of these scholars would tell us right in the early ages that we do not have direct access to the things in the world and we need pre-existing information to make sense of all the data we constantly receive.

Lots of predictive coding stuff.


SPEAKER_00:
It really makes me wonder why it's sometimes still so ineffable or poorly understood or even seen as controversial, some of these perspectives which have been, as you are describing, thought of and convergently come to for many thousands of years in different cultures.

So really interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

In the late 19th century, the German scientist Hermann von Helmholtz in 1860 depicted perception as involving probabilistic inference.

He is one of our gods in the community.

He was really inspired by Kant.

With that inspiration, he developed the idea of the brain as a hypothesis tester and that perception is a process of unconscious inference.

More specifically, this idea that he developed in experiments was that perception has to be inferred by combining sensory signals with the brain expectations and beliefs about their causes.

Such inferences happen without the subject's awareness.

I mean, it has to happen without the subject's awareness.

Because, you know, imagine all the chaotic sensory data coming and you open your eyes and you have to try to organize everything.

I mean, it doesn't happen that way.

You just open your eyes and everything is still stable.

And so, it's unconscious.

And...

it needs to keep track of the causes in the world by updating perceptual best guesses, or you can say hypothesis, as new sensory signals arrive.

So here he built the idea that we use sensory signals with the brain expectations to update the hypothesis we make for the causes

of the effects we receive in the world.

And this means that he somehow turned Hume's and Kant's insights scientific, claiming that we can only infer things out there in the world behind a sensory veil, which, if I'm not mistaken, will be eventually called Markov blanket.

Is that right, Daniel?

Not sure.

Maybe unveiled.

Hamholtz was crucial to many different works in machine learning.

one that was even nicely named as Helmholtz machine.

He was crucial in psychology, neuroscience, cognitive science, and so on.

Particularly in psychology, Helmholtz's insights inspired Yuri Schneisser in 1967 and later Richard Gregory in 1980 and Yves Arvin Roque in 1983 to develop the analysis by synthesis approach, which is the process that analyzes a signal or image by reproducing

it using a model.

There is a picture of analysis by synthesis approach with some schema available in this link.

In fact, Gregory built some kind of neurohypothesis testing model based on his Helmholtzian understanding of the brain as continually formulating perceptual hypotheses about the world and testing them by acquiring data from sensory organs.

okay so many things happened after the analysis by synthesis stuff but i will just jump to what we have in philosophy today because we will touch the formalisms and the computation stuff afterwards okay so i'll just make a jump and go to what we have in philosophy today so uh

Recent works in philosophy and cognitive neuroscience have contributed to the expansive predictive coding framework and the Bayesian paradigm in the brain.

And many of the seminal works we have in the field addresses predictive coding as predictive processing without, you know, any relevant difference in the first instance.

And, well,

For instance, the philosopher Jacob Howey, that is based in Monash University, Australia, aimed on the improvement of prediction error minimization mechanism and the concept of winning hypothesis for conscious perception.

Also, he is interested in what PPE, predictive processing studies, can bring to people with mental disorders such as autism and schizophrenia.

Actually, the three of them, of the philosophers here, are interested in what PPE can bring to improvement in psychiatry and medicine in general.

So, in 2014, he published an important textbook on the matter, that is, The Predictive Mind, the red book you can see.

where he tries to solve the problem of perception inspired on humans' induction problem with Bayesian inference and predictive processes.

Later, in 2016, the philosopher Andy Clarke, based on University of Sussex, England, carefully developed what he called action-oriented predictive processing in his book, Surfering Uncertainty, where he adds and advances the crucial role of action in our perception.

And he makes lots of interesting connections between recent works in computational neuroscience and artificial intelligence and his eclectic philosophy of mind.

And last year, in 2021, the neuroscientist and USF, one of the authors of this paper we're talking here, and also based at the University of Sussex, made an amazing contribution to the field with his book Being You, where he claims that we are beast machines whose perception is a controlled hallucination.

And he improves consciousness descriptions using predictive processing framework and establishing the real problem of consciousness that, in his own words, requires explaining why a particular pattern of brain activity or other physical process maps to a particular kind of conscious experience, not merely establishing that it does.

Two, you know, philosophers and scientists work on.

And they, here they are.

Okay.

All right.

So I was talking about predictive coding, and then I went to predictive processing.

Is there a difference?

Well, many authors would use the terms freely, okay?

But then I found Clark saying in his book the difference that he understands from predictive coding to predictive processing.

So he puts as the fact that predictive processing is not simply the use of the data compression strategy known as predictive coding.

Rather, it is the use of that strategy in a very special context of hierarchical

multi-level systems deploying probabilistic generative models.

Such systems exhibit powerful forms of learning and deliver rich forms of context-sensitive processing and are able flexibly to combine top-down and bottom-up flows of information within multi-layer cascade.

Predictive processing does combine the use within a multi-level bi-directional cascade of top-down probabilistic generic models with the core predictive coding strategy of efficient encoding and transmission.

Okay.

From this, I'm not sure if you agree with me, Daniel, but reading this paragraph makes me wonder, I mean,

Okay, predictive coding is a local bottom-up, top-down cascade and stuff, but it also is multi-layer.

Yes, it also has some hierarchy.

So I'm not sure what he means.

I mean, I'm not sure if I understand the difference between predictive coding and predictive processing as he puts it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, very insightful.

And it made me think about the difference between like

coding like programming and like data coding, like Python coding for data and data processing, which is a little bit like it could be multiple computer languages.

And so you're really highlighting something important, which is that when the data are compressed according to a strategy where the errors are being transmitted rather than the actual sort of estimate itself, that's like that information channel is in a predictive coding way.

And then this helps us use predictive processing for the bigger picture, for systems that implement predictive coding modules, but that's not the only module they're deploying.

So that'll be something cool to hear people's perspective on.

Really nice distinction here, though.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And OK, so I wrote something here that

just like you said, that maybe coding would be better to use for formalisms and implementations and processing for the philosophical understanding that prediction is the basis of signal interpretation, e.g.

as opposed to descriptive.

Okay.

So, jumping back to formalism.

predictive coding in information theory and signal processing.

Okay, so another deep intellectual influence in predictive coding comes from information theory from Shannon in 1948, and especially the minimum redundancy principle of Barlow in 1961, 89, and 61, too.

Information theory tells us that information is inseparable from a lack of predictability.

If something is predictable before observing it, it cannot give us much information.

I loved this sentence.

Conversely, to maximize the rate of information transfer, the message must be minimally predictable and hence minimally redundant.

Predictive coding as a means to remove redundancy in a signal was first applied in signal processing, where it was used to reduce transmission bandwidth for video transmission.

And do you want to say something?


SPEAKER_00:
i'll just describe this without reading it it was a a common uh and effective although it can be improved on by other methods it's a method for video encoding known as frame differencing where basically uh one frame gets described and then subsequent frames only the pixels that change have to be described so that is a lot like an analogy to predictive coding in the sense that

it's able to connect the differences between subsequent time steps and use that to give really only the informative pieces.

Like I have a 100-digit number, and then I'm just going to tell you the third digit changed.

Now it's an 8.

Instead of having to repeat the same number and then 99 of those digits, they're informative, like in the sense that they're good info.

It's true, but they're not informative in the information theory context because they were quite predictable before observing it.


SPEAKER_01:
Initio Schemes used a simple approach of subtracting the new-to-be-transmitted frame from the old frame, in effect using a trivial prediction that the new frame is always the same as the old frame, which works well in reducing bandwidth in many settings where there are only a few objects moving in the video against a static background.

And more advanced methods often predict each new frame using a number of past frames weighted by some coefficient, an approach known as linear predictive coding.

OK, so now predictive coding in the eye and the brain.

The first concrete discussion of predictive coding in the neural system arose as a model of neural properties of the retina, with Srinivasan .

specifically as a model of center-surrounded cells which fire when presented with either a light spot against a dark background on center of surround or alternatively a dark spot against a light background of center on surround cells.

It was argued that this coding scheme helps to minimize redundancy in the visual scheme specifically by removing the spatial redundancy in natural visual scenes

that the intensity of one pixel helps predict quite well the intensity of neighboring pixels.

And then the first picture related to it.

Do you want to talk about it or just?


SPEAKER_00:
We're just going to look at two different tissues of the nervous system that have some predictive elements.

And this is referring to some of the photosensitive cells that are on the retina.

And that's work that had been done qualitatively and empirically for hundreds of years, but then was connected to predictive perspectives in the 80s.

then we're also going to look as you'll now unpack at what's happening in the cortex of the brain amongst different layers


SPEAKER_01:
with Manfred in 1992, was perhaps the first to extend this theory of the retina and the LGN to a fully fledged general theory of cortical function.

His theory was motivated by simple observations about the neurophysiology of cortico-cortical connections.

Specifically, the existence of separate feed-forward and feed-back paths

where the feedforward pathways originated in the superficial layers of the cortex and the feedback pathways originated primarily in the deep layers.


SPEAKER_00:
So we kind of had this philosophy development happening over thousands of years.

And then in the 1900s, people were starting to connect the neuroanatomy and the histology to some of these predictive ideas.

And then now let's kind of close the loop and bring it back to the critical work that Friston highlighted in his 2018 paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

And now predictive coding in the brain gets computational, mathematical.

While Montfort's theory contained most aspects of classical predictive coding theory in the cortex, it was not accompanied by any simulations or empirical work, and so its potential as a framework for understanding the cortex was not fully appreciated.

And so again, the similar work of Rao and Ballard in 1999 had its impact precisely by doing this.

And so they created a small predictive coding network according to the principles.

Oh, sorry.

They created a small predictive coding network according to the principles identified by Mumford and empirically investigated its behavior, demonstrating that the complex and dynamic interplay of predictions and prediction errors could explain several otherwise perplexing neurophysiological phenomena, specifically

extra-closical receptive field effects such as end-stopping neurons.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is pretty interesting because even the idea that the neurons that are active while a certain stimuli is being presented, that those are neurons that are receptive to that stimuli.

That's within the paradigm of signal reception.

And then it's like there's classical signal reception.

You know, the pitcher throws the ball, the catcher catches the ball.

It's classic.

But unfortunately, or not, there's all these so-called extra-classical effects.

And so this paper proposed a simple architecture that was able to encompass the so-called classical as well as some of the important extra-classical effects.

effects under this predictive processing framework and so that really led to a lot of developments in neuroscience in the last 20 plus years and that's exactly what we're going to go into now so thanks for providing that that awesome context like it really helps i think situate some of the details that we're about to look into okay so let's get a little technical

what happened after round ballard's 1999 synthesis so remember that carl friston said that that was like one of those once in a decade papers for him so how did he change his action selection publication policies after reading that paper well anyone could guess but what friston did was that he cast the predictive coding algorithm as approximate bayesian inference

upon Gaussian generative models.

And this is going to be connected.

This is all in the paper for people to read, but this connects basically all of the previous themes that we had been talking about, like the information theory, minimum redundancy, and the Helmholtzian idea of perception as inference come together in the Bayesian perspective on the predictive coding architecture by Rao and Bollard.

so the authors write friston's approach reformulates the mostly heuristic round ballard model in the language of variational bayesian inference which we're going to look more at and friston showed that the energy function in row and ballard can be understood as a variational free energy of the kind that is minimized through variational inference so that really connected the dots between

predictive coding architectures, and the empirical biological findings to all this work on variational Bayesian inference.

And those are the 2003, 5, and 8 single-authored papers by Carl.

So.

what is variational and bayesian and variational bayesian approaches and we're just going to look at the author's words and there's many many awesome places to look for educational materials and also check out some of the live streams like 26 32 34 37 and 39. so to be brief about it the author's right

Variational inference approximates an intractable inference problem with a tractable optimization problem.

So like a super hard problem to solve just by thinking about it and then guessing at the right answer.

with a tractable optimization problem.

So it's like 20 questions.

It's going to be hard to guess on your first question, but if you take this iterative optimization approach, maybe there's a way to actually resolve it.

So it's not exactly like that, but it's like kind of, again, flipping out something that's hard to solve in one shot with an approach and this iterative gradient descent type improvement that actually gets you to a good solution.

And so this is where we're gonna introduce some of the variables and the letters that we're going to use.

Following a lot of perceptual work in Bayesian statistics, we're gonna use O for observations, which are like data, either the actual data that the sensor provides us or generated data of the kind that we would expect the sensor to give us.

And then X are the latent or the unobserved states of the system.

So like X would be the temperature in the room and O is what the thermometer reading is.

And that's sort of a Bayesian approach that helps us have a generative model of the data generating process, which is also known as the joint distribution because it is jointly over both the observations and the latent states.

Where variational inference comes into play is hinted at in this paragraph on base.

So in order to do exact base, one would have to find this normalizing factor.

However, that can be intractable because it requires basically integrating or summing over all latent variable states.

And that's not always easy or known.

And so the approach of the variational method

is aiming to approximate the posterior using an auxiliary posterior using a different set of parameters

So the Q is going to be reflecting the distribution, the variational distribution that we control that is of a family of functions that is more amenable to optimization.

So P could be like a super messy function, but Q is going to be constructed by the modeler to be a lot simpler.

And so it is going to have its own parameters.

And those parameters phi are mu and sigma.

And so it's kind of like we would be interested in the mean and the variance of the x, the actual temperature in the room, given the thermometer.

But what if it were too hard to even get that?

Well, what we might want to do would be imagine that the temperature were normally distributed like a Gaussian distribution with this mean mu and the variance sigma.

So even if the temperature in the room weren't actually Gaussian distributed, maybe it's approximatable enough.

And so the variational approach to the Bayesian method is to introduce this variational distribution Q that's going to have like a lot of good features moving forward.

Here's how that cue comes into play.

This equation one is expressing using the variables that we've seen.

It's saying, and also introducing this divergence D. So first just the definition of D and then what this formalism says.

So D of P and double line Q. So any double line means between this and that.

D is a function that measures the divergence between two distributions.

So for example, P and Q. And here, the divergence is going to be calculated as the KL divergence, although other divergences are possible.

So when the divergence between the one that we simplified and controlled Q and that intractable true posterior, if that divergence were minimized to zero, we would be like fitting P as well as we could with Q.

And this is saying in one, it's saying Q star, the best Q of X, the latent states, given the data and the variational parameters.

So the best possible room temperature prediction given thermometer readings and variational parameters are a minimization over all the variational parameters.

of the divergence between the Q distribution that we control of exactly what we want the best answer for and the P generative model of exactly what would be the best to compute, like the temperature given the observations on the thermometer.

And so that goes a long way towards rewriting an inference problem as a divergence problem.

But they write, however, merely writing the problem this way does not solve it because the divergence that we need to optimize still contains the intractable true posterior.

So it's rewritten as a divergence between like something we control and something that we kind of set out to do this because we couldn't calculate it.

So we have prepared it, but still this is intractable.

So this is not usable alone.

They write, the beauty of variational inference is that it instead optimizes a tractable upper bound on this divergence called the variational free energy, VFE.

To generate the bound, we apply Bayes' rule to the true posterior to rewrite it in the form of the generative model and the evidence.

So here's that P of X given O. That's rewritten as now not of X given O, but P of O comma X. That's the joint distribution divided by the observations.

So this, by the Bayes rule, P of X given O is equivalent to this.

That's why this is the first line here.

They provide some rewritings and then they write, in the third line, the expectation around P of O, so the actual likelihood of the observations themselves, like how likely is the thermometer saying 21?

It vanishes.

since the expectation is over the variable X, which is not in P of O. So it's like, what is the expectation of this coin flip over the temperature tomorrow?

It's like, because they're different variables, it makes them very easy to separate out if we're only interested in one of them.

then they write that this f the free energy is a very is a tractable quantity since it's a divergence between two quantities we assume that we as the modeler know the variational approximate posterior q of x given o that's the distribution that we control and the generative joint distribution p of o comma x

So we traded out this intractable true posterior, where it's like, if we knew it, then we would just stop there.

But we don't know it.

So we've traded it out for a divergence between something that we totally control, q of x conditioned on these other parameters, and a joint distribution, which we might have uncertainty over, but at least can be modeled.

So that's one of the key pieces of variational Bayes.

And that's not specific to predictive coding.

It's just an important way that the authors are introducing it here.

Anything to add?

All right.

So let's kind of continue on this theme.

Since f is an upper bound, by minimizing f, we drive the variational distribution that we control closer to the true posterior.

As an additional bonus, under certain conditions,

f can be used for model selection.

So that means it can be used not just to kind of fine tune a model that we've already chosen, but it can actually do choosing from parametrically or structurally different models.

They write, we can gain an important intuition about f by showing it can be decomposed into a likelihood maximization term

in the KL divergence term, which penalizes deviation from the Bayesian prior.

These terms are often called accuracy and complexity, and this decomposition is often used in different machine learning algorithms.

So that's one rewriting of free energy as this divergence between the Q and the P, and then rewriting that as an accuracy and a complexity, which we'll go into maybe more another time.

And they write, in many practical cases, we must relax the assumption that we know the generative model P of O and X, the joint distribution.

Luckily, this is not fatal.

Instead, it is possible to learn the generative model alongside the variational posterior on the fly and in parallel using expectation maximization.

So this is basically the alternation

shown by equations three of how we can be setting one side of this kl divergence fixed and optimizing the other side and then going back and doing it the other way and so that kind of back and forth expectation maximization we're going to be like reducing this divergence from both sides and so formalism 3 are saying the variational parameters phi at the next time step t point t plus one

are an optimization argmin of those parameters holding the theta constant.

And then the second part of formalism three is the exact opposite.

Now the generative model parameters, theta at t plus one, are minimization over literally the same thing, but holding the variational parameters constant.

So there's a lot more to say about expectation maximization, but this is like converging to a small variable

divergence by whittling away at both sides and kind of alternating there so that's how expectation maximization can be used as a heuristic algorithm for variational Bayesian optimization

How do we go from variational inference, which all of those previous slides are things that we've basically talked about before and that are not applying to predictive coding specifically.

So how are we going to get to predictive coding?

They write, having reviewed the general principles of variational inference, we can see how they relate to predictive coding.

First, to make any variational inference algorithm concrete, we must specify the forms of the variational posterior and the generative model.

It's like if you want to do formalism three, those are the two pieces you need.

You need like the phi stuff and the theta stuff.

And so they specify it here.

N means a normal distribution with like a mean comma variance format.

And so they're gonna define a Gaussian form for the generative model

mean of this likelihood gaussian is assumed to be some function of hidden states which can be parameterized with theta while the mean of the prior gaussian distribution is going to be a g of mu so we're going to have like f of theta and g of mu the variances of these two gaussian distributions of the generative model are sigma 1 and sigma 2.

This is a slight technical detail, but they're going to assume that the variational posterior is a Dirac delta, which is like a spiking function distribution that's centered at the mean.

However, they explore that differently with Laplace assumption.

So this is basically taking what we discussed about variational inference and preparing it to be entered into a predictive coding way.

So they're setting up the problem with which parameters you're going to want to do variational inference on in order to implement predictive coding.

And there's of course more to say, but we're just giving a first pass.

In Appendix A is where they describe the difference between using the Laplacian approximation and the Dirac delta.

So it's footnote eight, which suggests moving to Appendix A and looking at the Buckley 2017 for a walkthrough.

But this on the bottom right is kind of like a summary of the difference between the Dirac delta approach and the Laplace method approach.

So the Dirac delta is like we're trying to find the spike that's at the mean or the median.

There's some other details in play that...

is where the bulk of the probability distribution mass is whereas the laplace method tries to fit a polynomial like just a second degree polynomial like a quadratic over the probability distribution also in the way that is best fitting so there's some similarities and some differences and it's explored more in the buckley 2017 paper on the fep for action perception mathematical review

So let's continue with our exploration of how we do variational Bayes and make it a predictive coding model.

the top they write we define the prediction errors epsilon o that's like the error on observation and epsilon x that's the error on the mean states so the epsilon o is like o minus f of some function you know f of some parameters and then there's also the epsilon x so how much prediction error do you have about the observation how much prediction error do you have about the hidden state

Epsilons are the prediction errors, and they're parameterized by these theta 1 and 2 variances.

Given all of this, we can derive dynamics for all the variables of interest.

So that's the actual underlying hidden state, the temperature in the room that we want to be actually predicting, mu.

And then, well, the variational parameter of it.

And then theta one and theta two, which are the variances.

You can think of it as like the variance of the room temperature and the variance of the thermometer.

I hope that's not...

wrong or an oversimplification but those are like the two variances and we want the real temperature of the room they write we can derive dynamics for all these variables of interest by taking the derivatives of the variational free energy f the update rules are as follows and so this is change in mu theta 1 and theta 2 over time d mu dt d theta 1 over dt and d theta 2 over dt

and that has some equivalences with some f's so it's going to be going from just the change in the mu estimate through time to something involving free energy and then that's defined more formally importantly these update rules are very similar to the ones derived in rao and ballard 1999 and therefore can be interpreted as recapitulating core predictive coding update rules

For instance, the mus are typically interpreted as rapidly changing neural firing rates, while thetas are slowly changing synaptic weight values.

So they're weaving together, connecting the biology with the formalisms here.

And they write also that that mu can be understood as the process of perception.

That's like, how hot is it in the room?

since mu is meant to correspond to the estimate of the latent state of the environment generating the observations on the thermometer.

And by contrast, the dynamics of thetas can be thought of as corresponding to learning, since theta effectively defined the mapping between the latent state and the observations.

So it's like you think you know how the thermometer is related to the temperature in the room, and then you see your thermometer changing.

You're changing how hot you think the room is.

That happens over a shorter time scale.

And then over a longer time scale, you might come to learn the variability of the temperature or how noisy the thermometer is.

But that's more like learning than perception.

However, they're on a continuum using this model.

so actually this up to formalism 9 completes the core formalism of predictive coding which is it's a variational Bayesian approach to having this ongoing prediction error minimizing approach to latent state estimation that is the heart of predictive coding and now we're going to jump into like a few different elaborations that we're going to be moving through a little bit more quickly anything to add Maria

Awesome.

The previous examples focused on predictive coding with a single level of latent variables, mu1.

However, the expressiveness of such a scheme is limited.

Deep neural networks in machine learning have demonstrated that having hierarchical sets of latent variables is a key to enabling methods that learn powerful abstractions and handle intrinsically hierarchical dynamics of the sort that humans intuitively perceive.

Predictive coding schemes introduced can be straightforwardly extended to handle hierarchical dynamics of arbitrary depth, equivalent to deep neural networks in machine learning.

This is done through postulating multiple layers of latent variables, X sub 1 through X sub L, and then defining the generative model as follows.

So like P, the generative model is going to be basically over all the layers.

So just as the generative model and the variational distribution had to be defined for the single layer model, here they're going to define the P distribution and now they need the Q. We define a separate variational posterior for each layer.

So they define the P's and the Q's just like they did in the single layer.

And then that allows them to calculate the variational free energy, which is a sum of the prediction errors of each level.

so this is f now not just over one layer but multiple levels so the variational posteriors that need to be calculated are partitioned across the layers which allows them to be summed in a very straightforward way given that free energy divides nicely into the sum of layerwise prediction errors it comes as no surprise the dynamics of the mu and the theta are similarly separable across layers

that allows different layers of this prediction hierarchy to be precise or imprecise.

and allow those movements to happen in a way that's uncorrelated, which is not just because the real world presents itself with settings where there's like confidence at lower and higher and vice versa, but it makes this calculation of the free energy of the whole system more like a simple sum.

Whereas if there was these like really complex interactions with the first layer by the third layer, if the fifth layer is this way, then doing the statistics would be a lot more challenging.

So visually, here's what that looks like.

We have the mu, which is the mean estimate of what's happening at that level.

And then there's passing of these epsilon error terms.

So they write, this is the architecture of a, in figure one, multi-layer predictive coding network, shown here with two value and error neurons in each layer.

The value neurons project to the error neurons of the layer below, and the error neurons represent the current activity.

So this is like starting to walk us back towards that cortical layout where there's a cortical column, where there's some so-called upwards and downwards signaling, but also there's lateral signaling.

So this is a graphical model that's reflecting the way that predictive coding can be arranged almost like in series and in parallel to have like wide models and deep models.

Just like you could have a neural network where it was

um four neurons four neurons four neurons four neurons or you could have 64 and then 64. that would be like a shallower but wider model and so that notion of shallowness and depth is also going to come into play with predictive coding here we're in formalism 12 and 13. and so now we're looking at the

rate of change the derivative of mu sub l so the estimate of the mean at that layer and theta l the variance at that layer so these are the update rules the gradients for the mean and the variance of different levels and they're also written as free energy functionals of those layers and

The dynamics of the variational means depends only on the prediction errors at their layer and the prediction errors on the layer below.

So again, we don't have this epsilon at L minus one connecting up all the way to mu.

It's only through these local connections within and between layers by which we're needing to calculate anything.

We can think of the muse as trying to compromise between causing error by deviating from the prediction from the layer above and adjusting their own prediction to resolve error at the layer below.

So it's kind of like a hierarchy of bosses or tasks.

And there's like top-down expectations and there's the bottom-up reality, which might be like ahead or behind schedule.

And then it puts each person like in this compromise situation.

Crucially for conceptual readings of predictive coding, and this is where there's like a doorway to the philosophy and some of the broader discussions, this means that sensory data is not directly transmitted up through the hierarchy as is assumed in much of perceptual neuroscience.

And so it totally returns us to these questions like, what is perception?

What is cognition?

What is action?

What is coming from the eye to the brain?

Or what goes from the brain to the eye?

What is the eye doing?

What is the brain doing with respect to the eye?

And how does it relate to predictive coding?

Any quick answers on those?


SPEAKER_01:
Not really.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So after introducing that kernel of the predictive coding formalism and taking it into the multi-level context, now we can look at another elaboration or generalization.

So they write in 2.3, we have considered the modeling of just a single static stimulus O. However, most interesting data that the brain receives comes in temporal sequences O bar, which is O through time.

To model such temporal sequences, it's often useful to split the latent variables into states, which can vary with time, and parameters, which cannot.

In the case of sequences, instead of minimizing the variational free energy, we must instead minimize the free action, which is the path integral of the variational free energy through time.

We're not going to go into the formalisms related to the generalized coordinates 14, 15, 16, and 17, but it's something that we can explore later.

And just as a reminder, just to kind of...

excite somebody who might want to explore it.

We explored the idea of the generalized coordinates of motion a lot in Acton Livestream number 26 with DaCosta et al.

And so here was a model where we have from left to right time at different time steps.

And then there's the observables of something.

And then it is part of this like column of higher derivatives of its motion.

So it's like position, it's,

its velocity, its acceleration, and so on.

And so at each time step moving forward, you're computing the generalized coordinates of motion for like the movement of a baseball.

And that is what ties generalized coordinates of motion to PID control, which will also come back at the end.

also known as integrator chains, and this is all happening within this discussion of Bayesian mechanics, just like if we had been talking about the baseball, we would be talking about physical mechanics or statistical mechanics.

Well, it's Bayesian, so it's Bayesian mechanics and the physics of action and control.

That's what they explore in Section 2.3.

Section 2.4 introduces and goes into a little bit more detail on precision.

One core aspect of predictive coding absent in the original Rao and Ballard 1999 formulation

is the notion of precision or inverse variance.

So precision and variance are like one over each other.

So if someone said it's very high precision, that's a very narrow, very sharp distribution, and one over the variance is another way to write that.

So sometimes it's used with like a beta and a gamma in other models.

Precision serves to multiplicatively modulate the importance of the prediction errors and thus possess a significant influence in the overall dynamics of the model.

And so we won't go into every detail with how the precisions are themselves fit, but just wanted to note that this big sigma is the free energy being summed over the layers.

So big sigma is a multiplicative sum

oh sorry it's just a sum but then this smaller Sigma inside is Sigma as the precision Matrix at a given level so it's kind of like different uses of Sigma but this is a way where the variances and the prediction errors at a given level are being summed across levels and that's helping fit these precision terms

statistical detail but it's important for making it work in real inference okay in section 2.5 they they pull back from elaborating on predictive coding and they talk more about how it has some biologically plausible bases so this was quite interesting

While technically predictive coding is simply variational inference and filtering algorithm under Gaussian assumptions, from the beginning it has been claimed to be biologically plausible theory of cortical computation and also for other brain regions like the eye and for other cognitive systems.

The literature has consistently drawn close connections between the theory and potential computations that may be performed in brains.

For example, Rao and Ballard explicitly claimed to model the early visual cortex, and Friston explicitly proposed predictive coding as a general theory of cortical computation.

This is like the realism and instrumentalism discussion.

Are we just modeling these systems and the kind of data that they provide us?

And it just fits really well as a model, but we're not saying that the architecture of the statistical model has anything to do with the architecture of the physical pieces of the brain?

Or is it a little bit in the gray zone where it's kind of like, wow, that model fits so well and the anatomy looks so good.

Maybe there's something there to it.

And so in this section, they review empirical work that has attempted to validate or falsify key tenants of predictive coding in the cortex, as well as some issues with the approach.

So it's mainly focused on the mammalian brain and the neural cell type, but

As always, we can sort of think about what is the adjacent here, like what are the roles of other cell types in predictive coding in the mammalian brain?

And then how might like the insect nervous system or how might other nervous systems or non-nervous systems perform predictive coding?

And then they just provide one example where they take what they had shown in figure one

with this multi-level predictive coding scheme that was sort of predictively programming, as they say, one to think about cortical cognition, and now they're gonna make that connection clear in figure two.

So on the right side is their figure two, and that's the canonical microcircuit model of Bostos et al.

mapped onto the connectivity of a cortical region and so then in red are those parameters that we've been discussing the mus and the epsilons the means and then the prediction errors and then here's just a few other representations of what others have written

about like that cortical column so here's like an evolutionary perspective that connects some of the mammalian cortex with the avian pallium brain region and so just the way that people work out these kinds of circuit diagrams like by looking at the actual tissue and then here's the statistics and so how does the tissue um relate to

statistical model but that's what they explore in figure two okay any thoughts okay in section three they continue to review empirical work but with more of a focus on machine learning of the unsupervised and supervised setting

And they're going to also explore how the predictive coding architecture can be made more biologically plausible by relaxing certain assumptions implicit in this canonical model and introduce action into the picture.

Figure three.

They summarize a few different, what they call paradigms of predictive coding.

Summary of the input output relationships for each paradigm of predictive coding.

So it's the input and the prediction, the output of different paradigms.

So here's the classical predictive coding.

Observation data are coming in, predictions about those observations are coming out.

It's an instantaneous real-time snapshot.

the real-time anticipatory unfolding is still getting data as input, but it's predicting the observation at the next time step, which is a similar problem to predicting it at this time step, but it's like a little bit different.

That can happen not just through time, but also in the context of space with like a spatial predictive coding.

And then these two on the right, supervised predictive coding in the generative and in the discriminative direction, have to do with the relationship with reading in labels and giving out observations or vice versa.

Make me a cat.

Here's a picture of a cat.

Here's a picture.

That's a cat.

So these are some of the ways that predictive coding models have been applied.

3.1, they explore the way that unsupervised training relates to predictive coding.

So that is machine learning on unlabeled data.

Like here's...

100,000 hours of human speaking, learn how to speak.

That's like an unsupervised approach.

Whereas the supervised approach would be, here's 1,000 hours of human speaking, here's 1,000 hours of a river, here's 1,000 hours of some other noise.

And so by the label, then the algorithm would learn what is speech versus non-speech versus the unsupervised.

But there's also a lot of continuum and complexity and it's a whole topic.

In some of the subsections of 3.1, they go a little bit deeper into the temporal predictive and the auto-encoding aspects, but we're not going to go into those right now.

In figure four, in section three two, they look at supervised predictive coding and look at it in that forwards and backwards direction.

And so here they're looking at the classic MNIST dataset for evaluation, where there's some pictures of handwritten digits and then it's predicting.

And so here's the generative predictive coding and the discriminative direction,

where here the data are coming in, like the picture of the five with the pixel intensities, and that is relating to the more high-level estimate of it being a five.

So this is observation in, label out.

That's a five.

Here's label in, pixels reflecting it out.

So that's connecting machine learning to predictive coding.

section three three they're also exploring some um relaxed predictive coding and it has to do with relaxing certain mathematical assumptions that they had introduced earlier for simplicity and for clarity we're not gonna go into it but it has to do with making it more useful in the real world by relaxing certain assumptions

And then in 3.4, they explore deep predictive coding.

So they write, so far in this review, we've only considered direct variations on the Friston, Rao, and Bollard models of predictive coding, which are relatively pure.

use only local biologically plausible learning rules there also exists a small literature experimenting with these models often achieve better performance on more challenging tasks than the pure models can achieve so pure again here meaning that it uses only local biologically plausible learning rules so only connected entities locally and so

These models, they suggest, provide a vital thread of evidence about scaling properties and performance of deep and complex predictive coding networks.

And they write, the first major work in this area is PredNet, which uses multiple layers of recurrent convolutional LSTMs, neural networks, to implement a deep predictive coding network.

So here is what PredNet looked like.

This is the original PredNet architecture

And so they have convolutional LSTMs that are passing information in a top-down way and in a bottom-up way.

So maybe we could look at it more later.

And then I also just found this 2019, 2020 paper where they also explored like whether PredNet actually is doing predictive coding, but again, a whole nother rabbit hole.

So section three reviewed through figure three and some discussions on the subsections, a few of the different paradigms and the ways that this predictive coding architecture has been applied.

In Section 4, they're going to connect it to other algorithms.

So we're going to basically speed through all of the connections except for active inference.

First, they connect predictive coding in Section 4.1 to the back propagation of error.

This is really important for neural network training, but we're not going to talk about it here, but it sounds really interesting to discuss.

One that we'll introduce but then skip over most of the details is the relationship between linear predictive coding and Kalman filtering.

So we can remember that the linear predictive coding is not just the frame differencing, it's where there's like that coefficient of how much you should forget each of the previous frames.

And this is known in signal processing as the Kalman filter.

The Kalman filter, as this slide shows, is an iterative mathematical process to quickly estimate true values, position, and velocity.

So that's also like getting towards the generalized coordinates of motion.

And so the Xs are like our observations.

That's the thermometer.

And then here's the red is our Kalman filtered temperature unfolding through time.

So our initial estimate gets quickly corrected.

And then even though there's a lot of noise in the observations,

the Kalman filter is like giving a good prediction on the actual temperature.

And this has been implemented in a ton of Bayesian approaches.

It's a totally standard signal processing Bayesian approach.

And in the following sections in 4.2, they have a lot of formalisms about the Kalman filter.

And in Appendix D, they provide even more formalisms on the Kalman filter.

So we're not going to really go into either of those.

In Section 4.3, they introduced this idea of normalization and normalizing flows.

And so they wrote, the deep link between predictive coding and normalization has been extended by Marino 2020.

situating predictive coding with general recipe for building or representing a complex distribution from a simple and tractable one so we encourage people to look at this merino 2020 paper if they want to learn more about predictive coding variational auto encoders and biological connections but not going to discuss today

One other model that they connect predictive coding to is known as the biased competition model.

And that is unpacked in 4.4, but I just wanted to pull up one example of this biased competition model.

and so this is from the sprotling paper of 2008 within each processing stage nodes compete to be active in response to the current pattern of feed forward activity received from the sensory input or previous processing stage so it's like there's competitions amongst the subunits to be activated by certain kinds of inputs and then there's some technical details okay

Now, finally, to active inference as we're near the end of the discussion.

This will be a little fun to explore also in the coming weeks, of course.

So they write in 4.5, predictive coding can also be extended to include action

allowing for predictive coding agents to undertake adaptive actions without any major change to their fundamental algorithms.

The key insight is to note there are two ways of minimizing prediction errors.

The first is to update predictions to match sensory data, which corresponds to classical perception.

I thought that the ball was gonna be here, but I guess it's over here.

Perception.

The second is to take actions in the world to force the incoming sensory data to match the prediction.

I'm going to move the ball to where I expect it to be, or I expected the ball to be in the left side of my visual field.

So I'm going to move my eyes to the right so that it's in the left side of my visual field.

So action is not always like reaching out and moving the ball.

It can also be the action of choosing where to look, for example.

And this is what is really fascinating because we spent so long in the earlier sections, in the first 50 equations, you know, without action.

So it's like, oh no, are there going to be like another 250 equations with action coming into the picture?

But actually it's quite a simple introduction.

The basic approach to including action in predictive coding is to minimize the variational free energy with respect to action.

Although free energy is not explicitly a function of action, it can be made so implicitly by noticing the dependence of sensory observations on actions.

So what you see is gonna depend on where you look.

We can make this implicit dependence explicit using the chain rule of calculus.

Active inference, it's inference about action.

So here's the rate of change of action

through time is the rate of change of a free energy functional of, previously it was of observations and of states through time.

And now O is O of A. Observations are a function of action.

They're partially or completely dependent on action.

And that is being understood as a derivative of change in action.

O of A over A, partial O of A over A, is a forward model, which makes explicit the dependence of the observation upon action and must be provided or learnt by the algorithm.

Because that is, how do observations, which are a function of action, change as actions change?

So that is like a layer that hadn't been brought up.

So they're saying, because you do need to solve that ratio or that derivative,

you do need to like learn that or be provided that.

And it's a separate thing to learn in addition to this standard generative model for perception.

So we tuck action as being like a dependency of observations, which is also what connects active inference to perceptual control theory.

So that's how we introduce action into the picture just from a first pass.

Let's go one more level in and then any thoughts you have would be great.

So if we were talking about just the inference case, prediction error minimization would be like the picture that we're seeing is exactly the one that we're predicting or vice versa.

So what does that look like for action?

The prediction error simply becomes the difference between the current observation and the target or set point, already bringing in this kind of homeostasis, allostasis perspective.

However, this raises the question of where the set points comes from.

Where do the targets come from and how are they computed?

Wentz-Priors.

A generic answer to the question is that set points can be inherited from evolutionary or ontogenetic imperatives, or supplied by other neural circuits involved in goal-directed behavior and planning.

For present purposes, we can simply take them as exogenously given variables.

So what isn't addressed in this review is this big question of priors and learning on preferences.

Like how do you know what to prefer?

How do you know how much to change how you prefer?

How tight should your preferences be?

Those are like really, really important areas, but they're just like opening the door, but not gonna go into it.

In 4.5.1, it's also straightforward to model the potential costs of action.

In biological organisms, there's different costs of action.

And so how can that be modeled mathematically?

Well, they say by explicitly including action within the generative model as follows.

And so now they've added in this extra term with a cost of action.

So it just shows how like once action has been introduced as a dependency of the observation function, then there can be like other things that can be calculated related to action.

Any thoughts on action or like in your readings, where has action been integrated well or not with predictive coding?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think that from my perspective, predictive coding wasn't really about action before this text.

So it was,

new to me because I always relate action to predictive processing and active inference, not really predictive coding, so it was new.

And from all of this that we've been through, I found fascinating how the complexity grows and how many different applications predictive coding can be found on, especially in machine learning and

You know, all of this mathematical heaviness brings many, many different solutions to problems that we faced for a long time.

So fascinating.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Yeah, agreed.

It's really interesting.

So just one more take on active inference, which we explored in 26 as well.

Like predictive coding, PID control optimizes a system towards a set point and is ideal for simple regulatory systems like thermostats.

Action, A of T, so we're taking that same notion of A as being like something that influences observations, so that's how we introduce action into the model, is we make observations depend on action.

Action is determined by three terms.

A proportional term, which minimizes the distance between the current location and the set point, P. An integral term, which minimizes the integral of this error over time, I. And a derivative term, which minimizes the derivative of the error, D.

combination of the three terms produces a robust and simple control system which can be applied with some tuning to control almost any simple regulatory process and higher coordinates of motion could do even better but as we explored in 26 like often the pid is sufficient and so that's a very common engineering method and so it connects

the Bayesian mechanics of action and perception and cognition of active inference on generalized coordinates to PID control in the engineering setting.

And then they provide a bunch of other formalisms.

In Appendix B,

They give some detail on this idea of natural gradients, which I think we could go into in the dot one and in the dot two.

So we won't talk about it here, but Appendix B is about precision as natural gradients, and Appendix C are providing some challenges for the neural implementation of backpropagation by predictive coding.

So also we're not gonna explore it here, but those are both really interesting, short,

and very topical appendices in section five it's uh of quite good length and we're not going to cover actually any of it today because it's been a great and long enough dot zero but in the dot one and the dot two and beyond we hope to unpack the discussion and the future directions so

We have a lot of room and space for questions.

And I think we both or all walk out of this with more questions than answers.

But what would be your closing thoughts, Maria?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not sure what to think now.

I have to digest all the information we have here today.

But...

I have this wish to continue with the understanding of formalisms.

I want to understand better what you said here.

And I'm really excited about the biological part of predictive coding implementation and predictive processing.

So as it is not really developed in this paper, I think that the author said

that it's not really explored, actually.

I have this idea of looking to it to see what's been doing in the past years.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah, I think it'll be some fun upcoming discussions.

Thanks so much for all the help and for this .zero and to Brock as well.

So see you around.

Thanks a lot.


SPEAKER_01:
See you.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.

## O4u8PRzk1vY

SPEAKER_01:
great hello and welcome everyone it is just adjusting things it is may 4th may the 4th of 22 be with you and we're here in actin flab live stream number 43.1 blue i don't know how you do it with always joining during the theme song welcome to the actin flab

a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at links on this slide this is recorded in an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams

check out ActiveInference.org if you wanna learn more about what's happening in the lab and get involved and participate in the live streams or any other activities.

All right, well, we're here in live stream number 43.1.

and are continuing the discussion of the paper predictive coding a theoretical and experimental review by baron millage neil seth and christopher buckley in 43.0 with maria

we went over some of the background and context and did like a first pass on various aspects of the paper but by no means exhausted it because it's a long and very intricate paper and also it touches on a ton of other areas of more general interest so there's a lot to discuss and in the 43.1 today we'll see where things go if you're watching live it would be awesome to have any questions in the live chat

Otherwise, we will just start with some introductions and pick up with whatever people are finding salient and exciting.

So we'll just start by saying hello and going from there.

I'm Daniel, and I'm a researcher in California, and thanks a lot, Blue, for joining.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Blue.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico.

And yeah, I'm excited to be here today.

This paper was really intricate and detailed and provided a lot of background that I don't have because, you know, there are so many active papers that I want to read, but I don't have time to get to them all because I like to read things very thoroughly and slowly and carefully and look up the things that I don't know and

back references, travel down the scientific rabbit hole, so to speak.

So yeah, this was a good paper that kind of helped me, you know, shirk all those act-inf responsibilities that I have and came out with more like questions than answers, which is always a good sign of a good paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, how about going into the paper, what questions did you have?

And maybe we'll get to how our questions evolved, but what were you expecting to find in the paper and what questions were motivating you to seek it?


SPEAKER_00:
So I always have had a hard time, like, what is the difference between predictive coding, variational Bayes, and Act-Inf?

Right.

And like, I was really hoping that the paper would kind of lay that out for me and like, no.

So, like, I mean, I kind of got a good historical overview of how they all are interlocking and overlapping, which I didn't know before.

because, you know, all these things, none of them are simple and there are intricate details in all of them.

Like, you know, that I don't know all the details ins and outs, but I think that this gave a very good, like historical overview of how these things kind of layer into a nice little sandwich.


SPEAKER_01:
Great, definitely a good starting place.

Let's also add Bayesian Brain there to the mix and start to look at maybe some similarities too, because they're not exactly like addressing the same area and they're compatible, often more compatible than not.

So getting at what distinguishes them is very important and

like one way that that happened and it came up in the dot zero was so much of the paper was dealing with inference on the relationship between observations and unobserved latent states.

So think like trying to infer the temperature of the room given the thermometer readings.

And that was so much of the paper.

And then action comes into the picture in

uh section four or five it's like predictive coding the author's right can also be extended to include action allowing for predictive coding agents to undertake adaptive actions without any major change to their fundamental algorithms

but that's 50 equations deep.

And so it was very interesting to see if those 50 equations are kind of like the stem.

I know that the equations are not sequential and building on each other in all of these cases, but then action gets tucked into a bigger picture very seamlessly.

And I think that speaks to the relevance of distinguishing how they're similar

and difference and why it matters, I guess.

So how should we even begin to look at that?


SPEAKER_00:
So even action actually came up earlier in the paper before 4.5.

So action came up in section 2.3 with dynamical predictive coding and generalized coordinates.

And this I thought was a really good example.

Like I was craving

and still I'm craving like a really simple example.

Like, like it's one thing, you know, we talk about the equations, we go through all the letters, we compare this and that, but it would be really great to see a super simple example works through like from start to finish using all of these observable states, latent states, complexity, accuracy.

Like it would be really great to see that at some point.

point.

And if you're listening to this live stream and want to come on and give like a guest tutorial on like how do we actually work these equations into some very simple problem that we can solve in real life, like I would be more than happy to facilitate that presentation.

Yeah, because I can't even like

I can't jump from like all these equations into like, how does that apply?

But even in 2.3, this was kind of a good, a good, a good-ish example, a real life example about like inferring, you know, the velocity and the acceleration and the jerk just given the observed coordinates.

So that was kind of, and it talks here about also free action.

which I've not heard before.

So instead of minimizing the variation of free energy, it says we must instead minimize the free action, which is F bar.

And I've not,

seen or heard it referred to in that way, but it's modeling like time series of observations.

So like, you know, you know the coordinates at time one, time two, time three of a swinging pendulum, for example.

If you know those coordinates, then you can kind of guess, you know, how fast is the object moving and you can infer these other variables.

So I haven't seen that free action, but it did even come up before four or five.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

And it speaks to that

expected free energy, EFE, which is what do you expect the free energy to be?

And then there's the free energy of the expected future, which one of the authors has worked on, which is kind of a slightly different variant.

And then here's another way to look at the free energy of some future time steps.

And it speaks to that difference between the variational free energy, which is like what you're able to calculate right now

with the information at hand and looking backwards.

And so the more perceptual aspects of inference can be calculated using the variational free energy approach.

But then anytime the future is coming into play, there's uncertainty about the observations as well as even uncertainty about what actions one will take, let alone the consequences of the actions that one will take in the future.

So we do need a different way to calculate it.

And then as you're kind of getting at, this is a different way than we've seen it before with the minimization of free action.

But let's return to...

this page and think about how we can distinguish with like a Venn diagram or something that helps us understand how these core ideas are linked.

One couple that we can highlight is predictive coding and predictive processing.

Do you have any thoughts or questions on that?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so maybe not a Venn diagram, but, like, maybe we should build perhaps, like, a pyramid or, like, a multi-level building.

Because I think, you know, based on what I read in the paper, I think really predictive coding kind of starts it all off.

And also...

it makes sense to make a layer cake, like being that these all kind of start off with the layers of cortical processing that happen quite literally in the brain.

So I think making a layer cake maybe makes the most sense.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So we're in the kitchen.

We're in the Actif restaurant kitchen.

And what are we going to build in or what is the bottom of this layer cake?


SPEAKER_00:
So I think the bottom at least, um, so, so there might be two layers on the bottom, um, one from Helmholtz.

So we can start with like the, the perception as unconscious inference view of Helmholtz, um, and then predictive coding, um, as described by Rao and Ballard.

in their description of the visual system and the visual cortex.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

And again, kind of calling back to the dot zero, the two qualitative philosophical ideas that the authors invoke and that Maria helped us unpack were Helmholtz's notion of perception as unconscious inference,

and Kant's notion that a priori or beforehand structure, like prior structure is needed to make sense of sensory data.

So we're gonna have one bottom layer of the cake with Helmholtz and then also with the Kantian.

So this is gonna be our qualitative philosophical layer of the cake, these two notions.

then you mentioned another critical work which was rowan ballard's 1999 work building on a broader history of applying predictive and anticipatory approaches to different neural systems and in the dot zero the two neural systems that we looked at were first the retina system with the shrinivasan 1982 and this is looking at retinal

physiology and like the electrophysiology of photons hitting the retina.

And then another area where predictive approaches

especially early on, were getting built out around and towards was the cortical hierarchy and the different layers in the mammalian cortex.

So we have these two anatomical exemplars of some microcircuitry, some histology that is compatible with a predictive approach.

Okay, so we have these two,

um basal layers but we might even add more basal layers but we have biological systems that are doing predictive things and that includes the retinal as well as the cortex also of course if anyone has like questions we'll get to it in the right way so please ask any questions or doing any comments so we have the retina the cortex

as examples, but there's others, okay?


SPEAKER_00:
And then if there's a third layer that we can add to the bottom, I think it would just be Bayesian statistics, because- So I think it comes maybe before that also, or maybe like, maybe now, maybe Bayesian statistics is like a layer two, but like, I think before the Bayesian statistics,

And even before biological systems doing prediction, there's the information theory component that I think is important also.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So, well, we have, this is qualitative and philosophical.

Then we have biological and actual.

And then we have a formal area.

And that'll be information and base.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, the information goes under the bays, I think, just like the Helmholtz comes under the Kant, right?

I think it's really the relationship between information and probability, which we started to explore in, or we explored a lot in the FEP of Generic Quantum Systems livestream, number 40.

That was 40, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
so many streams ago okay this is fun and i think we're we're gonna start building this into a tasty structure so we have the philosophical coming in on the left and that's one on-ramp that just like we had discussed earlier like this is something that has been almost

imminently available to thinkers for thousands of years these are the kinds of qualitative claims that anyone can experience whether by thinking about the blind spot or about how they're sense making in response to some stimuli this is just the idea that

the sensory observations are first off not the direct contact with the world like we're not seeing the lightning strike event we're seeing photons hit the retina and sound hit the eardrum and so we're receiving sensory input that's that kind of plato's cave angle and then kant and helmholtz elaborated on that to include this idea of unconscious inference that requires a priority structure or like what we would call like a bayesian prior

Then we have this biological area, and these are just reflecting natural systems that are exhibiting some kind of behavior.

Like we can think about the 1999 paper of Rao and Ballard themselves.

about the functional interpretation of extra classical receptive field effects and we talked about that in the dot zero like the classical effects are kind of the simple normative ones like the joke is it's classical because of the papers and the order they were published but that doesn't like make it

even true let alone the best model the classical is just like it's like classic rock you might like other genres but then there's the classics or whatever so that's the biological systems that are exhibiting certain kinds of outcomes and then we have these two formal or quantitative areas

And those are the Bayesian statistics and probability as well as information theory.

And they're definitely linked as well, but we'll just leave them as kind of two conjoined layers here.

Okay.

Now, where do we go from here?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, isn't that the question?

So maybe predictive coding and predictive processing and really what's the difference between these two.

I think predictive coding came from neuroscience.

So maybe that layers on top of the biological part, the biological piece of the cake.

And then predictive processing might go on to the quantitative piece.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome yeah and it really is what maria highlighted and and drew out in the dot zero which was using a quote from an andy clark book and clark wrote that predictive processing is not simply the use of the data compression strategy known as predictive coding so at least in this take

Predictive coding is like MP4.

It's like an encoding strategy, which is also why we connected it to frame differencing and video encoding.

But predictive coding is gonna be something that's data oriented and it's related to information theory, compression, information encapsulation.

And then Clark is writing predictive processing is not simply that.

and so marina spoke to how another way to think about the difference between predictive coding and predictive processing is to use coding for the formalisms and implementations and processing for the philosophical understanding that prediction is the basis of signal interpretation as opposed to merely recognition or descriptive models so if anyone has like a thought on that then

know put it in the live chat or come get involved but let's work with that delineation going forward so predictive processing is going to be um somehow related to the formal or sorry predictive coding is going to be more close to the formal

whether it's predictive coding in a biological context or whether it's gonna be in a philosophical context or something, it's gonna be more on the formal side.

Whereas predictive processing is gonna be where?

A little bit closer to the philosophical?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think so.

And then maybe like, does the Bayesian brain like make up the third part of our, like if predictive coding layers over the Bayesian statistics and predictive processing layers over the philosophical, then does the Bayesian brain somehow make the in-between sandwich that goes over the biological?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Okay.

So let's see.

We have...

predictive processing as being a philosophical approach and consideration of these philosophical memes and themes in the biological case, which we're certainly bound to.

Then we can have predictive coding as kind of the formal way

that these predictive anticipatory systems are implementing predictive processing.

And then what is the Bayesian brain?

Seems pretty fair to put it at like the intersection between Bayesian and brain.

But what is the Bayesian brain to you?


SPEAKER_00:
So to me, the Bayesian brain is kind of...

you know, I'm trying to look back through the paper to their description, but in my recollection of the Bayesian brain, which was probably my first introduction to Bayesian statistics, I was like, oh, this is great.

And it wasn't even the Bayesian brain, it was like the Jaynesian

interpretation of the Bayesian brain paper, but like that paper was like probably the, my like turn on to Bayesian statistics and, and implementing this.

And, um, so, so in my mind, the Bayesian brain is, is just this idea that, um, the brain uses Bayesian reasoning or, or Bayesian updating.

to process information and go forward.

But that's probably a very simplified interpretation.


SPEAKER_01:
I think there's going to be one more realist interpretation, like the brain is doing Bayesian stuff, and then there's the more instrumentalist interpretation.

We can use Bayesian statistics to model what it is that the brain is doing.

So is Bayesian...

the territory or the map of the brain, but we'll just leave it as an edge for now.

So I'll read a question from Dean, and then I think we're gonna be exploring a lot where action and active inference comes into play.

So blue, Dean writes, what do you think of this?

As coding, you are doing something in coding.

As processing, you determine by comparing

processing and or not processing as you're doing.

So process entails processing types.

What I'm hearing there is encoding doesn't require two arguments.

It just takes one, you take one file and you zip it.

You've encoded that in a way.

So

predictive coding can encode or implement some type of informational algorithm without a reference or a comparator.

Whereas Dean's saying, as processing, you determine, not with this single argument plug and chug, but you determine by comparing as you're doing.

And so predictive processing, it does have that sort of

top-down and bottom-up, as it's often visually represented, but processing is entailing that full stack, and therefore the processing is requiring something like a minimum of two to have consideration.

If you're processing...

nuts, then you're sorting them into two different kinds or you're removing something from something else about those.

Like you're doing something that has compositionality or some type of multiplicity to it.

It's not just something you can take that one file and just zip it.

So that's a great point, Dean.

I think I'll add two little arrows here.

Yes, okay.

Yes, Blue, let me share the slides.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

I'm left in the dark here.

I definitely agree with Dean's point about the coding versus processing.

I can write a whole lot of things.

I can take a whole lot of notes, and that's coding.

That's encoding the information from

our conversation, this live stream.

But until I do something with those notes, like turn them into elements of a paper that I want to write or something like this, I have not processed what I have encoded until I take them forward to a forward step.

So I think there is kind of this temporal implication with processing versus coding.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah also like the timeliness of processing like you want to process the food before it has become you know bad or something so okay we have predictive coding again these are just tentative slide play if anyone thinks differently they can join or write a comment but

predictive coding might entail something of a unidirectionality, just like a .zip.

And you say, well, somebody will unzip it later, but we can encode it without that part of the loop being required.

And then we have this two directional relationship with predictive processing being like top down and bottom up.

Okay, what do you see now?

Or I can bring up something.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So I'm not really seeing anything.

So why don't you bring up what is on your mind or what you're thinking of?


SPEAKER_01:
Where is action?

And then I think that'll start to walk us towards where active inference is.


SPEAKER_00:
because of the temporal nature of processing, I think action might start in the processing, um, element, like even in something like mental action, like people do like thought correction or thought remediation.

Um, so like if you're, uh, you know, you have this prediction and it like surfaces in your mind, but then like you correct the prediction or, or like you, um,

you know, you think you see a snake on the floor and then you say, Oh, that's a snake.

But then like, you look, let me see that snake.

Like, and then you have to zoom in, look at it closer and it ends up being like a coiled up rope.

Right.

And so it's not really a snake, but like you direct your attention because of some prediction and then can continue to process that prediction.

So, so possibly action starts in the processing, in the processing area.


SPEAKER_01:
maybe it's there in the middle well i'm gonna start it in the middle we can see where it goes because i think it's gonna have an important edge to each of these three areas so there's a few ways to represent it of course so how does action relate to biological systems or first let's let's um start with some philosophical frameworks that highlight the importance of action so this includes an activism

embodied the four e's five e's seven e's etc etc etc everything involving like this sort of embodied enacted and cultured extended etc approach to cognition and philosophy and those can be qualitative so i'm putting that edge here these are different qualitative and philosophical areas

Yes, they can be formalized.

We'll get to that edge.

But these are qualitative memes that come from this philosophical area, and they're going to draw us to action.

Okay.

Now, how about biological systems and action?

What do you think about when you think of biology and action?


SPEAKER_00:
I don't know.

I think those things are kind of inextricably linked.

In my mind, because like you can't have life without having some action.

I mean, cells replicate.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I think this is going to be just something that doesn't demand to be said, but is totally true.

biological systems are active there it's active matter and life is this multi-scale organization of activity so there's many ways biological systems are doing action and what are some areas that are formal whether or not they have to do with biology or any philosophy can you name a few areas of like formal theory and science that you think relate to action


SPEAKER_00:
so i mean i think um just that's maybe more related to processing um but but as i said earlier i think processing is related to action but like bayesian inference and and variational inference i think um which also tie in a lot to active inference um i think that they come in there uh in the processing slash processing through action or action through processing


SPEAKER_01:
okay great so um bayesian planning as inference as well as areas like cybernetics control theory and um different formal ways of modeling active systems and modeling decision making these could be

related to a biological system or not, and they can be drawing on a philosophical framework implicitly, explicitly, or not.

All right, so now this is starting to get fun.

You added another term there, and I think this will merit a detour, but then I return to here, which is the variational Bayesian approach.

So what do you think variational is meaning or doing here?


SPEAKER_00:
So it's interesting and part of what makes this complicated paper and also like a complicated detour, that like the authors cast predictive coding as variational inference.

Like even though we've kind of made this distinction between predictive coding and predictive processing,

where coding is like a one-way street and processing is like a two-way street, the authors nevertheless use the term predictive coding as variational inference.

And this predictive coding or this variational inference, I think the key...

construct here, and that's probably, I don't know, it overlaps with Bayesian brain maybe too, is the idea of having a model of the data generating process.

And so I think variational inference kind of throws the idea of a model into the loop.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So let's zoom in on this blue corner.

of formal and quantitative areas.

And so these can be taken in an action independent way.

They can be explicitly about action, like planning as inference

or they could just more implicitly rest on inference.

I'm sorry, more implicitly rest upon action.

For example, in the case of we're inferring the hidden state of the temperature of the room, and we're observing the thermometer.

That doesn't have pi, it doesn't have a, it doesn't have action in that model.

It might just have those two parameters of like the room's temperature, hidden state, and the observations of thermometer.

But then we can kind of take a step back and see, all right, well, there's the person,

who's engaging in this experimental action the person's ocular motor zooming in on the thermometer maybe we can just abstract away but action is always baked into it because we're talking about active systems but let's just put some of that aside for a second and take a quick detour to talk about variational inference because it's a really important topic

let's think about and we've also explored this in active live stream 26 and 37 and a lot of other times so let's look at three different ways of doing bays bays ways bays areas as they were so and maybe there are more but the three that we can list up here are exact bays monte carlo

and variational Bayes.

So pick one, and then what is something important to know about that way of doing Bayesian statistics?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, so I'm by no means an expert in Bayesian statistics.

I actually cracked out my Bayesian data analysis book while I was reading this paper, because...

it was, uh, one of those papers, like I said, I'm, I'm a, I'm anal retentive and, and detailed.

And I'm like, what does that mean?

I have to look up every little thing I don't understand.

Um, so like, okay, so let me start with exact base.

Um, so exact base, when I think about exact base, it's like, um,

the probability of a given B, like the probability of rain given clouds or something like that.

Um, and so it's like, uh, uh, an alternate alternative to frequent test statistics where, um,

the probability of rain and the probability of clouds or, or like a coin flip is easier to talk about, right?

Like, so each flip of the coin is half.

And so like, you know, the idea that what, what are the chances that you're going to get heads, um, you know, five times in a row is half times, half times, half times, half times, half.

So, um, in Bayesian statistics, there's, um,

or the probability that you're going to get rain.

Here, this is it.

In frequentist statistics, the probability that you're going to get rain and the probability that you're going to get clouds is the probability of rain times the probability of clouds.

That's a great way to put it.

And then in Bayesian statistics, it evaluates the probability of rain with clouds, like given what you already have observed before.

Like if it's rained, it's usually cloudy this percent of the time.

And it takes into consideration the probability of rain

rain with clouds, the probability of rain, the probability of clouds, all those things separately.

So it gives you a prior estimation, I think.

So I don't know.

That's probably super confusing.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

No, you mentioned a lot of really important points, which is it's an alternative to frequentist statistics analysis.

So we're not getting a p-value out of this.

And we're able to explicitly say our priors.

And

not to go down this rabbit hole but a lot of frequentism implicitly has a uniform prior and we'll just leave it at that for now so the exact base is using the base equation essentially as written and just as you said it there's the probability of something given something else and then you kind of find the probability of that other thing given the first thing

multiplied by these other terms and then you fill out all of those variables and you literally do that division and so we explored like this in the case of axel constant's paper with the bacteria and so there was the exact bayesian bacteria that was having its prior and then taking in new information and updating how it thought about what was out there

based upon the new incoming information and it was like in a formula and it was like dividing exactly the numbers that you see here in this way okay so that's exact base now what are some issues with exact base

It might be straightforward when you're talking about that coin flip, but if you're talking about a high dimensional space or something that is just bigger than the RAM or whatever of your computer, when it comes to the implementation, there's often challenges with exact base.

And so there's several techniques that have been developed to approximate what an exact Bayesian approach would be

in a more tractable way so there's two alternatives to exact base implementation and the spirit is going to be exactly the same of taking in new information and updating our priors as specified but it's going to be done in a few different ways so first what about monte carlo what is monte carlo


SPEAKER_00:
So Monte Carlo, you probably know more about the history than I do, but Monte Carlo is like a sampling technique.

So, you know, instead of trying to calculate the probability of rain and clouds using exact bayes,

you just sample out of 1,000 rainy days, how many of them were cloudy?

And out of 1,000 cloudy days, how many of them were rainy?

And so instead of getting an exact measurement of your distribution, like where is the overlap between clouds and rain, you just randomly pick out from all of the possible days.

You estimate your sample that way.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

So it's based upon sampling.

And so it's like we might not know one of these terms, but we can at least draw a sample.

And so this does a few different things.

It connects us first to empirical and specific data as implemented in a row of a program, not just

b sub i or some sort of analytical representation, but like this is where we're getting into this specific sample was pulled by this algorithm at this time.

And one method that's a common

thing is the markov chain monte carlo and this is using a local resampling approach like assessing local maneuvers of a given chain that's engaged in sampling and you kind of drop these chains into different parts of the probability distribution and then have them evaluate different aspects of that distribution so it's as easy or hard as dropping those paratroopers

into different parts of the physical landscape and then having them accept or reject different proposed moves so that's sort of a two-dimensional landscape with the height being elevation and maybe that's what you want to map because you might want to know is there one central peak are there two peaks that are very similar and take that into the statistical case and this is especially helpful for when there's no

Well, I don't want to say no idea, but there is not the desire to explicitly formalize what shape the distribution looks like.

So we might want to do like Bayesian phylogenetics, and so we need to talk somehow about the likelihood of a given DNA sequence being that way, but like...

Where do you go from there?

And so that's where the Monte Carlo sampling based approach really comes into play.

And then because it's based upon sampling, the advantages are you can run that sampling for three iterations or three million.

So it's very flexible with the amount of computing power that you bring to bear on this challenge.

But also there are the risks of oversampling, which is that you have

use some unneeded electrical power and computational power, which is really non-trivial, but also there's the risk of under sampling.

And you might even be like in a regime where you think that you've sampled because you're getting samples that are just confirming what you already know,

But there's a whole other island that you didn't do the paradrop to.

So one can be lulled into a false precision with bootstrapping and sampling-based approaches because they can give ultra-high precisions

but that can be based upon actually more like a biased sampling approach or all these other features.

And just the one anecdote that I have on that is in the Bayesian phylogenetics case, I remember this one professor in undergrad, Professor Moore, and he'd always say, fuzzy caterpillar.

you want it to look like a fuzzy caterpillar and there's some technical details but it's like you want it to be exploring the full range of a parameter like if something could be zero to one you want to be exploring the full range but returning to the best estimate and that shows that you're sampling like the diversity of what that parameter can be but also spending more or most of your time

in the most likely and in the best regions and so if the value were at 0.5 and the range of what's possible was like zero to one that looks like a fuzzy caterpillar with more thickness in the middle and then a lot of fluctuation but it's not like it's spending a ton of time at one and then it drops suddenly to zero because

that would suggest that you're not converged yet.

Whereas when you see that fuzzy caterpillar, it's like you're sampling the extremes and getting novelty and testing different combinations, but you're also returning to something that is working.

So Monte Carlo sampling based approach brings in all of these opportunities and challenges associated with sampling.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, so I was under the impression, like you talked about over sampling, but I think, um,

over sampling, like as you, as sampling goes to infinity, like your, your accuracy increases, like you're, you're closer able to get the true posterior.

But I think it's, it's uneven sampling.

That's the danger in the Monte Carlo method.

Like if you're sampling too far in one end or the other.


SPEAKER_01:
And perhaps like asymptotically, if you exhausted the state space, then you would know that you had the right answer.

But the whole reason why we're using any kind of heuristic approach rather than exact Bayes is because like we don't have the full state space.

So yeah, there's relatively low cost to oversampling,

but we don't always know when that is.

And then under sampling can be just totally misleading if we take that as our only,

representation of that distribution.

And so there's all kinds of cool techniques that involve like multiple chains happening in parallel.

And some of them are like higher temperature and less temperature.

So for one of those paratrooper teams, it's very cold.

And so they're only making the best, very local moves.

It's like the elevation is sharpened for them.

It's very hard to get out of a local rut.

And there might be another team that's very high temperature.

And for them, the landscape is flat.

maybe even completely flat.

And then they're like a hot molecule that's able to move over something that might be a barrier for another team.

So that team is going to like fill in the details and locally explore quality solutions.

Whereas there's another team that's like, or another chain.

And so that's the multiple chain solution.


SPEAKER_00:
monte carlo approach and there's a lot to that in phylogenetics which is where i've seen it the most but also probably many other areas okay so i've i've run it in phylogenetics too and like i mean the programs can take forever to run because you know i mean you're too many parameters and and whatever they can really take a long time um the computational power is no joke like what goes into um the monte carlo sampling

So we have exact base, which is calculating the true posterior.

And then we have the Monte Carlo, which is estimating the true posterior through sampling.

And then we come to the variational, which is trying to minimize the divergence between the true posterior and your approximation of the posterior.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

minimizing divergence between the true posterior, like what we would really have wanted to actually know.

what is the actual temperature in the room conditioned upon the noisy thermometer estimates that we're getting?

So are we gonna sample our way out of that one?

The variational approach is gonna be very different.

And in 26, I think we had like the cat and then one approach was like the Monte Carlo was like pointillism.

It was like dots.

So we were sampling pixels from the cat and then it becomes like a pointillist picture of a cat that if you do sample densely enough, it looks like a cat or it's recognizable as a cat.

And the variational approach was like a clip art template.

And so let's just say that you had a template of different curves or of like, you knew that it wanted to be a cat.

You knew you were looking at a cat.

So then you have like a cat template that can get stretched or zoomed in or out.

And so that might be very straightforward to optimize because you're just trying to minimize the divergence between these very limited parametric changes that you can implement

And of course, you run into a situation which will explore various aspects of variational inference.

What if you try to stretch that cat emoji onto a different animal?

Or what if it's a totally different kind of data set?

So you will find some divergence minimizing solution.

That doesn't mean it's sufficient or even in the right ballpark.

Just like doing an L2, least squares, minimizing linear regression, we'll always find a best fitting linear regression.

But that best fitting linear regression can be like hilariously inaccurate.

Like if the data are like a parabola, like a U, the best fitting regression might be like a flat line through the middle.

Or if 80% of the points are here and 20% are over here, there might be a regression that's very misleading.

That's like the Simpsons so-called paradox.

In variational, we're not going to use sampling.

We're going to use the minimization of a divergence, which is a KL divergence, but they mention in this paper it can also be a different kind of divergence, and the Raney divergence has been explored in some recent work of Sajid et al.

So we're going to minimize the divergence between the true posterior and a distribution Q,

that we control and is tractable to optimize.

So it's like, instead of that sampling-based approach, we were dropping the teams at different parts of the landscape, and then they were going to report back on information.

Here in the variational approach, it's like we have a template, and then we're gonna just do stretching and bending

again, this is kind of a torture metaphor, but we're gonna stretch and bend, and there's only a few parameters on the stretching and bending.

And we're gonna find the best fit of those stretching and bending parameters.

Like if it were a linear regression,

y equals mx plus b the two dials that you get to change are like the m the slope of x and b like how high or low the regression is and then you're finding m and b that are the best fitting about the data y and so you're kind of like minimizing the least squares error term

here it's not a linear regression that we're fitting by minimizing the least squares it's a variational bayesian approximation that we're fitting by minimizing the divergence between the true posterior and the distribution q that we control and is optimal or is able to be optimized what else would you add on that


SPEAKER_00:
I think that's it.

So the true posterior and the distribution that is tractable and we can optimize over.

Yeah, that's it.

So let's close this little... Computational intensity on variational is like much less, right?

Because instead of calculating all of the parameters for every little

dot every little point on the sample we are calculating for like a big blob it's like one big blob instead of several little points but we calculate for that big blob this is the density for of that of that function um and these are the parameters of that so


SPEAKER_01:
So now we're gonna back out of this formal cul-de-sac that we've been in and just remember to ourselves, even if it's your first time hearing variational inference,

and or your kind of like bluer eye where it's like we've read it in how many papers but still every time we kind of start on square zero so why do we use variational bayesian inference so the first thing is it allows us to use bayesian statistics and probability which we might prefer over for example frequentism okay variational base then allows us to use a heuristic bayesian implementation

So if there's something that's too challenging or implausible for exact Bayes, now we can approach it like Monte Carlo or variational.

These are both heuristics.

Unlike Monte Carlo, it's not based upon sampling.

Variational is based upon a family of equation fitting.

And so it can be implemented very efficiently, which isn't always the case for Monte Carlo.

It rests upon inappropriate factorization of the problem.

And one other piece is this connects to analytical equations in physics.

So it's almost like Monte Carlo is like a computer scientist's approach.

It's like, how much RAM do we have?

How many processors do we have?

How big is this data set going to be?

And then there's no analytical equation or closed form for Monte Carlo.

It's like engineering.

It's kind of like you have to have some art and skill and science coming together for the Monte Carlo to be the best it can be.

And then it's more about like an adequacy and an efficacy question because you're not converging to the infinite asymptote.

Again, otherwise you could have done something else.

And then the variational is like the physicist's approach and it draws on the variational calculus of Feynman and others.

And this is the part that's very amenable and connected to the equations of least action and all these other things like factorizing equations.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's funny that you bring up the computer scientist approach, um, in Monte Carlo.

And like, so, um,

I am a horrible computer person.

I mean, I will brute force wrangle my data, like just give me more RAM, just give me more processing power.

Like I just want to make things work.

I don't have any patience for finesse, right?

So in my mind, I think about the Monte Carlo, like the brute force, just shove your data through the algorithm, no matter how much RAM it takes.

I think about Monte Carlo like that.

And I think about the variational bays more like the people that,

can do like, you know, very simple things in code to make it run much faster than have that like very good skill with like, Oh, well we can just, you know, run this little factorization or, or, or, you know, we can make the problem run so much better on the computer.

So I think about it about the variational like that, but you, but you're right.

It does have that connection to statistical physics and to definement.

But I think about it as like a highly optimized tool.

way to run Bayesian statistics.

But why, Daniel, would someone want to run Bayesian statistics in the first place?

So maybe you want to give us an example.

Why would that happen?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, yeah, we will pull back.

Just the last point there is the variational methods, we might even have a heuristic for those or an algorithm or approximation of those, for example, message passing and Forney factor graphs.

Those draw an equivalence between Bayes graphs, where nodes are random variables and edges are statistical relationships.

Bayes graphs can undergo variational inference

and there's a tractable way to use toolkits like that developed by the BIAS Lab.

and use message passing and a 40-factor graph representation to have a level of implementability for even the variational.

Whereas it's not possible to imagine a heuristic for Monte Carlo.

It is the heuristic.

Sampling is sampling.

You can do better sampling, but that's the game that you have chosen.

Whereas in variational, even this question of minimizing divergence does require kind of like a...

proximate or an operational approach, because how can we minimize the divergence between the true posterior and something we control when we don't know what the true posterior is?

So there have to be a little bit more added, but this is like a very awesome discussion because it's helping us pull out like, this is the sort of exact approach.

And then there's a more computer science like sampling approach, and then a more analytical and physics related approach.

Okay.

So why do we want to do base?

Let's pull back to our triangle here.

Why do we want to do base and thinking about the concepts here?

Why do we want to do base?


SPEAKER_00:
I asked you.

You're not allowed to turn the question around on me.

That was me asking you.

You're not allowed to just talk and then ask me.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, there's a few ways to take it.

I guess one would be, what is the alternative policy selection?

If we're doing research or application, what is our alternative to picking some Bayesian approach?

So if we take the Bayesian road, we know that there's going to be some sort of trivergence later.

Exact Bayes, Monte Carlo, Variational Bayes, something else.

or we could go down a different statistical path.

Like we could use frequentist statistics and maybe that's totally adequate and effective for the situation.

And both are just maps.

So a well-fitting linear model of height and weight doesn't make height and weight a linear model.

really good fitting action perception loop whether it rests upon a kernel of frequentist statistics or bayesian statistics doesn't make those systems that way that you modeled it um so i would say bayesian statistics is useful when we want to do some kind of formal or quantitative inference

where we want to be specific and explicit about our prior beliefs and how we want incoming information to update those beliefs.


SPEAKER_00:
So I agree.

And it's what I always try to tell people, you know, when I'm explaining like, what is Bayesian statistics, which a lot of people have never heard of, like,

in college, at least when I graduated, there's no Bayesian statistics course.

Now many schools have them and, you know, I'm outdated already, but it's really like when you're doing frequent statistics, you go out to the desert and count mice every year, right?

Every year you go and count how many mice you see in the desert or something like this.

And if you, I mean, you expect to see some mice in the desert, otherwise you wouldn't be there counting them.

So you expect a non-zero count.

answer, right?

So every year you go out, you find 10 mice, 20 mice, 50 mice, 30 mice, 20 mice, 10 mice.

And every year you go count mice.

So if you were to go, like you have some expectation that you will find mice.

Um, you also have some expectation that there is going to be less than a thousand mice because every year you go sample this one place.

Right.

And so, um,

What Bayesian statistics does is it takes actually that prior, like frequentist statistics, they don't care if you ever found mice there before.

Like your probability of finding zero mice and 30 mice and 50 mice and 100 mice and 1,000 mice is all the same.

It doesn't matter how many years you've been there before.

Like you are starting with nothing in frequentist statistics.

You don't get to have any guess that there's even going to be one mouse in the desert.

Where with Bayesian statistics, like obviously you think that there are going to be some mice and you think it's going to be some number you can count reasonably.

So with whatever area.

And so what Bayesian statistics allows for is that prior belief or that expectation that you have as the experimenter.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome and that's kind of what we were getting at with that idea of frequentism having this implicit uniform distribution you flip the coin 10 times you get three heads your maximum likelihood estimate is it comes up 30 of the time on heads 0.3 however if you want to take like a bigger picture view you might have some sort of precision about where it's likely to be like is it

likely to be 0.5 and you're going to be surprised if it were 0.3 because you just pulled it out of a cash register.

And then in that case, you still might say, I want to have a uniform prior.

And if it is 0.3, then it's 0.3.

Or you might want to say, I'm very confident it's something else, but

Bayesian statistics opens up the space to be specific about how we want to use our priors, how confident we want to be, how much precision we want to have in those priors, and then how we want to incorporate new information.

So any other thought on that?

Or let's continue on that and connect it to some formalisms.


SPEAKER_00:
So I have one more thought on the coin flip with the Bayesian idea.

Like if you know it's a fair coin and the probability is 50%,

And like, if you're, we're flipping coins and we're betting each time, like, you know, a dollar, a dollar, a dollar.

If we flipped that coin, like you flip the coin 10 times in a row and it's heads every single time, like on the 11th time, like my bet is on tails because like, it's not, it's a fair coin.

Like it's not going to come up, um,

every single time heads.

And so frequency statistics like does never allow for that previous information.

And also like, where is that information?

Which is something that always baffles me.

Like, does the coin already know that it's been flipped 10 times and it's come up heads all those times and that it then has to come up tails sooner or later?

I mean, the probability is so low that you're going to get like a thousand coin flips of a fair coin in a row that is heads.

Like, I don't know if it's ever happened to anyone ever.

So like as we increase in the number of flips and if it's heads, heads, heads, heads, heads, like it becomes increasingly probable that the next flip is going to be tails in my view.

Right.

Which is maybe totally wrong.

But but where is that information stored?

And the Bayesian kind of allows for that to be there.


SPEAKER_01:
i wonder if this even connects to where is that information stored in the quantum reference frame of the observer and nowhere else but let's look at how that gets implemented in these formalisms so you just described that setting where somebody has like a belief that the coin is fair maybe that's an empirically grounded belief like previously they flipped it a thousand times and they got 50 50.

or they have just an a priori belief that is fair.

If that belief were generated by a real other data set, we would call that parametric empirical base because it's the process where you set the priors as well as their confidence based upon some collected data set.

That's parametric empirical base.

Or one could just take that a priori, Kant's synthetic a priori, and just say, coins ought to be 50-50.

And that's what I'm sticking with.

Let's just say that then we play this game.

We flip it 10 times and likely or not,

10 heads happen that's the trace of behavior in the niche it actually happened now that might be seen as a totally likely outcome by somebody who believes that it always comes up heads hence they're unsurprised or depending on what your priors were that could be variably surprising and then you talked about well when and how should you update your beliefs on that coin

Like maybe something changed while you weren't looking at it.

And so you want like your best estimate to very heavily reflect the recency.

And maybe that should be like a moving average of the most recent three flips or maybe the most recent 30.

So let's look at two places in the paper where they do something like that.

The first one has to do with predictive coding and frame differencing algorithms in video compression.

And so in this area, we can think about the way that the video looks, people who are watching this video, the way that the video looks is like the output.

And then we want to encode like how surprised are we, what is happening when the frames are changing?

And so the simplest method is just count where it's different and convey that information.

But it might also be important to use, as they write,

more advanced methods that predict each new frame using a number of past frames weighted by a coefficient in approach known as linear predictive coding.

So that's one case where you're determining how many frames back, how many coin flips back should we use for that now casting and how should we weight them?

So that's one area.

And then a second area that they bring up and connect is the Kalman filter.

So here's the Kalman filter and this is their formalisms 33 and 34.

And it has a lot to do with Bayesian statistics.

So on this, and Bayesian Kalman filter is very common

We can see it in two different ways, so on the left side of this slide.

The top image shows a prior prediction, that's the prediction, and then two is the measurement, and then there's the fusion.

So we have the prediction, the measurement here with like GPS, and then there's the fusion.

so that is very similar to having a prior and then some updated sensory information and then the posterior so it's just labeled slightly differently but we can already see how this is like totally related to bayesian statistics

What this also brings into the picture is like a pseudo code that unrolls through time.

So Bayesian statistics approach doesn't have to be about time.

It can be about a static data set.

And then you could be modeling like, okay, per extra sample of the population of their height and weight, we're going to update our inference on that relationship.

But that's a timeless analysis.

It doesn't incorporate some sort of unfolding through time.

That can be incorporated into the Kalman filter using this pseudocode down here on the left.

There's some prior knowledge of state, and this is like two dimensions, and then there's a cloud representing a distribution of precision or uncertainty.

So a more precise estimate would be like a tighter cloud there or a sharper peak or a sharper valley, depending on how you want to think about it.

And then less precision would be like a broader basin or like a more diffuse ink drop.

And then there's a prediction, then a measurement occurs, which can be precise or can also have an associated measurement error term

which could be fit with parametric empirical Bayes based upon testing, or it could be determined on the fly with expectation maximization.

And then that prior gets juxtaposed in this update step and that outputs.

So this takes sort of this timeless Bayesian update scheme and specifically adapts it to the case of something happening through time.

And that's shown on the right side here with this image of like time is happening

and we're getting these noisy x measurements.

And the true temperature is the purple, and let's just say it's unchanging in this case, but that could also be changing.

One can just imagine that, especially if it's very noisy, it's hard to get increasingly complex dynamical patterns, but that's all part of the game.

And then the prior starts high, and then the prior is weighted.

It's kind of like a spline.

It's weighted.

through all of these Xs.

And you could imagine one extreme case is like move to the last one that you saw.

And so that would be like basically recapitulating the measurements distribution through time.

The other extreme case would be wait all the time points evenly so that like we're kind of converging to a moving average.

So if we have 100 hours of video that is like at a two and then all of a sudden it switches to an eight and then your moving average would very, very slowly start moving up from a two.

And then one could imagine that there's some intermediate solution that doesn't use like the whole data set because that's too slow to adapt and maybe takes up too much memory, but isn't just like a one step instantly switched to the nearest measurement.

And that parameter of how fast should you update your Kalman filter is a parameter in the model.

And so that is exactly what is being statistically optimized is how much through time should we update our ongoing estimate?

And so in the static or the timeless Bayesian case, that's where we talk about precision.

how much should we update our inference as new information is added to our data set but that doesn't mean appended in a temporal way the common filter is making it explicit that these data points are being added sequentially and that is providing us with this pseudocode by which the latent state is updated

not just as a function of adding data, but actually adding data in a sequential and unrolling way.

What do you think, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, great.

I think that that was a super good explanation and very clear.

And yeah, my first interaction with common filtering was in imaging and image processing.

And so I think

That's maybe where people come across that a lot, especially like doing laser scanning microscopy or video.

I guess the video update also is like that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So let's just look at some of their writing.

But these are like the smaller the formalism.

the less we've paid attention to it and the more that we would love to know about what it actually means.

But let's kind of pick up above there, 35.

They write, Kalman filtering proceeds in two steps.

First, the state is projected forwards using the dynamics model or prior, and that's the P,

of mu t plus one that's the mean at the next time step conditioned upon the mean at this time step so that's like what is going to happen next conditioned upon how it is now these estimates are corrected or sort of compromised coming to a compromise by new sensory data by inverting the likelihood mapping

P of observations at the next time point, conditioned upon our estimate of where the latent state will be.

So this is what temperature will the room be conditioned upon how it is now.

the next time step what will it be conditioned upon what it is now this likelihood mapping which is like the a matrix in the pomdps is what is the probability of the outcome in the next time step being a certain way conditioned upon how we think the room's temperature is going to be and so these are the equations and some of the variables

and then they kind of conclude or in this little section the derivation of the rules is relatively involved and that's in appendix a and some other places but also the common filtering can be interpreted as finding the optimum of a maximum a posteriori estimation problem so this is almost like we have Kant with

the exhortation of the a priori what information are we bringing to the table qualitatively Kant or quantitatively Bayes that's the a priori and then Bayes kind of bridges the a priori the prior with a posteriori

not sure if that's the latin for that one but it's the posterior what happens after the sensory update and then that space between like the before and the after is the during and that's the during of the now that we're doing action and inference within let's look at how they introduce oh anything otherwise we'll look at how they introduce action and then connect it back to active inference


SPEAKER_00:
So I think the common filtering and the, the updating.

So I think we, we kind of skipped over updating when we were talking, when we were making our layer cake earlier and just how, how messages in the nervous system biologically and in predictive coding are passed forward and backward.

So it might,

be helpful to back up and talk about error propagation and propagation of back propagation and propagation of signal through time just as like a very basic way.

Because I think the Kalman filter is kind of an advanced way to do that.

Can we detour?

Can we backtrack?


SPEAKER_01:
We're back at the triangle.

And so now we've added variational as like a little badge.

to the Bayesian.

And also we're gonna add Kalman as a badge.

Where have we visited on this journey?

And one can imagine that they could take a Monte Carlo or a variational or an exact approach to Kalman filtering and so on.

And then you mentioned a few more biologically inspired or compatible features like error propagation and so on.

So what is a area in the paper or an idea that's relevant here?


SPEAKER_00:
So I think that the signal propagation and bottom-up prediction error, like how does error propagate through visual systems, through neural networks?

I think that there's applications here

And is it the error that's fed forward?

Or is it the signal that's fed forward?

Or where does the error go in the system?

So I think these are some confusing things that maybe they touched on in the beginning of the paper.

So let me see if I can find exactly.

Or there's some debate.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, while you're looking.

So I've pulled out this right edge of the triangle.

So we're going to just...

leave some of the baggage at home and take out to the table, just this link between Bayesian statistics and probability and biological systems.

And then you raised this really important question about like, how do we think about error estimation?

And also some related terms there would be like precision, ambiguity, risk.


SPEAKER_00:
Compression.


SPEAKER_01:
And so those are error estimates.

And then how are error estimates propagated and communicated?

How are they propagated and communicated in language?

I'm not sure.

If I had to guess, how are error estimates communicated in systems?

And so we might be interested in mathematical systems.

So then the way that you communicate the error is just you multiply the two variables.

You have a precision matrix, and then you have like some sort of hidden state matrix.

And then you basically just fuzz this kind of pristine matrix by some error matrix.

And so if your error on something is like zero, this is not exactly how the multiplication would work because multiplying by zero, but if the error were zero on something,

one would want their estimate to be passed through without being blurred.

If the estimate of the uncertainty were super high,

in the extreme approaching total noise and uncertainty and variance estimate, then no matter where that pristine estimator were, you'd want it to be like totally fuzzed over.

And then one could imagine that in a per variable ongoing way, you'd want to be updating these variance estimators.

And that is exactly what happens in the Kalman filter, which is this unrolling and ongoing estimate of

observations, latent states, and the variance that links them.

And that's done through matrix multiplication.

But how does it happen in biological systems is a different question.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think some things come into play here, like redundancy and signal compression and then error propagation forward and backward.

And so there is this in predictive coding slash predictive processing, because I'm still like not 100% on the difference there.

But I do think this is a predictive, it seems like it's a predictive processing thing, but the authors do say predictive coding.

There is like a bottom up construction of a model.

So the authors say that perception is not the result of an unbiased feedforward or bottom-up processing of sensory data, but is instead a process of using sensory data to update predictions generated internally by the brain.

So there's the idea of a model comes in here.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, generative model.

Where do you see generative model in these discussions?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, it's kind of threaded throughout.

So I think the idea of variational inference brings in a model because the model constructs the estimate of the posterior, like where there's a consistent effort to update

the estimate of the, or to, sorry, to minimize the divergence between the actual posterior and the estimate of the posterior.

So the estimate of the posterior is like, you know, trying to make the model match reality.

So trying to make the picture of the cat match, stretch, bend, fold into, you know, the model of the cat.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Awesome.

So generative model with no

complications is being put into the Bayesian statistics area.

Because if you specify a model that's generating thermometer

outputs given the temperature, it's quite literally the generative model.

And we know that there's kind of two directions.

There's like the recognition model and the generative model.

That's the tail of two densities because a distribution can also be understood as a density.

And so in the realm of statistics, generative model is quite literally the approach that is taking parameters of a model and using it to generate, for example, observations in this case.

No need to complicate that.

But then there's a few ways that we hear different people in different papers talking about the relationship between biological systems and generative models, as well as recognition models.

But we're focused on the generative model here.

And sometimes these are even

coherently or incoherently used differently in the same paper or the same sentence, which is our favorite and will eagerly await the kind of automated detection systems that will enable us to do high throughput analysis.

But here's just a few of the kind of ways that people can talk about that.

We hear sometimes that the biological organism or cell is a generative model, has a generative model,

enact a generative model or the more instrumentalist we can model that system with a generative model and so this bottom one is kind of like saying i'm just planning to use bayesian statistics to model a biological system and perhaps we could say that this is the least

bringing assumptions to the table of what that system is doing.

Because by saying we can model it using a generative model, or we can use or fit, derive a generative model for this behavioral cognitive system, we're just remaining purely with both feet in scientific instrumentalism and empiricism.

We're making only claims about the map

and not about the territory per se which might be throwing out the um whatever with the whatever however these ones are when people are making claims that are about the territory

what is the brain?

Is Bayesian brain what the brain is doing?

Well, it's not passing around screenshots of Bayes equation like we are.

So what is it that it is doing?

Or again, is it on the instrumental side?

It's just something that we can use to model the brain.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
So, um,

Going back to predictive coding and also linking to what is the brain doing, and really this is why I wanted to stop here.

I found the spot in the paper.

But when we were talking about common filtering and image processing and then error propagation in a system, they talk early in the paper about predictive coding

as a means to remove redundancy and applied it to signal processing to reduce transmission bandwidth for video.

And the authors say here, Barlow applied this principle to signaling in neural circuits, arguing that the brain faces considerable evolutionary pressure for information theoretic efficiency.

since neurons are energetically costly and redundant firing would be potentially wasteful and damaging to an organism's evolutionary fitness.

Because of this, we should expect the brain to utilize a highly optimized code, which is minimally redundant.

And they say predictive coding minimizes this redundancy by only transmitting errors or residuals of sensory input that cannot be explained by top-down predictions.

And so they remove redundancy at every point in the layer.

So it's like when you're watching a video and, um, or even like the flip book, like, so we see like, you know, the, the, the flip book that likes of a little figure kicking a ball.

The point that changes is the point that's prioritized the point that's different in each frame, not the point that stays consistent because that is where the action is here, um, where the motion is happening.

So that's what's prioritized here.


SPEAKER_01:
And that totally connects to information theory.

Informative updates are the ones that update your prior to move it to a different posterior.

That's the Bayesian information concept, as opposed to, for example, the

Shannon entropy, which is like based upon symbol entropy.

So they're totally compatible.

And if this seems like a technical detail, it is, but also this is the Bayesian concept of surprise and information, but that was a great section you pulled out.

So here we're really highlighting as following Barlow, applying this principle of redundancy removal, but

Already we can caveat how much redundancy to remove because a more redundancy removed system is also potentially more fragile.

Like if we only have one copy of each saved file, now our threat

of losing it is very high.

So redundancy is always in a trade-off with like resilience and other system features.

So this is one principle, but it's not the only principle at play.

So redundancy doesn't mean we're gonna pare it down to nothing.

It just means that for an organ like the brain, which is using like 20% or however much of an organism's energy budget,

changes in its efficiency by several percents can be really important.

So that principle of redundancy removal is being applied.

And the argument is that the evolutionary pressure is for information theoretic efficiency.

So if you don't have anything to update, you don't want to spend the energy to do something extraneous, nor do you want to spend any more energy than you might have to on updating.

And that's again, because of the wastefulness of potentially excess signaling.

And then with evolution, there's always a twist.

Like what if it is wasteful and that's just some second level reason why.

So it's not the whole story.

This is just sort of short sentences.

Because of this,

should expect the brain to utilize a highly optimized neural signaling neural firing code which is minimally redundant and then they connect it back from what the brain ought to be doing normatively at a first pass to the formalisms that were being described with predictive coding so in the frame differencing case it was like only tell me about the pixels that are changing

And then if nothing's changing, just send me like a little beep and I'll just know with just one piece of information, just to keep it exactly the same, even if it's 4K video and it's a gigabyte per second or whatever, but we don't have to change anything for that video.

And then as pixels are changing, update me on how to change them.

And so that would be like the maximum efficiency encoding.

And so you would give a full resolution of the first frame in the movie.

That's the prior, that's D. And then all one has to do is think about how to encode how the subsequent frames change.

And sometimes they introduce things like a key frame.

So every second or every minute, it starts with a fresh prior.

And so these are the kind of computational things that one can do when they're not bound by the constraints of biological systems.

But this is an awesome connection.

Any other thoughts on that theme?

Or where does error propagation come into play?

Or we'll turn back to the triangle.


SPEAKER_00:
So, I don't know, the error propagation is interesting, and it'd be great to have, like, the input of somebody who is more, like, versed in machine learning, because I think the idea of, like, back propagation, like, this is an error, and, like, sending that back to the previous, like, layer in the neural network is super interesting, and part of what, like, enhances the efficiency of neural networks, like, hey, fix this.

And so I think, and I can't really find in the paper where they say that, but

but there's like a local correction for error within each layer of processing.

So in the visual system and yeah, in signal processing itself, it's like each layer prioritizes just fixing their own error.

And then that contributes to the overall efficiency and accuracy of the system at large.


SPEAKER_01:
yes back propagation is mentioned 45 times in the paper with a quick search so it's definitely an important concept and also something the authors have worked in a lot so good error propagation and back propagation

also that reminds me of um when professor levin was here in 40.2 with the back propaganda and the imperatives for like the different parts of the neural network and the kind of information that they want or expect or prefer and then how they want to escape being trained and engage in learning but not being trained but still updating

So this learning and being trained both involve like updating priors potentially, appropriately.

But in the case of training, there's a feeling like another entity or agent is imposing their will versus learning can also be associated with behavioral and cognitive changes, but has a different sense potentially than being trained.

Anyways, let's go back to the triangle as we're sort of

not quite landing the dot one play.

The check has not arrived at our restaurant, but maybe we're working our way up to our first star.

Where do we sit on where action is?

And then we have a few terms that we wanna put, which is message passing and then active inference.

Oh yeah.

So what is another term that we can add in?

or something that we're seeing differently in a new light?

Or where do you see message passing or active inference?


SPEAKER_00:
So I think, yeah.

So we have action.

Are we happy with where action is sitting?


SPEAKER_01:
Do we have enough arrows?

I think it's... I've used every feature of Google Slides sufficiently.

I like action as sort of a fulcrum in the center of the merry-go-round is action.

And yes, more arrows could be drawn, but we'll keep it a little sparse.

But go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think maybe message passing sits between...

predictive processing and action.

And then that's exactly where I was going to put active inference was right where you just typed in inference.

Um, because I think, uh, if we're, or yeah, it's hard to say, um, where active inference really goes, maybe like not right where inferences, but like somehow if action and the Bayesian brain and biological systems could form a, uh,

a triad, maybe active inference would sit in the middle of those things.


SPEAKER_01:
So I added message passing to Bayesian statistics and probability because it's something that we can do on a Bayesian graph.

It's a implementational approach, but it's also leaning a little bit towards the biological because when people talk about like, how does a given piece of information or signaling or stimulus in a

the toe end up having an effect on the other side of the body or on the brain.

Like there's some kind of, now it's being used in a technical Bayesian sense with message passing, whereas in a more just sort of like conversational way with biological message passing, but whether it's a synapse, an immune synapse, or a neural glial synapse, or it's a mechanotransduction, or it's a hormone,

broadly, we can just consider these different biological mechanisms that convey information or updates or anything to be like past messages.

So message passing is going to be a formal technique, but it does lean towards modeling the ways in which different biological nested entities are exchanging information.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
And so why I would put it with predictive processing is because when I think about the things that we were talking about, like

How are signals compressed?

How is redundancy eliminated?

How is error propagated through a system or back propagated?

Which is why I liked it there in the processing because you can't legitimately process that information without knowing how the message is going to be passed.

If you're only going to get every fourth letter of the message I pass, well, I'm going to encode my message in every fourth letter, not in every


SPEAKER_01:
single letter um and that that changes right okay thanks yes so we have message passing now

as part of the philosophical concept of systems that engage in holistically considered predictive processing, because it connects what biological systems are doing with some idea about like information sharing without any formalism.

But then message passing via the Forney factor graphs is gonna be in the Bayesian side because that's like the implementation.

So maybe message passing here, yeah, it's like on the sort of predictive coding

implementational side.

Whereas we're not saying biological systems are doing 40 factor graphs and message passing in that technical sense, but for sure we can think about it in this qualitative way.

Okay.

So we have action in the center and then kind of bifurcated it to include action and inference, AKA active inference for a few reasons.

First off, action is not just blind flailing action.

When we talk about planning as inference and inference on action and inference about future latent states and observations,

that aren't explicitly about action, but we know in active inference that they actually do condition on action.

So inference and action, how we think and how we act, how the entity's cognitive model is, and how the entity's behavior is through time, those two are like an inseparable dual, and that's why active inference

says it all in the title.

It's about action and inference and all of the ways that they are related to each other.

Again, whether it's like planning as inference about future action or inference on the consequences of action, or it's inference about something that isn't explicitly action itself, like what is the temperature, but it requires or is conditioned upon policy selection.

in this framework not the only way to look at it but that's how they come together in active inference and like let's peep over to 4.5 where they introduce action formally the basic approach to including action within the predictive coding framework is to simply minimize the variational free energy with respect to action free energy is not explicitly a function of action

up until equation 51, it can be made so implicitly by noticing the dependence of sensory observations on action.

So if your future sensory observations don't depend on action or don't depend on that kind of action, this is like an extraneous calculation.

Like if you have a coin flip and you're rolling a dice,

and they don't influence each other, then they're conditionally independent.

And so there's no need to calculate the joint distribution if you're just interested in the coin flip, because it's not having a causal relationship with the rolling the die.

However, if we're going to have agency or model systems that appear to have agency, then there's some kind of dependence

on future sensory observations related to action.

In the visual case, the visual input is conditioned upon the ocular motor decisions, and those are actions of a musculoskeletal system.

And then the way that it gets tucked into the equations is the change in action with respect to time,

is gonna be related to a gradient, so like a partial differential equation, but then it's amenable to gradient descent.

It's gonna be like a partial derivative of free energy and how it changes with respect to action.

So like, am I minimizing free energy by steering the wheel more to the left or by steering the wheel more to the right?

That's like DF over DA, change in free energy over change in action.

And then free energy F here

is a function not just of the joint distribution of O and mu, not just a joint distribution of the observations on the thermometer and the mean estimate of temperature in the room.

That's kind of the pure inference take.

But again, we're suggesting that sensory observations have a dependence, could be partial, could be complete, on action.

And so now observations themselves are a function of action.

And then that can be unpacked a little bit more in 51.

And they discuss it further, of course, in the paper and elsewhere.

But that's like how this inferential framework gets built in predictive coding.

And then action becomes introduced as something that inference can be about.

And that's what they say allows for predictive coding agents

to undertake adaptive actions without any major change to their fundamental algorithms.

It's not like there was the temperature thermometer module and then now there's this totally ad hoc decision-making module that's bringing in all this thing about, well, what is the reward of different temperatures?

What is the reward of different thermometer observations?

Rather, within this same parsimonious and first principles inference framework, we can model active inference, which is inference including action.

Let's kind of continue on this action theme, but then we'll end in a few minutes.

So under such a scheme, the prediction error

becomes the difference between the current observation and the target or set point.

That raises the question of where these set points and targets come from.

And that's where they just sort of have that road leading off into the distance saying, well, in the evolutionary case, it's inherited.

In the computational case, it's just simply there.

It could be just a priori speculated or it could have been a parametric empirical base.

So that's one really interesting point is like when you do introduce action, you have to discuss not just the target or the set point and how it's generated,

But also, you have to make explicit in the forward model, as they write, the dependence of the observations upon action.

And that has to be provided or learnt.

Because just that temperature thermometer model is not going to include a forward model of what happens when you turn on the heater or when you put on a jacket.

So that's something that has to be learnt.

And then a second interesting thing that starts to come out of their framing here is like the costs of action.

And that closes the loop really well with a discussion that you raised of like Barlow and the information efficiency argument for why the brains ought to be doing something, something like predictive coding, efficient signal transfer, and hence why it's either what they ought to or are doing

or and how we ought to or could model it so that's why the costs of this are important cost of action are important and then just one last piece in four or five was active inference in the pid control which is related to the generalized coordinates of motion and we unpacked that a lot in live stream number 26 with the bayesian mechanics paper of da costa at all and this connects

control in active inference systems to a very commonly used engineering framework for controlling processes, which is PID control, which is framing action through time as being related to these three terms, which are described above.

That's how they brought action into this paper was by spending many of the early sections providing like the single layer predictive coding model and connecting that to variational Bayes that was in like sections two.

And then in section three, and also in section two, they explored all these different interesting generalizations, the spatial case, the hierarchical case, and then they also connected it to biological systems and reviewed some evidence for predictive coding of different kinds.

And then in section four,

when they connect to several other inference algorithms, like predictive coding and the back propagation of error, linear predictive coding and the Kalman filter, normalization and the normalizing flows, which we didn't talk about.

Predictive coding as biased competition, also something we didn't talk about.

And then after all of that action gets tucked into the picture, and it's just like very clean in a very elegant way,

to think about it and helps us understand like maybe even how active inference is similar or different to some of these other frameworks.


SPEAKER_00:
So in the spirit of our layer cake, I think today like we covered, if this paper is a sandwich, we covered both slices of bread, like the very beginning and the very end.

But we left out like all of the things that kind of come in between.


SPEAKER_01:
The meat and potatoes.


SPEAKER_00:
Have you had potatoes on a sandwich ever?


SPEAKER_01:
They do it with some French fries sometimes, but I know what you mean.


SPEAKER_00:
Go to Subway.

I'm going to go to Subway and be like, yeah, can I get some potatoes on my sub?


SPEAKER_01:
Can I have a predicting coding special?

And then they go, what do you expect is going to be on this sandwich?


SPEAKER_00:
It would be cool next week to really kind of dive in more to error, back propagation.

Predictions are sent up and errors sent down.

Or is it the other way around?

and really kind of discuss these computational graphs that they start to talk about.

So I think next week would be really cool to kind of dive into what's inside of the sandwich.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, awesome.

Okay, so we'll definitely go into some.

So what's inside the sandwich?

Backpropagation of error, biological evidence and examples,

So I think there's a ton of exciting stuff that we'll be able to talk about next week.


SPEAKER_00:
Like the different paradigms, like we could cover figure three, the paradigms of predictive coding and the normalizing flows.

So we definitely, we covered the bread today.

Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
um well anyone who's listening we really appreciate it look forward to your comments on the video or joining us next week if that's gonna work and blue this was like super interesting and very helpful so i think it's a great dot one and it's funny because like dot one it's

it's the meat and potatoes of the 012 sandwich so it's like our middle of the bottom of the bathtub phase the dot one where we're opening up all these ideas and just trying to like give a second coat of paint on a few things go into a few technicalities re-represent some knowledge it's like that was in a very

paradoxical or delightful way about not the potatoes itself, but rather about the beginning and the end.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, to be fair, for those of you who haven't yet read the paper, there's like 60 equations and like 55 pages plus an appendix.

So no surprise that we covered the bread, but it would be cool to tear apart a little bit of what's inside of the

the paper, because I think that these layers are cool and important.

And the paradigms of predictive coding were super interesting to me.

And I love like the intersection between the brain and machine learning.

And I learned a lot, um, reading this paper, especially like I was taking neuroscience classes.

I'm going to say how old I am right now, but I was taking like neuro in college at like, at like in 2003, probably maybe 2004.

With no idea, learning about, you know, the work of Rao and Ballard and Hubel and Wiesel and all of these, you know, centers around like visual experiments with no idea like how new they were.

No idea like how new of an idea it was like the processing process.

through the visual cortex, really like I didn't know how cutting edge the work I was learning about was.

So it's cool to kind of have that framed for me and put in perspective and yeah, all the building upon that that's been done.

It's nice.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

Thank you very much Blue and everybody else who's participating and see you next week.

## X0Q6JLDYWJo

SPEAKER_02:
Hello everyone.

Welcome to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 43.2.

It is May 11th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll follow good video etiquette for live streams.

If you want to learn more about what's happening at ActInfLab, greetings.

Head over to actininference.org, and you can find out more about participating on live streams or other modes of participation.

And today we're in 43.2, where as always, it's up to the last minute with what we actually do.

And welcome also to Stephen.

We're going to continue this discussion in our third part of the conversations we've been having on this paper, predictive coding, a theoretical and experimental review.

And we'll begin with the introductions and then we can

move around the paper we brought up some things that we'd like to cover last week for today but also we can take any questions or areas or sections that any of them want to talk more about we can absolutely go there so we'll just start with introductions and say hi and feel free to

add anything you'd like, what brought you to the paper or what's just one thing that you took away from it.

And then I'm sure we'll have some fun today.

So I'm Daniel, and I'm a researcher in California.

And I'll pass it to Dean.

How goes it Dean?

sorry i was muted in jitsi so it was on the live stream but welcome to dean and steven and uh i'll also share the slides with you here in the chat but we're live and in the game so feel free to say hello and anything um uh just to get us going with this discussion i'm getting a bunch of feedback on from somewhere daniel let's go it's going good um

I'll open up another window so that you can see what slides I'm working on.

But yeah, how goes it?

Or what was interesting to you about this paper?

Do you hear me, Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
That's me.


SPEAKER_01:
okay all right all right okay i can hear you now yeah i could hear you i couldn't hear you before something was weird sound fine dean i can hear you daniel but there's a long delay and uh there was a i can hear i could hear feedback like a second audio loop going off while you were talking okay did you have the stream open or anything

I just, no, I just have the picture of the three of us.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, I'll just reload just to be sure.

So it goes with live streams.

All right.

Okay, so is that better?

Well...

roll with it then.

So, okay.

Or we'll see what happens.

So yeah, Stephen, how goes it?

And what did you like about the paper as we start?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'm just interested in the general scope as per normal.

So I'm sort of going to go with the overall vibe of pushing the boundaries of active inference.

So I'm fairly relaxed with this one.

Okay.

Hey, Dean.

Work better?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, my bad.


SPEAKER_02:
All good.

All good.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for telling me not to have both GHC and the YouTube open at the same time.

Yes.

These little technical things that I should have been more on top of.


SPEAKER_02:
there's like some reflex where if your own audio is played back to you at a certain delay it makes it like basically implausible to speak it's pretty interesting yeah well apologies guys that's not the start i wanted all good so how goes it or what like brought to you to this paper or what did you find interesting in what they wrote well


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not really totally up on what predictive coding is.

I think I know what predictive processing is.

And when you and Maria were talking in the .0 or you or Blue were talking in the .1, just sort of the translation of that into operations that you can...

identify with a certain amount of confidence is the part that i'm really interested in i'm not really sure what the applications are beyond the psychology realm i'm sure there are quite a few and that's kind of why i showed up today was to sort of piggyback on what what people who obviously know a lot more about this than i do are saying about it and where it's going and what the potentials of it are all right well let's start with a few


SPEAKER_02:
reminders and recalls.

Is there any area or figure or formalism that either of you would like to suggest that we jump to to remind ourselves of anything critical about the paper?

Otherwise, I can bring this to some.


SPEAKER_01:
Is it okay to start with the back propagation of error?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

All right.

So I'll bring in, this was in section four.

And so I'll be bringing in some, but let's, we're gonna ramp into it just as a reminder about the roadmap.

So the first section of the paper is an introduction.

The second section of the paper describes with quite a lot of detail, the core kernel of the predictive coding architecture.

This is a computational architecture and it involves information transmission,

That is in this predictive coding way.

So check out the paper the dot zero the dot one That's where we're going into a lot of detail on predictive coding as an information architecture and then as Maria was

bringing out for us, predictive processing might be used to refer perhaps more holistically to systems engaging in predictive coding.

And there's a bidirectionality there to predictive processing, whereas predictive coding might be something that could be done in a bit more of a uni-directional way.

That was section two on predictive coding.

introducing the kernel, and then going into a few specific generalizations of that kernel and modifications that help make it more computationally powerful, as well as linking it closer to certain biological architectures of tissues, like in the retina and in the cortex of the mammal brain.

in predictive coding in the brain.

Three, there's some exploration on different paradigms of predictive coding.

And these are referring to kind of like settings where the core and elaborations can be applied.

And that's in the supervised and unsupervised cases, as well as thinking about spatial and temporal predictive coding algorithms and connections with modern machine learning, like with deep predictive coding.

Then after that sort of kernel and generalization of the predictive coding kernel and exploring some of the paradigms for where that kernel and its elaborations have been applied in section four, there's the relationships between and among the algorithms.

And so that's where we get into this section on predictive coding and the back propagation of error.

So that's where we'll go.

And

I'll copy in some formalisms or find out which ones would be the best to bring in.

But here we are on slide 56, which I'll share in the chat here.

What is interesting to you about backpropagation of error?

And then we'll start there.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, what I'm curious about is that bottom line of that slide.

This recursion is identical to that of the propagation.

to the propagation of error algorithm, which I'd never actually encountered before this.

So I was wondering, I know a bit about recursion.

I think we all have sort of a basic understanding of what's involved in recursive loops.

But I was wondering,

how sort of the predictive, where is this relationship between predictive coding and this other algorithm, which I've heard that, I don't know if it's an expression or label back propagation of error, but I've never really looked at it from a operational standpoint or how it's laid out mathematically.

And I'm not sure if either of you have that familiarity, but I was hoping maybe you did.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

So how does predictive coding relate to the back propagation of error?

Let's look at these sections, which we didn't annotate too heavily leading up to, because there's many equations in the paper, many areas.

Even before we introduce the formalism and to give me 15 seconds to read it, qualitatively, what would backpropagation of error mean to you or where is an applied setting where you think this could matter?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, and again, this is me talking out loud, hanging my butt out there because I don't really know what I'm talking about.

But am I correct in assuming that it's anytime you find yourself in feedback and feed-forward loops?

I know that they're acyclical, and I know that usually implies adirectional.

But isn't anytime you're getting sort of a...

a looping condition where you get an opportunity to sort of reset?

Isn't that the situation that we're examining?


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, we're in the arena of

statistical Bayesian graphs.

So we're talking about models here.

We're not necessarily talking about what an actual system is doing, a computer system, nor some sort of biological system.

We're talking about a modeling statistical architecture, and it would be a secondary conversation about what systems are actually doing with back propagation.

So this isn't just like saltwater flowing from the ocean into the river.

Okay.

just to sort of forestall any preliminary connections we might want to draw.

But we can see when we have a bit more sense of what backpropagation of error is on this graphical setting, how it could apply.

So they're introducing this concept of a computational graph, fancy G.

not free energy related, just G for graph.

And it consists of two kinds of elements, just like all graphs or networks do, which is vertices and edges.

The vertices are representing intermediate computation products.

For example, the activations at each level, this multi-level predictive processing architecture.

So we have like nodes within the level, and then there's edges that represent influence here as differentiable functions.

So this is

related to some of the graphical Bayesian approaches we've looked at previously, but also it shares a lot with some neural network representations where the edges are not just like a correlation or a mutual information, but the edges are more like a differentiable function.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
We're gonna restrict to looking at specific kind of graphs here, which are computation graphs.

They're saying are directed acyclic graphs.

So that means that it's directed.

There's an arrow such that the differentiability of the function is going from one way to the other.

Like we can think of that as the forward direction.

And then the acyclicness is just ensuring that there's like sort of one place where we could start and we could just forward propagate everything out to the edges.

And that wouldn't trap us into an infinite recursion by going forward.

And we've talked about some of the differences between like cyclic and acyclic graphs with Majid when we were talking about the DCM and all the ambiguities of that acronym.

Okay.

Stephen, anything, and then we'll continue.


SPEAKER_00:
Just one quick question.

Ontologically, how useful or problematic is the word coding?

Now we've moved a bit further down with active inference.

And in a way, is back propagation of error needed to be that, needs to be distinguished out, even in a descriptive term, just so that

the connotations of coding don't sort of confuse all the discourse.

What are the connotations of coding?

Well, that it's basically kind of almost like a representational kind of script almost that's been written somewhere.

It's kind of how, you know, like the coding that you get in a computer program or something.

And I kind of think that that

does sort of speak to the nature in a way, because this is the nature of how for the future, but back propagation of error kind of speaks in some ways to the nature of how the code is processed.

And I may be off topic here, but I just kind of wonder, as we're going through this and trying to link it all together, how much that ontological term is also possibly something that could be thought of in another way to make it easier to understand what's going on.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, we are dealing here with computational architectures.

So I don't think we need to run away from these questions that were brought up more in a philosophical non-computational version into the anti-computationalist perspective.

Like we're not fighting for what is happening in the brain here.

We're using predictive coding to talk about information coding and transmission approaches.

So that's one thing.

And yeah, I mean, we don't, we can't just go around flipping different words.

Predictive coding is what for decades has been referenced by a certain architecture here.

And then there's a lot of openness with how that architecture is applied.

But I'm not a hundred percent sure, like this is about predictive coding architectures.

yeah no that's cool i'm i'm just putting that out there just seeing how that floats a little bit i think that's a good good response like what else would what else could be in this position of coding it's about how signals are encoded and what is being transferred between different nodes is what is being transferred the raw value or

In the predictive coding architecture, we have two directions that signals are being passed in this compute graph, not in the brain.

And that would be coming from one direction, the expectation, that's the predictive part, and then the error residual.

That's the deviation from the expectation.

And so that is what the predictive coding architecture is.

It's just about having graphical systems that are passing expectations and differences or errors rather than passing just the plain values themselves.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I suppose there's also that question of how much is in...

the dynamics of what's going on and the hyperparameters when looked at, and how much difference that makes to the story.

Okay, so you've got the predictions, the prediction errors being passed down, but coding tends to be like the numbers are there.

But in some ways, the numbers can kind of evolve once the,

the system the dynamics of the systems or the dynamical sort of patterns of the system start to sort of fire up so to speak you know it takes a little bit of time for the active influence model to start really purring along sometimes so that kind of coding is in a way sort of almost more live than traditional coding which is kind of sort of baked in


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, I got you.

We're not even in active inference yet.

So I see some back later, but we're discussing predictive coding, back propagation of error, and then action does get brought into the picture in section four or five, but up until section four or five, there's no action even in the model.

So we're just looking at the architecture that does computation.

And then understanding how action could be brought in.

And that's kind of the fun surprise that we uncovered in the .0 and .1 and in the layout of the paper was when the architecture is sufficiently general and powerful, incorporating another variable that is about action, like policy selection, becomes fluent.

And that's...

why these architectures are composable with different sensory modalities with different scopes of action with different affordances all these things because there's a level of generalizability that we can pull back to okay so let's return to predictive coding and back propagation of error we have this graph the vertices are representing intermediate computational project products so like a number or like a variable

because it's kind of like where you're storing the intermediate computation product.

And then the edge of differentiable functions could be like y equals 2x is a differentiable function.

Anything that has smoothness in the graph is differentiable.

And as the orange part says, we're restricting this to directed acyclic graphs where we're not going to get into an infinite regress just by going forward.

Now, what happens when we're trying to tune this architecture

so that it has a minimized loss function.

Loss function, whether we're dealing with least squares error, like a regular linear regression, or whether we're dealing with some other loss function, the loss function is like what is trying to be minimized.

So when the ball is rolling downhill, we're minimizing like the loss or the energy function.

But the energy function approach and wording is coming more from like a physics

side whereas the loss function is just a purely statistical claim like what is the function that we're minimizing okay given the output vertex v out so this is like the one that we actually want um to be reducing the loss around the loss function is going to be l l is a function of v out

Backpropagation can be performed upon a computation graph.

So we're going to be minimizing loss at a certain vertex by backpropagating upstream a lot of what led to it being the way it is.

And so that could be done on just the last tip of the spear, or it could be done throughout the whole system.

Backpropagation is an extremely straightforward algorithm

which simply uses the chain rule of multivariable calculus to recursively compute the derivatives of children nodes from the derivatives of their parents.

Okay, so formalism 28.

This fancy D is partial differential.

So the change of the loss function with respect to the change in an intermediate variable I is what we're looking at.

We're looking at how

we're going on that bowl, are we dropping on the loss function?

Is the model getting better or worse with respect to changes of intermediate computational products, vertices?

And that overall loss function

is the sum of v the subset of p which is the parents so we're looking at vi like the um node that we're focused on node of interest or something and we're going to sum over all of its parents and then for all of its parents we're going to compute something that's basically like the change in loss function over the change in that parent's value v sub j

and how it changes with respect to change in the child.

So we're taking something that's like this graphical network with nodes and edges and differentiability, and then figuring out which way is the overall downhill based upon all of the back propagation of the gradients.

By starting with this output gradient, that's vout,

And if all the gradients are known, so like we're dealing with a model that we specified,

then the derivatives of every vertex with respect to the loss can be recursively computed.

So because all the edges are differentiable, the big function is also differentiable.

So like 2x is differentiable, x squared is differentiable, x cubed and x to the 11th power are all differentiable functions.

So you could also differentiate their concatenation through addition.

that'd be like the derivative of two X plus the derivative of this.

And also the chain rule in calculus allows us to like nest those.

So if we can differentiate two X and if we can differentiate X squared, we could differentiate two X inside of parentheses squared.

That's basically the chain rule in calculus.

And then that is what allows this sort of,

big downhill computation based upon the specification of the graph and then the back propagation of all the relevant nodes and finding out how those need to be tuned so that the final output node that's being optimized

can be going downhill defined as going down on the loss function.

Less loss is better here.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Excellent.

Thank you.

Because this was one big opaque Markov blank to me when I read it.

I just couldn't make any sense of it.

But is the ability to differentiate or what they're saying here is the ability to differentiate an ability to build

relationship that parent-child thing is is it that is it the capacity to differentiate that allows for the relationship to be identified or is it the other way around because

When when they're talking here and saying Backpropagation perform on a computation graph that Propagation is extremely straightforward and uses the chain rule of multivariate stuff when it's talking about that.

It's it's It's pointing back to something that you don't necessarily have to see but you know that there is some relationship just like there is between 2x and x squared am I getting

Is your explanation helping me move closer to a better understanding of that?

Because I understand derivatives, but I'm not sure how the derivatives fit into this explanation.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

Yeah, I think we're solenoidally exploring.

Now, we haven't even brought in predictive derivatives.

These equations here are for 28 and 29 are about back propagation on computation graphs.

So with these papers, it's really important to know like what has not been brought onto this diction and there isn't error.

This is just about the nodes and edges like the intermediate computation values of the abstractist kind and their differentiable relationships.

So now they're going to show how predictive coding relates to backpropagation of error.

So they write, predictive coding can also be straightforwardly extended to arbitrary computation graphs.

To do this, we simply augment the standard computation graphs with additional error units for each vertex.

So let's recall what some of these graphs that we previously looked at.

Here in figure one of the paper, we have a graph where the nodes are intermediate computational products, represent differentiable relationships.

And importantly, some of these intermediate products

have the semantics or the interpretation of being estimates about mean, mu, at that level or estimates about variance and error at that level, epsilon.

So this is kind of like

a subtype of graph, like the abstract is kind, it's just intermediate computational products.

And then predictive coding are specific kinds of computational graphs where some of the nodes represent mean estimates and some of them are error estimates.

In contrast, and hopefully not to confuse, here's from 26.2, where we talked about like integrator chains.

So notice that all of these nodes can be interpreted as intermediate computational products, but there's no error term here.

So this is an example of a computational graph that doesn't have error terms.

This is not a predictive coding architecture.

Not that it's inconsistent with or somehow disjoint from, but this is not having epsilons, so it's not a predictive coding architecture.

whereas this is sort of a canonical multi-level predictive coding architecture.

Great.

Hey, Jax, good to see you in the chat.

Okay, now we're going to return back to the back prop.

Okay, so...

we're adding in these additional error units epsilon sub i for each level of the graph.

Formally, the augmented graph becomes now g tilde.

So previously, fancy g was just edges and vertices, nodes and edges.

And now the vertices is being unpacked so that v can remain for the mean estimators, which are ultimately the ones that we would like to have the most accuracy on.

accounting also for variance estimators.

And so this big E has been pulled out.

It's the set of all error neurons.

We then adapt the core predictive coding dynamics equations from a hierarchy of layers to arbitrary graphs.

Change in V the nodes with respect to time

prediction is happening through a sequence of observations in the predictive coding architecture, that's that now casting, Kalman filter, frame differencing, a lot of these other sort of real-time algorithms for mean and variance estimation that we talked about, equals the change in F free energy with respect to change in the node.

So now the loss function through time

is going to be related to the f that had been previously um previously defined in in earlier equations and then that is going to be defined as basically the error this is in formalism 30 the epsilon sub i so the the error variance at that last level minus a sum of c

So C are the children, and then there's just some more terms involving basically tuning the nodes, accounting for the fact that we want to like tune the variance estimators and the computation nodes that represent the mean estimates.

And so...

Then the dynamics of the parameters on the vertices v and the edge functions theta, so they kind of slightly evolve the edge notation towards theta, can then be derived as a gradient descent on f, where f is the sum of prediction errors of every node in the graph.

So previously they had specified how the composability of the multi-level predictive coding architecture is such that the levels are

can be factorized from each other which allows us to sum their free energy contributions into like a free energy total and so that is how a multi-level model can be fit because it's finding like the free energy minimum for that whole multi-level system which might entail one of the levels not being at its like perfect perfect lowest free energy state

And in this section, they've connected the way that back propagation in 28 and 29, without any action, without any prediction, is able to make a big loss function that's composed because of the tractability of the compute graph.

And all of these little loss functions can be summed into a big loss function that you use to train a neural network, for example.

And then...

moving that into the predictive coding in free energy minimizing space by saying, well, this is a special kind of compute graph that has the mean estimators mu and the variance estimators, the error terms.

And then we're going to do something similar where we're going to compute what amounts to a loss function, f, the sum of prediction errors of every node in the graph,

based upon internal prediction errors being minimized.

So in the non-predictive coding frame, we're minimizing a big loss function that's composed of smaller loss functions.

In the predictive coding frame, we're minimizing our divergence from expectations composed of the divergences from many smaller expectations.

Okay, yeah, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
sort of extrapolating hopefully again from this the the predictive coding then like by working with the errors which are kind of almost uh i know i'm making a little bit of a jump here but um are kind of implicit to the to whatever the system of interpretation is on the data

is quite, it's kind of, that's why you're going into this biological world, because it's, it's so bottom up, in a way.

Because it can start just with whatever the errors are, in the nature of the system that's been set up for doing the sensing, even forgetting action, just the nature of how the sensing set up, will start to generate the errors at some implicit level.


SPEAKER_02:
that be a fair assumption so anytime there's going to be a prediction of observations so yeah we don't need action here yet there's two options either you have a hundred percent predictive power and your error is zero or there was some error so you're always in one of those two cases and which one are we usually in

not having the total perfect 100% accuracy down to the 100th decimal point.

If for no reason other, then that's beyond the point of diminishing returns, or we're also trying to balance accuracy with model complexity.

So because we have these metrics like the AIC, the BIC, all these metrics that find us a model that's a balance between accuracy and complexity, so it's not overfitting, the cost of not overfitting

of cost of having a simpler model is literally increased error.

Because every new parameter that you add into a model, you always explain more variance.

The first principal component takes the most variance of the data.

The second principal component takes the next most variance of the data.

Every principal component on a data set is going to continue to eat more and more variance out of the data, leaving less and less in the error term.

But it's a situational thing, whether you need to explain 80% of the data or 90% of the data or 95% of the data, but there's always going to be some difference between the prediction and the observation.

Again, unless one is in this super edge case where it's perfectly known.

So yeah, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's helpful.

And it's also implicit there that

that even if you, whatever you set that complexity and accuracy to at this very deflated level is really helpful.

So the nature of the model will change the nature of the errors and basically the best it gets to by the most it can reduce will vary a little bit as you change that model.

And not making too much of an extrapolation, but that,

is a nice way to be able to unify a lot more complex and rarefied ideas about models and what is really happening.

You can sort of drop back to that complexity accuracy principle.


SPEAKER_02:
here's some more sections from 4.1 towards the end of 4.1 on page 30 in the paper so yeah hopefully we've been representing this at least mostly accurately and then for those who want to go deeper that's why there's a paper and that's why there's like

a continued discussion and development on these ideas because they drop many little crumbs of, well, we've held this to be zero for simplicity and but they're right.

We can think of this as a predictive coding network in which all of the error is initially focused at the output of the network where the loss is.

And then through dynamical minimization of prediction errors at multiple levels, layers, this error is slowly spread out through the network in parallel until the optimum distribution

The error at each vertex is precisely the credit that should be assigned to causing the error in the first place.

That's pretty interesting.

It's kind of like let the chips fall where they may with respect to error and variance attribution.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
This is awesome.

So is the way the architecture is and the way the graph is set up as kind of a mirror of what the architecture is of this layering thing,

Are they also there to kind of contain little fires of mistakes and errors?

Is that why it's effective?

Because it sort of contains something, you know, suddenly causing a chain reaction and having everything.

When we read Majeed's paper about, I think it was Majeed or maybe it was Axel's paper, about you can make predictions going right off of a cliff.

And the result is you no longer exist.

Is this kind of an architecture that helps us avoid some of those really consequential prediction consequences?


SPEAKER_02:
That's an interesting idea.

I think we should engage in some slide play and try to get a little bit of clarity on that.

And also, hopefully we'll hit on

lot of the ideas that we've been bringing up in a more abstract way because i know it it's helpful for like everyone to see multiple coats of paint on this and like it it's the the epitome of abstraction is the austerity of those formalisms about compute graphs so let's think about it um we won't take it to the um the cafe

level um that was even though that was i remember that being quite fun um with the we're gonna be we're gonna be between the cafe um and uh you know something else so we'll be intermediate because we're gonna be talking about a specific graph but we're not gonna like necessarily for the first pass on it go all the way in okay so

The node that we care about being most accurate on is 7.

So this is going to be our focal node.

This is like...

the one that we want to have an image classifier algorithm, this is the classifier node.

We want to have prediction on what the thermometer is going to say, that's what this is.

We want to have prediction on the temperature in the room, that's what this is.

We want to have inference on action and think about the upstream

of action, then that's what this node is.

So seven is gonna be like the node that we're interested in minimizing our loss function on.

This can be carried out on multiple variables, but we're gonna just look at minimizing on this.

Okay.

what is the back propagation chain here well let's think about what the forward and the reverse arrows are so first just to clarify like this is a directed acyclic graph there's no loops in the graph and the arrows are all directed um they reflect

Differentiable functions, causal influences amongst these variables, these intermediate computational products.

So like variable one is then there's some function, differentiable function that translates it into two, two influences four and three.

Three influences five and six, six influences seven.

We've seen this in the Bayesian context where the sparsity of the connections

allow for the factorization of this graph.

Like it allows us to sort of hold one part

unchanging and change other parts through factorization.

That's a lot of the variational inference stuff that we've talked about.

Okay, so what are the parents of seven?

Which nodes do you think that we should consider if we're going to back propagate?

So the forward model, the actual like causal chain in the model, not in the world, is like one, you can imagine some perturbation happens to one, every node is going to be influenced.

That's the forward perturbation in the forward generative model.

What is going to be invoked if we start at seven and do a back propagation?

Which nodes are not important?

Five and four.

Right, yeah.

Five and four will not be invoked in this optimization scheme.

So if we were...

So we'll make these ones gray that we're going to be back propagating on.

But I also hope I'm representing this accurately, but you could imagine that like changing the dials on five or the function between three and five will not reduce the loss on seven.

So it still might be an important thing in the forward model, but it's not in the back propagation from 7.

It's in the forward propagation from 1.

Okay.

So then...

This is not a predictive coding architecture because in the predictive coding architecture, some of these, that's what we saw in like, for example, in figure two is what we saw in figure one.

So there's the means and the variance estimators.

So let's bring in figure one and try to adapt it to our graph.

So our graph is sort of up to formalism 29.

Now we want to think about a graph that's not just nodes and edges of the abstract type, but it's going to be nodes and edges that include these error neurons, as they're calling them here.

So here's a reminder on what that architecture looked like.

Jax wrote, how is the back propagation of error related to Holland's, John Holland, bucket brigade, the bucket brigade in signals and boundaries?

It sounds, explain a little bit what is the bucket brigade or we'll look, but it sounds like a bunch of people helping and sharing buckets or something like that.

Okay.

So let's just say that the one that we actually want to minimize is going to be like a mu.

it's gonna be a mean estimator.

Now let's just modify this graph so that this one's gonna be error.

I'll just use the, well, type the variables.

So this is a mean estimator.

And then we're gonna alternate so that this one is an error and this one is a mean.

this one's a mean again this is not the exact same architecture that they laid out and this might not be um traditional or um

classical standards but like this is getting us towards this idea that within a cortical column so to speak we have um the forward propagation of alternating layers of means and errors um we want this loss function to be minimized by diffusing

the uncertainty across these error nodes.

That is like letting the chips lie in terms of the variance attribution.

And as they write precisely the credit, it should be assigned to cause the error in the first place.

So if like node two in the forward causal model,

was causing 90% of the variance.

And so this was like, one is a very tight distribution and it gets blurred a ton on the way to three.

And then from three, it only gets blurred a little bit on the way to seven.

So like two is going to be big.

This is like a big error estimator.

And six is small.

tiny variance estimator.

So it'd be like, if we were in classical statistics and we were gonna do, we were doing brain imaging on a bunch of people from two different categories, like with and without this diagnosis, you could imagine that in that two level model, one world, there would be like massive variance amongst people and very little differences between those two higher groups.

In another world, it could be the opposite.

There could be big difference between the two groups, but very small differences amongst the people within a group.

And so this is the parameterization and finding the parameters that are going to minimize the loss function means that we want the variance to be partitioned appropriately

across error terms, just like we would like the average, the mean estimators to be accurate, the equivalent in the error world is we want the errors to be appropriate in how they're distributed.

So it's like, if you're doing a mean estimator on something, you don't just want like the highest mean possible, you want like the most accurate mean possible.

And the most accurate error possible doesn't mean the lowest error possible.

That would be the fallacy of, well, we're estimating means, well, then let's just make it bigger.

So we're estimating errors, not because we want bigger errors or want smaller errors.

That's the thumb on the scale.

Estimating errors accurately entails appropriately distributing the error terms on this graphical architecture.

And then they're adding in one extra point, which is basically that the dynamics of predictive coding are purely local, requiring prediction errors from the current vertex and the child.

That is...

on the computational front, a win for tractability and for the actual algorithm, because you don't need to have the whole model loaded into RAM, for example, because you know which neighborhood of variables you're going to engage when you're doing a certain parameter update.

And then on the biological side, it starts also leaning towards plausibility because

they even call it an error neuron well neurons are signaling forward let's just call that the direction that the action potential travels down the axon but there's also retrograde signaling at the synaptic junction so it's plausible at the multiple neuron architecture level

or even at the two neuron biological system level that there is like, even if there's a direction at which signaling is assumed or perceived to be normatively happening, there's also a retrograde signaling of multiple kinds.

And we won't go into that like complexity of retrograde synaptic regulation, but that at the circuit level and at even the synapse level, the idea that signaling is happening both ways

is something that is seen as the strength of the predictive coding architecture.

Again, the locality allows it to be more computationally implementable and this sort of bi-directionality and signaling is more reminiscent of biological signaling processes, synapses, conversations, brain regions, so on.

Okay, let's... Okay, yeah, any thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_01:
I think that's a pretty good explanation.


SPEAKER_00:
Go for it, Stephen.

Just checking.

So if you added all the errors out, are the errors kind of independent of each other, or is there like a total error across the chain, so to speak, of like...

uh, how much error there can be, or is it like kind of contained within the streets?

Like it's six relatively contained and two relatively contained.


SPEAKER_01:
okay dean can i take a guess steven yeah sure i'm get i'm guessing so just keep the wild a money money part of this front of mind um i think what the i think what the graph is telling us or at least when we formalize it in this way is that you could always

find the cumulative error, but the point of the system is to try and keep the error where it actually exists within each layer.

So sort of partnering the error

each level with with whatever the prior or the hierarchical L plus one or L minus one layer is but me again I'm just guessing but I'm kind of making sure that I understand completely what what Daniel laid out here and that would be my guess I mean you could you can add it all up but I think the I think the point of it is is

is that before it runs away from you, the architecture is set up so that there will be some cumulative effect, but it probably wouldn't be, it shouldn't be, there's the word I'm looking for, it shouldn't be as abrupt as if you didn't have the layers and you didn't have the ability to differentiate and you didn't have a kind of understanding of what is happening, i.e.,


SPEAKER_02:
back propagationally now again i'm just throwing that out there but because i don't have a reputation around this i could be completely wrong there's a lot to say and the authors like do provide many citations but i i believe that's right like just as appropriate mean determination we're thinking in a gaussian world like right um

There's a lot to say on Gaussian processes, but a Gaussian is a mean and an uncertainty.

So there's going to be somewhere where the hump of that distribution is, and then there's going to be some width to it.

Now, sometimes the process is actually Gaussian.

Other times we can use nested Gaussian processes so that it's like, well, there's some process that's moving it, and then there's wiggle around it.

So we're going to see that moving as one Gaussian, and then the other one is like a ripple that's like a smaller Gaussian on that.

And then even in cases where there's a non-Gaussian distribution, that's where the Laplace approximation comes into play, which is the second derivative

We have the Jacobian and then the Hessian matrix in 26.

And then we talked about how when you take the second derivative, you're basically making that bowl and then lying in it.

So you're going to the bottom of the bowl that you created, and you know that it's gonna be the sort of hump structure that's amenable to going downhill.

Because once you go beyond quadratic,

beyond the hump, anything that's like a multi-hump distribution or even just X cubed, you're going to have challenges

getting globally optimal from local optimization processes because you won't know if you're in a local energy well or not.

And so many of these computational tools and approaches that we're discussing like across these live streams and papers can be understood as taking something that isn't like a bowl

and making it so that it can go downhill and finding, well, what is the appropriate level of how many layers have to be added to this onion?

Or how many oven gloves do I have to put on?

How many approximations should we carry out in our approximation science so that there can be something like a parabola

where we know that we're on parabola territory and that's what allows us to then minimize a loss function because if one believed that they were on a rugged landscape then minimizing something locally would be you'd have no way to know if that was on the right track or not um yeah steven


SPEAKER_00:
could i say then would i be okay to say that it's almost like each of these errors say number six number two in here and you could have those would be like little mini bowls or mini um at different and the further up the chain the bigger the potential um impact of the positioning in that bowl or whatever the landscape is out towards whatever's been you know the mean that's been understood okay


SPEAKER_02:
Let's look at figure one.

So this is a cortically inspired, so inspired by the Cortex.

And Blue wrote, Dean, I understand the architecture the same way error correction is retained locally.

So let's look at this semi-cortically inspired predictive coding hierarchical system.

Just like in the example with the two clinical populations doing brain imaging, there's one world where the patients within the group vary a lot and the groups don't differ.

There's another world where the groups differ a ton and then the people within each group do not have any variance amongst them.

So depending on how it's parameterized, one could have a model where the highest level has a major influence or not.

And that's the whole question.

It's like in a linear model, is it more important like the MX part, the slope, or the B, how much it shifted?

If the regime of attention is on linear modeling as an architecture, it doesn't make sense because they're both just parameters in a model.

Now for any given data set, it's an empirical question to what extent changes in the slope or the intercept

are associated with changes in the loss function and that's linear regression.

Here's an architecture that gives us an approach to finding loss functions, but how do we know how many layers?

How do we know how many of these side connections to make?

There's a few ways to go about that.

One could just a priori model the structure of the model of the graph around something else like previous work or some inspiration from a biological system.

They might also be interested in this structure being a parameter of a model.

Like

And that's the whole structure learning and meta Bayesian approaches and all of that, but that's pulling back another level.

And so that's the, the challenge of structure learning, because we can get that loss function within a given static graph, but that doesn't mean that we have the best possible graph architecture.

It's like if you have 100 pieces of data, biometric data on people, and you're making a multiple linear regression to find out their risk for some condition.

Do you just use 100?

That might be overfitting.

It might be too costly computationally.

So how many of those variables do you use?

There's a process for determining what's at the trade-off between accuracy and complexity, where it's fitting the outcome well, the loss function on the condition that you're trying to actually predict, but it's not past the point of diminishing return or using variables that are uninformative.

Or for example, if there's two variables that are perfectly correlated with each other, that's called multilinearity, and you wouldn't want to use those variables.

So that's the challenge in the linear regression world.

And this is like taking it into another space, but it has more analogies than not, which is why SPM, statistical parametric mapping, that textbook is, for those who want to engage, vital.

prerequisite because it addresses a lot of these questions on model fitting including on dynamical systems and it puts it with six feet on the ground in classical parametric and non-parametric statistics dean


SPEAKER_01:
This just raises the question in my mind, I haven't answered it, as to whether or not a mean is constructed, or if a mean is actually sculpted, or some combination of the two.

I mean, being a min-two guy, I'm going to assume that it's probably both.

Like you can have the figure, but it's your understanding of...

what the difference is between an edge and a directional link, which you have to kind of carve out from the overall image.

But that's, again, that's one of these things now where if you get into this predictive coding piece, I think the product looks like a construct.

But in actuality, there's got to be a huge element of this, of being able to isolate the mistakes so that they don't overwhelm.

And if you're isolating something, if you're removing some factor, you're actually sculpting as well.

So maybe that's a bit of a philosophical overlay on the sort of mathematical operational side.

But you know me, I'm always trying to turn it into what's the practical function of this.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's like statistics as world building, because if you just want the mean, then just take the grand average.

If you want the mean and the variance, there's a method.

Do you want a variance on the variance?

How confident are you that it's 10 plus or minus one?

Is it 10 plus or minus one plus or minus 0.5?

Or is it 10 plus or minus one plus or minus 0.01?

So a tight estimator.

on the error as a parameter and so we're like playing with which parameters are seen as like the things in and of themselves the means and which ones with respect to means have this interpretation as being error neurons or being variance descriptors now one properly fit model which you could take into the you know 50 stacked levels 10 plus or minus one

And then on that one variance estimator, we have plus or minus 0.1.

And then how sure are we about the plus or minus 0.1?


UNKNOWN:
0.01.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, now how sure are we about that 0.01?


UNKNOWN:
0.001.


SPEAKER_02:
That would be like a well-fit model where as we kept on adding uncertainty parameters, we would be making appropriate estimators.

Now, what would be like a mal-fit model?

And I hope this is accurate.

10 plus or minus one.

And you go, how sure are you on that one?

plus or minus 50.

It's like the variance just exploded.

It's like, well, but you're saying that the variance could be like zero or the variance could be 50.

How much confidence should we then have in the mean estimator?

And so that's what this appropriate distribution of uncertainty is.

Now let's think about node seven, an uninformative node seven.

We're predicting temperature, but it's just, it's unchanging.

We don't have a lot of information there to fit a world model because it could just be a single level estimate.

It's 10 and it's not changing.

But as we deal with progressively more and more nuanced and informative things that we want to minimize loss functions on like natural language,

images from natural scenes, action, including the unknown consequences of real-time unfolding action.

Those, because the uncertainty becomes higher and the information content of what you're trying to minimize your loss function on is higher, it not authorizes or licenses, but kind of

moves us into potentially having higher levels of model complexity as simple as possible and not simpler with that principle being carried through again if you're just trying to predict a constant number you don't need a six level predictive coding architecture whereas if there was something that did actually have that many levels of depth

that's the kind of architecture that would do well to predict it and we talked about this with the par and pazulo on the architectures for homeostasis and allostasis and it was like yeah to just recognize if you're out of bounds and then come back in that's a given model but then there's a different graph that's going to do something like intermodal or anticipatory or have memory so all of those cognitive or computational features

license or engender more complex causal models but these are being sculpted ab initio from nothing by the statistician and then we're in sort of brackish or gray waters when we um juxtapose the architecture of the graph with the architecture of some natural system


SPEAKER_00:
Okay?

Yes?

Stephen?

Yeah.

And you've got this excitory and inhibitory dynamic going on.

And even though the arrow is going from the arrow down to the U, the U is exciting the layer above, isn't it?

It's exciting.

It's almost like...

It's like one, bottom up is kind of exciting, higher up areas, and then things that are further up are also sort of saying, hey, calm down, calm down.

I can reduce some of this.

You're getting a bit out of hand here, you know?

They've only scored two goals.

Let's relax, you know?


SPEAKER_02:
That, again, I also hope this is not inaccurate.

It's almost like there's a suppression of error, like a dampening being carried forward

with the ultimate dampening being you predict it perfectly.

You have totally quelled all error yet in real settings because of just simply model simplification or uncertainty in the world,

error is coming in from the observables, which is often what we're trying to reduce our loss function on.

And that's this whole difference between reinforcement learning, finding oneself in reinforcing or rewarding states, and active inference with reducing surprise about outcomes.

we're dampening error and carrying that forward in the forward generative model and then also able to run it back in a tractable way because it's like you're dampening the vibration, but then the vibration is still entering in and you'd want that vibration to be appropriately distributed according to where it should be.

Okay, Dina, then Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it seems to me that the way, what this is saying to me is that because of the way things are organized, two things can live simultaneously at once.

One is sort of that local mean correction, and the other is the more generalized global or

the other direction in the bidirectionality parallel of mean correction.

One is kind of reinforced through external evidence, while the other one is reinforced through localized, almost, it is distributed, but it's almost like the ability to localize and isolate if necessary.

So I know we've talked a lot about top down and bottom up, but this brings a lot more color in my mind to some of those conversations we've had before in terms of, you know, arrows going in opposite directions.

And it's not so much that they're going in opposite directions, but that you can be going two different directions quite literally at once because of the way things are set up.

So, yeah, I think this has been really, really helpful for me in terms of not only understanding what back propagation is, but actually in sort of giving me a little bit more foundational ideas around, again, how do we turn these sort of statistical ways of representing it into, so I'm confused, should I go into the cafe or not?

I mean, not all of us have to go to that level of detail to really understand what the final thing was that pushed us over the door threshold or not.

But it appears that this has been around for a while and being able to take that, if you really are kind of stuck because you really don't know what the parents are of your current child,

action because we haven't got as you say we haven't got to action yet but that's the whole point there is an architecture there that's going to allow us to have choice thanks um this minimum of two um


SPEAKER_02:
comes up so much.

So it's awesome to hear about that.

And then to connect like expectation maximization and the tale of two densities, epistemic and pragmatic.

It's like wherever we look, there's partitions into two.

into multiplicity and unity through plurality.

And then other times, even within the one road, there's the movement in both directions, forward and backwards in time, or the forward propagation of a generative model, which could from just one, if all you knew was one, you could simulate sevens.

If all you knew was seven and the structure of the network, of course,

you could backpropagate the best possible mean and error estimates using backpropagation of error.

Okay, Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
This is helpful for thinking about how we perceive things as well.

Dean was saying about making choices.

It can be when we get zero error or whatever's seen as negligible error.

You want to just allow that to carry on and stay with your imagination.

So I go to the bar and a lot of things are the same, right?

Maybe there's a happy hour sign.

And if that's unusual, maybe I'm happy about that.

I note it.

But if a lot of things are exactly or very similar to how I expected, then in a way, my perception is probably mostly wrong.

my predictions just not being

contradicted.

Or actually, I just don't see it.

I think I've seen it, but I just don't need to see it.

And where there's something which is ambiguous, like you were saying, you need that number seven, if we're going to use this diagram, starts to have to be looked at.

You start peering at things, straining their eyes, trying to sort of see, well, what's that?

Is it a dog?

Is it a man running into the woods?

Is it a dog?

Is it a man running into the woods?

You start to notice

So I think this is also quite useful for that perspective of, you know, when, when you just, you don't actually need to see a lot of stuff.

It's quite an efficient model, right?

If it's, if, if the, if the area goes below a certain level, you just move on and carry on.

Of course, that's where the challenge with autism is, they think, because too many things have been looked at that are possibly negligibly relevant at the time.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one last thing, Dan, before, because I know you want to clean this up.

I think one of the analogies that I draw is with the emphasis on the word minimum two, min two, doesn't mean it's always a hard bifurcation or a binary.

It means that

the minimum amount of things, like even when you take your shoelace and wind it through all the eyes of your shoe, you've got two ends that you eventually will loop back together and entangle in some way to hold your shoe on.

So even though it's one lace, I think what active inference reinforces, because it's got active and inference, is that ability to be able to

see two things, both seemingly contradictory and both actually true.

Now, it can be multiple things.

You can have multiple surprises, some of which make you quite happy and others where

you walked in and said, well, why hasn't it been happy hour at this hour when I've been at this bar on multiple other days?

Like you could be disappointed in that as well as being pleasantly surprised.

So I think what this, again, I just reinforce this, the minimum of two allows for the integration.

The minimum of two recognizes the differentiation.

And when we're talking about statistical issues and when we're talking about errors and when we're talking about

energy, I think the way that these folks have been able to discover what architecture would allow for that is what's really interesting to me now.

Because I wasn't even thinking in these sort of, so what does the scaffold look like?

But it looks like there's been a lot of work done in this area.


SPEAKER_02:
So let's take it to action as we head into our last little bit on this.

And of course, if anyone is more author or not familiar with the formalisms, just contribute to Acting Flab, help us annotate the papers and read these deeply because there's so much to learn and somebody getting involved like a few days or weeks before these streams is a leverage point if you want to help other people understand this area.

So I've changed the colors just all to gray because they're all just random variables now.

We had the seven.

So we were back propagating error on temperature prediction.

But also maybe this system is predicting pressure.

And so then three might be like estimating, you know, is the water boiling?

Again, we're getting one step closer to the cafe.

So if we were only trying to predict temperature, we would back propagate along the seven, six, three, two, one route.

If we were only predicting pressure, we could back propagate along eight, five, three, two, one.

The fact that there's a parent that is upstream, it's like the last common ancestor of pressure and temperature.

Like we might be able to reduce these errors a lot on the temperatures by having this higher order variable, is the water boiling?

And so one can imagine like if the answer is yes, then it's like, it's expecting that this is like higher on both.

And if it's low, it's lower on both.

So the generative model can go from the water's boiling, what pressure and temperatures do I expect?

And you could add a third node.

It allows you to, conditioned on a cognitive structure, go from observations of just temperature around the horn to pressure, or from pressure and temperature up to the water boiling.

But the influence of these observations is like limited through this choke point.

It's actually a Markov blanket with respect to what's on the either side of it.

Let's bring action into the picture.

Action can also be understood as parametric.

What angle should my elbow be at?

What angle should the eyes be oriented?

Those types of things, again, not whether that's what the actual neural signaling in the brain is doing, but this is how we model action.

It's like the car, how many miles per hour should I be going?

those kinds of questions is parametric modeling of action.

And that's what was so fun and exciting was the first 50 equations in this paper have scaffolded this tremendous general node computation architecture.

multi-level means and variances forward and backward up down left right all of these interesting ways and connections but not yet action not because we hadn't brought action in as a dancing partner but actually this was above any interpretation of the nodes as inference or action and then it's as easy to condition on action

as it is to condition on any other inference, because action is just a parameter for parametric active entities that are engaging in action as inference, planning as inference and so on.

And so then one can think about what is the compute graph, whether it's composed of just nodes and edges, or whether we think of some of those nodes as being like variance estimators,

And then, you know, this maybe, again, the connections, I'm not going to rewire this whole graph, but just like, is this a water boiling situation?

Okay, so we have a thermometer.

It says that it's 100 C. It's boiling temp.

The pressure sensor is broken, but we back propagate it.

we're high confidence on the water boiling.

Then this is like another variable that's going to require like a different sort of question that it's answering.

But one can imagine that if this is a water boiling situation and the water's not boiling, there might be an error.

And so how can we reduce loss function on the total compute graph, including observation and action?

How can we reduce uncertainty about a cognitive model, including observation and action?

There's two ways to do it.

And it's how they introduce it in the very beginning of the paper, which is that the minimization of the loss function

of the free energy, expected free energy, variational free energy, can be achieved in multiple ways.

Through immediate inference about the hidden states of the world, explaining perception, updating a global world model to make better predictions, slower parametric inference updates that have the interpretation of learning, and when action is a variable that we have agency over,

It introduces some complexities like the need to have preference and the need to specify a time horizon and to have uncertainty about the consequences of action, right?

Wouldn't it be easy if we were just watching the movie and our actions didn't have any influence upon the story that we saw?

It'd be a different inference.

And finally through action to sample sensory data from the world that conforms to the predictions, potentially providing this integrated account of adaptive behavior and control.

So it took us 50 equations at the general before we could jump into action, but it's a deflationary approach to action because action is a parameter in a broader cognitive and computational framework.

Okay.

Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Daniel.

Yeah, that's really helpful.

Actually, going back to the example of water as well, you can even bring in the higher level of affect in the sense that one thing that's really hard with water compared with a lot of other things when you heat up oil and stuff is you can have the water boil and you've probably had it.

And you can have a thermometer theoretically saying 100, but the steam can go above 100.

But it's very hard to really – it can trick you, right?

It's like it's hard to – it's actually quite hard to get – I find it hard to get my head around steam being hotter than water because it's kind of –

just kind of how I know, you just think of it as being 100 degrees water, right?

And it's almost like if you were to get into that situation or after I burnt myself one time or there's almost, maybe I just start to have a feeling of fear if I have a sense that I'm somewhere where

what might be coming out is high temperature steam, right?

And that will override the fact that perceptually, I haven't got a lot of ways to easily sort of gauge that visually, unlike, say, a ring getting red and, you know, other things.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Here's what that makes me think of.

Sometimes we...

have indirect cues that reduce our uncertainty about something that's not directly observed, like the mood ring.

If everybody was wearing a mood ring and that was an accurate predictor, you know, that would be this other alternate world.

And so there are certain kinds of variables that are more like the magical mood ring or like the temperature of metal within a range, because I mean,

it's only going to start to get glowing when it's super, super hot.

So it doesn't help you differentiate whether it's free, like at zero C or 50 C or 200 C probably even.

But there's some range for certain things in the world where we can use indirect sensory cues.

Affect is not quite here in this model, in this graph.

but we've talked a lot about how uncertainty can be understood as like anxiety and or negative valence.

In the world of reward maximization, less reward is bad.

In the reward, in the world of precision optimization,

Excess variance is bad.

Not any variance.

It's not a simple, you know, destroy the variance estimators.

It's about the appropriate applications of variance.

But excess variance, more variability than expected.

You told me it was 10 plus or minus one, but I just pulled three, 50, negative 80.

That's confusing.

It's more confusing than I thought.

So then some of these mean and error estimators in a computational model might have, this could be a mean estimator on valence, or one could choose to write a paper where an error estimator is framed as being an anxiety parameter.

And that's always that jump between what any parameter is in a graphical model

and anything about the world or attaching it to some word because, oh, it's anxiety.

Well, then that makes me think of this other situation.

So you can send someone really too easily down a road of associations when the deflationary perspective is just stating what it is.

Okay, fun.

Didn't expect that we would go

this way with the back prop but blue mentioned it last time and and it is important to uh bring up and also it connects to modern methods for training neural network architectures and that's what a lot of the author's research has focused on so let's just continue to explore action a little bit they reiterate that when we're thinking about

active inference about inference involving action.

So cybernetics, control theory, any area where some parameters represent observations or latent states and other parameters represent active things.

The first way that you can minimize prediction error

is to update predictions to match sensory data corresponding to perception.

And the second is to take action.

And earlier from the introduction of the paper, they kind of did a little minimum of two even on this, which is to split out perception as rapid inference and learning as a slower updating.

But we've talked about the continuity between perception and learning.

Like if you're seeing the ball move across the screen,

Is that perceiving the movement of the ball or is it learning a parameter representing the location of the ball?

So whether we call something more perceptual or more learning oriented, and even abstract learning can be seen as like perception in interior spaces, which has been the focus of a lot of work by Fields and Levin with competency in navigating these abstract spaces.

But perception sometimes brings us a little bit

not too close, but a little bit just linguistically to like our experience of perception when the phenomenology and the qualia is not what is in play here.

It's about parameter updating in the model.

Yeah, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you think, Daniel, it's about sample size, but sample size is related to maybe the time commitment?

Like if I'm inferring something, that's a very, very short volume of sample versus prediction, which is slightly or relatively larger volume of time commitment to move to that

volume and then modeling, for example, which takes the perception and tries to build something material from that.

Do you think that that counts here?

Because at least that's what I was telling participants we had to take under consideration was sort of the time factor of the sampling process.


SPEAKER_02:
sure i think um if we allow inference to um be just broad and including everything then that's what it is but yeah just in its connotation inference using a model often has the um it's sort of like the machine is ready the model is ready and we're gonna do inference the new patient comes in with the biometric data we're gonna do inference using this model and we're gonna predict their risk of the diagnosis

That's the fast perceptual timeframe.

Learning is, unless it's one-shot learning, is taking in multiple patients and updating the parameters of those models.

Now, those two stages can be alternated like an expectation maximization or in the tale of two densities, but that doesn't get away from the fact that there's sort of this like one data point mode, like plug and chug inference perception mode,

variational free energy.

And then there's a little bit more of like the updating the model parameters.

It's like, are you tuning the engine or are you using the engine loosely in the non-action space in this first way to minimize prediction error?

Those given the ongoing stream of patients coming to your office, there's two ways to reduce your surprise.

Those are the perceptual and learning continuum, which does come down to the specifics about the sample size and the architecture of learning and perception.

You could also reduce surprise by choosing what to sample and or modifying the world.

So that's how they bring action in.

And...

It's very interesting to think how many pages of prose I've gone into wondering where action fits in.

And there's still many more pages to go in terms of where does Formalism 51 take us?

Have we cashed the check of pragmatism and activism, extended cognition and so on?

Like what is 51 with respect to all the qualitative insights of action with all of its depth?

What is 51?

A short answer might be that it's like the Y equals MX plus B.

with respect to all the ways that linear models are used in the world.

This is just like a sort of skeleton archetype that is just the trace or a hint for someone who then wants to analyze specific actions over specific timeframes for specific cognitive computational models.

But that's where 51 takes us, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah one other piece that could be kind of interesting to throw in there as well as matching my uh the sensory uh data with my predictions i could reimagine my reality to explain my beliefs which in a way would mean i create my own sensory data

by proxy if that makes sense which is a kind of an interesting slight add-on to that but um it's it's the same idea because you're not strictly taking action you're taking actions to match sensory data but not necessarily the real world sensory data it could be the the kind of uh you know the imagined world data i i am seeing an angel coming over the top of


SPEAKER_02:
that hill now you know yeah one could engage in um mental reverie and it would either be reducing their surprise in the long run or that system would fail to persist in an entropic world and people have made

all kinds of arguments like in evolutionary psychology about the basis of why we perceive or believe different things along similar arguments so definitely makes sense let's just look a little bit in 452 which we didn't um previously get to but of course anyone with any other like questions in the live chat welcome to do so so

Here in 26, Livestream 26, we talked about PID control.

We talked about integrator chains and about generalized coordinates of motion.

So just a reminder on what 26 looked like.

We had from left to right is time.

These are different time points.

And then at each time point, there's this vector, it's like a stack.

reflecting the observables, and then also things that are latent states.

They're not observables of the world, real or imagined.

They're the derivatives of how the observables are changing.

And those can be the position, it's like the zeroth derivative, but then also velocity, jerk, so on, acceleration, so on.

So we looked at that in 26, but it wasn't connected

formally to predictive processing, predictive coding.

PID control is restated in 53 using the formalisms, using the notation that is going to prepare for the merge with predictive coding, like A for action, epsilon for errors.

And so the error term is included in all of the three levels.

To obtain equivalence to predictive coding, we utilize a linear identity generative model with three levels of dynamical orders.

So the joint distribution of all the O's, all the observables, and all the X's through time is going to be this factorized expression.

So the distribution of the observation conditioned on the latent state, and then that is conditionally independent of, so it allows it to be factorized and calculated out separately.

Here's like the first derivatives, second derivatives with O double prime and X double prime.

Here is X conditioned upon its own derivative,

the derivative of x conditioned on its derivative, and the sort of root node is the double derivative of x, because this one like stands alone.

That's like where our model kind of taps out.

That's equivalent to node one here.

Like there's no variance term leading to one.

There could be, but then that would be a different model.

So these equations in 54,

restate this dynamical model and introduce um omega which i believe would be an error term this w and also the muse which is the desired set point for x at that order so at the first second or third um derivative what what is desired there um

then that allows so so this is like a graph where instead of these being different things like what if what if kind of mixing architectures a little bit because the generalized coordinates doesn't have errors interleaving it just has the

state the first derivative the second derivative and so on um rather than interleaving error terms but we can imagine another similar graph where as you back propagate it's like higher and higher derivatives that's the integrator chain but i guess in 55 56 and 57 and 58 they do something similar to what we had done with the generic computation graph

or to the predictive coding architecture with the interleaving of the means and the errors.

This is just that on the graph architecture where the nodes have this interpretation of being derivatives of one another.

What is there to say?

That's an interesting connection.


SPEAKER_01:
Just bringing back flashbacks to try to get my head around 500-level economics courses and when you'd have somebody walk in and start pounding stuff up on a whiteboard on second, third, and fourth derivatives and just feeling like you'd been tossed into a blender and you had no way of avoiding the blades.

Yeah.

I'm glad that there's people that can do this stuff, but I would have to dedicate way more time to trying to parse what the heck they're talking about because it's a wall to me.

It's really hard.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I feel you.

Maybe for the last few minutes, we can kind of pull back to...

okay as we swoop out of this bathtub out of the dot too into the great beyond like

What have we taken with us?

Why was this lengthy journey through predictive coding and the 60 formalisms and what Maria brought with the thousands of years of philosophy and history on perception?

So where are we and how are we different now and going forward than we were before we started 43?


SPEAKER_01:
I'll say what it's done for me.

First of all, bringing up the historical piece of it was really, really helpful because this didn't just sort of come up yesterday or in the last couple of years.

It's been around for a while.

I think for me, I wouldn't have seen predictive coding as a sort of formalized way of retracing a navigational route, but that's what it screamed to me.

And after the point one, I...

and hearing you and Blue talk about it, when the question around back propagation came up, that's when I sort of did a deeper dive on that.

And again, I wasn't picking up on how to do that path retracement.

The formalisms weren't really addressing what I thought was being said.

I think what today helped me with is

sort of examining if you don't have traces laid down that are material that you can see, if you weren't actively part of the building of the path, that there's still some graphical, statistical ways of organizing information to give you a better sense of

Okay, so you didn't lay the breadcrumbs down, but we can still give you a better sense of where you came from as a result of being able to use this kind of formalism.

I mean, honestly, Daniel, 53, 53?

Come on.

I mean, if you're one of the people that was able to write those 53 out and actually

presented in paper form.

I mean, props to you.

You get many thank yous, but holy mackerel.

Other than the fact that there is some evidence now that you can retrace, even though you don't have necessarily those markers or

You didn't self-correct.

You weren't aware of how you self-corrected, whereas the predictive coding at least gives you an opportunity to maybe retrace that back, even though you didn't spend a lot of time trying to organize the evidence.

The other thing that it does is I think it reinforces the idea that the way that these live streams are structured, which is just introduce the paper, just give the paper its

it's opening, like open up the box in the point two, you can actually go into one particular area of the unknown, which for me was the back propagation, which you and Stephen helped me with.

In the point two, we are still doing the part where

The .2 could always, even if you didn't have a record of the .1 and the .0, this paper told me that you would still have some way of knowing where that elusive .0 exists relative to this live stream today.

And again, I could be overfitting, but I don't think I am.

Otherwise, why would you string out 53 operations?


SPEAKER_02:
A lot of interesting stuff there.


SPEAKER_01:
Because this is level.

This is the exact same.

I mean, what we're doing in the live stream and the levels that they're talking about, they affect each other in exactly the same way.

It's diagrammed out here as a stack.

And we tend to think of ours because it's over multiple days as sort of a horizontal stack.


SPEAKER_02:
continuation but they're essentially one and the same oh that's that's very interesting um so it's almost like well there's the dot zero and the one of the two they can go both ways so in in the temporal sense

The dot zero is a precursor temporarily to the dot one, the dot two.

So for the YouTube channel subscriber, this is their observation.

Oh, 43.0.

Oh, 43.1 has been live streamed.

43.2 has been live streamed.

But what is like the derivative that sort of sets the initial conditions for dot two?

It's the dot one.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
And then what of course sets for the dot one, dot zero.

And so there's almost this sense in which as we dampen our uncertainty through action and inference moving forward in a world that's always continually vibrating and transcending our model,

like it pushes the earlier actions that we take that high school teacher that book that you read all the way back even beyond one's own corporal birth as like parameters that

dampen or specify if one doesn't want to think about dampening the position acceleration and velocity and so on um they're like higher and higher chains and that means that they have like they're further and further away from where the rubber hits the road for the YouTube subscriber on the outside but they're absolutely like part of the process by which something comes to be

then the dot two you said can exist without the dot one and then then the first time it made me think of like the negative numbers like even before the zero what is what is there before zero what happens before zero is there a negative number there's no number that's positive that's smaller but what is is it is it a letter is it a shape like

Is it its own big bang?

It's like, and there's a sense that it is, and there's a sense that it isn't.


SPEAKER_01:
Part of it's the pre-reading.

The other thing that I think maybe doesn't sort of register explicitly is that

The error propagation in the way that we do the live streams remains.

There are some corrections and there are some, there is a sort of a gradual movement towards a bit of minimization.

But every time we come together and try to figure out, we don't come from a position of we figured it out.

We come from a position of, well, what will we do with this today?

So we retain that error propagation.

And I think that that's not convention.

Convention is why would we spend time on something where we leave a bunch of error baked in?

But I think, again, if we're going to differentiate, if we're going to truly integrate, if we're going to be able to say that you can have a point two existing

without a point one and a point zero?

Of course you can.

But how superficial is that relative to the method because of the architecture, because of the way it's structured, how much deeper you can actually go and how many times you can bump into a dead end, immediately find out how quickly you're going or going off the rails, so to speak, because I can't remember which one of the live streams was that you had the train moving down the track.

But you can find out whether or not something is a dead end quickly and re-correct.

That's what that retracing part today, I think, is one of the, well, it's the takeaway from this set of live streams.

And I wouldn't have anticipated, based on the title of the paper,

that that retracement piece was going to be the thing that was going to sort of percolate and make the most sense in terms of why the structure is, yes, there's an optimizing piece to it, but there's also a piece that allows for mistakes.

I mean, sometimes it's very consequential, but lots of times,

The consequence is what's minimized, not the error.

And I think that's what the architecture affords.

You want to talk about affordances.


SPEAKER_02:
So when you said the consequence is minimized and not the error, that makes me think about high-reliability organizations.

Of course...

One way to minimize the consequences of error would be to never have errors.

Zero tolerance for anything.

But that is challenged in a world, again, that's always throwing us challenges.

So in that setting, it's almost like the observation...

Here, the one that we actually want to reduce our loss function on is not the so-called proxy of error occurring, but we could reduce our loss function on function, on the thing working, and just say we are minimizing the consequences of all this upstream stuff, stuff that might have the interpretation of error and things that might not.

They're just nodes in this graph.

And then what is going to dampen

surprise about the consequences and so like if you say you know anything that you say to me right now uh i'm going to accept it and believe it and then it's like in a in a trust space that opens up there to be like a communication that goes deep if it's being honestly said

and that's because like what's being minimized like don't tell me something surprising it's like my consequence you can have precision on my consequence that's one direction of the conversation and that is what allows that second direction to really come into play

with the transmission of variability, rather than, well, how am I going to reduce my uncertainty about action relative to what the person is going to tell me?

I won't talk to them, or I'll tell them what to tell me, or I'll leave them in the dark about how I'm going to act, and then they'll have uncertainty about how I'll act if they say something even trivial.

And so I think this really spans many levels and ways here because there's nested levels and deep chains.

But I agree.

I think on the more topical, if such a thing could exist, some of the takeaways that I had also really appreciated Maria providing a lot of the philosophical context.

And then that one part where we're like,

Wasn't this a meme like thousands of years ago and in many cultures in the world?

What is it that still makes the predictive mind and surfing uncertainty and being you, what makes these novel and surprising and even somehow counter-cultural, what is happening there?

What chain is leading to that where the idea that we're generators with agency rather than passive receivers, why is that?

such a hill to climb and die on that's one piece i absolutely take away then it was awesome with blue um to work on this in the dot one where we had like on the bottom left the qualitative philosophical insights and and connecting to technical and formal insights on the bottom right

biological systems and it's sort of like where are we engaging deeply with one of these vertices where are we engaging deeply with an edge where are we trying to grab two vertices and the edge or go around the horn or where are we trying to really go for the triple play um every baseball home base inference and action

um in the bottom of the ninth of the dot two it's it's a full count and it's a power play that and then also i think the last piece that the kind of takeaway is just when the computational and cognitive framework are defined generally enough

like at the level of a graphical network, which opens up message passing, variational inference, back propagation of error, predictive processing architectures, hybrids of all of these approaches, then action is deflated.

or it's inflated maybe, or whatever it is that we even say, it becomes composable and tractable to discuss open-ended combinations of perception, cognition, and action and impact, which is the home base in the niche.

And so if even that model has to be structurally revised, like we end up having another way of framing entity and the niche interaction,

It may fit within this framework or it may necessitate revision of the framework, but within the entity niche interaction space and the nested systems and the counterfactual cognitive systems, there's almost like less and less to action than it seems.

It doesn't remove the challenge of action.

It reduces something else that I'm not quite sure about what it is.

Like it doesn't make it easy

but something is being removed as we're learning and working through this but it doesn't make the climb well it makes the climb different to think differently but it doesn't move doesn't mean that fewer foot pounds of force have to be applied but there is something different about the navigation around action and inference

via active inference that I think is will continue to develop for a long time okay Dean and also Steven thanks a lot wasn't sure there for a second at the beginning what would happen I gotta thank you again Daniel because


SPEAKER_01:
Obviously, you did understand, have a reasonable understanding far more than mine in terms of what that back propagation implication was in terms of marrying it to the predictive coding.

So didn't mean to put you into the tutor's seat today, but appreciate the fact that you were able to sort of pull it apart and then put it back together in a way that made a lot more sense than just reading it off the page.

So thank you, sir.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Dean.

See you later.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.


SPEAKER_03:
Take care.

Bye.
