## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess01

SPEAKER_01:
Hello, welcome back.

It's the 4th Applied Active Inference Symposium, Day 2, Part 2, on November 14th, 2024.

We're kicking off this session in the darkness of the pre-dawn on the West Coast, appropriately, with...

Mehran Hossein Zadeh Bazzagherani, ML Don, Brain in the Dark, Design Principles for the Neuromimetic Inference under the Free Energy Principle.

So thank you Mehran for joining.

Looking forward to your presentation.


SPEAKER_00:
Mehran Hossein Zadeh Bazzagherani Thank you very much.

It's a pleasure to be here.

So today I'm going to be talking about the design principles for neuromimetic inference under the free energy principle, namely the methods that are inspired by the brain in order to model human perception.

I just want to preface this by saying that this is a collaboration with my colleague Simon Orbaz from Maynooth University and Professor Friston,

from UCL, and this work has recently been accepted at the NeuroAI workshop at NeurIPS 2024.

So let's just get started.

The content is going to be as follows.

We're going to be talking about first the motivation behind this work, why we got started with this idea anyway to introduce the design principles, particularly for these models.

And then I'm going to do a quick refresher on the math side, just so we all get comfortable with the upcoming derivations that I'm going to be expanding on, which covers the math behind the free energy principle, particularly variational free energy.

Then I'll do a brief discussion on what free energy principle is.

I presume everybody knows by now because we've had so many talks since the beginning of the symposium, but I'm going to do a quick run at that.

Then we'll be talking about the Bayesian brain hypothesis that furnishes the foundation for the idea of modeling human perception as a kind of inference, namely Bayesian inference.

next we dive into the juxtaposition between the generative model and a generative process what do we mean by each one of them knowing the distinction is crucial for understanding the free energy principle because fep lies on this um notion that

there is a boundary that separates an entity from the environment and separating basically my internal state from the external state beyond my Markov blanket.

Next, we'll talk about variational free energy and how it's driven, how it's derived basically.

Then we jump into the design principles in terms of the experiments, the things that you need to consider, the things that you need to define, and how you should go about doing that in order to model human perception as a kind of online inference problem.

We'll go through some final thoughts, some lessons learned, and then I'll introduce some of the resources for those of you who are interested in pursuing free energy principle more seriously and delving into the theory and the practical side of it.

And then we're going to wrap it up with a demonstration using the GitHub repository that is publicly available, by the way.

The motivation is this.

Deep learning has revolutionized artificial intelligence because it has automated the process of feature extraction from raw data.

However, it actually faces a lot of problems.

For example, lack of out-of-distribution generalizability, catastrophic forgetting, and poor interpretability.

It is known as a black box problem.

basically and the catastrophic forgetting is basically when the new knowledge overwrites the previous knowledge the weights are getting overwritten so while the network learns the concept of a cat it might momentarily forget the concept of a dog because the paths are shared between different concepts that are to be learned

You see, in contrast to deep learning, biological neural networks in your brain and in my brain, they do not suffer from these issues.

And this inspires the AI researchers to actually explore this interesting and intriguing area called the neuromimetic deep learning that is all about replicating the brain mechanisms, namely the neuronal message passing and belief updating within the AI models, purely inspired by our best knowledge about how the brain works.

A foundational theory for this approach is the free energy principle, FEP, which unfortunately, despite its potential, is often considered too complex to understand and to implement in AI, simply because one would need a myriad of

disciplines um under their belt knowledge about disciplines under their belt to be able to understand the 300 principle namely you need to know things for example about dynamical systems random processes you need to know about asian mechanics some neuroscience some maybe computational neuroscience and so on and so forth so as as a result it's not it's an intimidating topic let's say for anybody who wants to just get started with it

So we seek to demystify FEP and basically provide a comprehensive framework for designing neuromimetic models where we are actually trying to mimic human-like perception capabilities.

So here we present a roadmap for implementing these models.

And by the way, a PyTorch code repository for applying FVP in a predictive coding network is going to be introduced here.

The link is here that that's the code.

It's publicly available.

Also, as I said, the paper will soon be available by the NeuroAI workshop.

And so hopefully you guys will have a chance to take a look at that as well.

Now let's get started with the refresher of the math.

So first and foremost, the idea of a PDF.

So it's an acronym for a probability density function, which is a function that describes the likelihood of a continuous random variable taking on a particular value.

It has two conditions.

It has to be positive.

So for a given parameter theta zero, for example, the mean of a Gaussian, let's say, for any input x, it's always positive.

And second, we have this normalizer sort of condition that if you integrate a PDF across the support space of the input, name the all possible values of x, you will inevitably must get to the actual value of one.

What this means is

The probability of x, the input, getting any value in any range within its support is always 1, which means that x will always fall in a range in its own accepted range of value.

So that's 100%.

So you need these two if you want to have a PDF.

Next is the idea of an expectation.

I just want to remind you that the reason I'm going through this math is because later on when I introduce the steps of deriving variational free energy, these concepts are absolutely crucial.

So hopefully I'm not going too fast, but yeah, just bear that in mind that these are very important.

And for those of you who are math savvy, and these are two basics, my apologies,

Now the idea of expectation is actually the weighted average of all the possible values that the variable consume, weighted by their probability.

So you have in the first line the expected value of x over the probability distribution, the PDF, p .

So as you notice, we are integrating all possible values of x multiplied by, or weighted by, their corresponding probability.

And it's important to note that you're not limited to calculating the expected value with respect to a variable, but you can also do exactly the same thing with a function.

So the expected value of function is, again, the same thing, but you're basically calculating a weighted average of a function where the weights are the probability of the input to that function, which is x.

Now, some key probability components here.

Now, we have this idea of a joint probability.

So a joint distribution between two variables, x and y, you can divide it up between some conditional term, which is the probability of x given y multiplied by the probability of y in the first place.

Or you can go the other way around, the probability of y given x times the probability of x. You notice that if x and y are independent, this conditional term reduces to probability of x, or this conditional term would reduce to probability of y. So either way, on both sides, you're going to have the probability of x given y if x and y are indeed independent.

next if you want to move from a joint distribution to a marginalized distribution where you're actually marginalizing one of the variables out this is how you can do it so in this case if you integrate p of x y across all possible possible values of x

In other words, if you literally break this down and basically write it down in its constituent terms, if you do this integration, you're inevitably, basically what you're doing is you're getting rid of x, and then you end up with a term with a probability distribution that is only a function of y.

and that's what you call a marginalized probability distribution or pdf again this is key where will this come in handy it's going to come in handy when when i'm going to be talking about the bayesian brain hypothesis and bayes rule and so on and so forth so keep these two equations in mind please

Now, some properties of logarithms.

So this is basically just the definition of a log.

So log of A with base B equals C. The definition says that it just means A equals B to the power of C. So for example, the log of 8 base 2 equals 3, because 2 to the power of 3 is 8.

So the log of a multiplication is sum of the logs of individual terms.

The log of a division is the subtraction of individual log terms.

That's the log of the nominator minus the log of the denominator.

The log of a fraction is literally minus the log of the swapped fraction.

Literally swap B and A together.

You end up with just a negative of the new log term.

The power law, the log of b to the power of c, so basically c drops down as a coefficient, so you end up with this term, c times log of b with base a. Log of a with base a, if the value and the base are both the same, you end up with value 1, and by extension, if you have this term, c drops down as a coefficient, and this term equals 1, so you end up with c.

log of 1 with any base is always equal to 0.

Why?

Because a, whatever it is, to the power 0, is 1.

And last but not least, this one is again very important, ln of a is basically just

logarithm a logarithm with you know where the base is natural number e or it's called the natural log and e is basically the euler euler's number so you got log of a with base e it's called just the natural log so when in python you say numpy dot log is basically the natural log now the free energy principle

it is a theoretical framework in neuroscience it's been developed by carl friston so basically things that persist over time especially living systems look as if they are minimizing a certain quantity it's called free energy it is as if they're sort of maintaining this boundary

that is called a Markov blanket, to persist in the face of random fluctuations in the environment.

This really connects well with the Bayesian brain hypothesis, as you will see shortly.

The brain, from the perspective of Bayesian brain hypothesis, it's actually in the game of inferring the hidden causes behind its sensations.

So namely, if you have, let's say, y to denote the sensations and x as the hidden state.

And then this inference basically means that given my observation y, I want to estimate the probability distribution over x.

It's basically called a posterior probability, which means that after having seen an observation, what is causing in the world beyond my Markov blanket this particular sensation or observation?

Inevitably, this requires having a generative model, GM, of the world.

And this actually connects really well with Helmholtz's concept of unconscious inference.

And it is defined like that perception is kind of unconscious inference, which means that we are in the game of

you know inferring the hidden cause behind our our sensations for example right now you're looking at the monitor and the photons but the light is hitting the your sensory epithelia on your eyes those excitations those those hits those are your sensation

And when you realize that I'm watching this presentation at Active Inference Institute, and this guy is talking, his name is Mehran, this is the slide of a face, Helmholtz's picture is here.

These are the inferences that your brain is making given that particular sensation that is hitting the neurons on the surface of your eyes, right?

So it's estimating this probability distribution about what's happening beyond your Markov blanket.

Now, let's talk about the idea of a generative model versus a generative process.

This is actually very, very important.

On the right-hand side, you see this generative model as a box, and it has some internal states.

Let's call them hidden states.

This represents the neuronal activities in your brain, the excitability, the voltage level, let's say, of your neurons that keep changing all the time, they fluctuate all the time.

And these guys are basically holding information about what's happening beyond your Markov blanket, right?

Remember, what's happening beyond your Markov blanket is out of your reach.

You have absolutely no way of observing exactly what's happening, right?

and here we have the generative process where x star denotes the actual things that are happening in the world which are completely out of reach to you now if you imagine here you have the face of a person let's say steve jobs standing in front of me but this is no like i'm not going to see the truth

what i'm going to see is some sort of a map some sort of a noisy transformation of the truth x star right let's call it y this is what i'm gonna be experiencing this is what's gonna hit and induce excitation at my sensory epithelia on my eyes

and then if you want to look at like basically dig deeper into the idea of perception as um unconscious inference the game the game is this your brain the generative model in your brain predicts a sensation like i'm expecting this sensation to be felt or received at my sensory epithelia and my markov blanket and then the actual sensation y is received

the difference between the actual sensation and my prediction is called the prediction error so using that prediction error i will update my generative model about the world namely i will update my belief about what's happening in the world so this is where my internal states will change to reflect the better image of the unknown world beyond my markov blanket or the parameters of my generative model are going to change

to, again, do a better estimate of what's happening in the world so that I will have a better prediction about the sensations that that world is going to cause.

So, the generative process, again, is not directly observable.

And the internal states X, this is very important, carry information about the invisible external states X star beyond my Markov blanket.

This is where this connects to the discipline of information theory.

This is a very important link, by the way.

So the generative model, what do we mean by that, mathematically speaking?

Now, in a dynamical world, a generative model has a belief about the dynamics of the world.

What it means is, how fast is the world changing, for example, or how is it changing?

Now, if the world is at a given state x,

What does its dynamics look like?

For example, its velocity or acceleration or even higher temporal derivatives are like jerk.

basically all sorts of rates of changes, the rates of change about the world.

That's what I mean by dynamics.

So in a generative model, your generative model will have an understanding, it has to have a belief about how the world is changing beyond a smart cop blanket.

So in other words, if I'm in the game of estimating the dynamics of the world, it means I'm chasing a moving target.

What it means is,

At any given time when I want to infer what's happening in the world, by the time I've made that inference, the world has already moved.

So that basically makes inference a tricky task, especially if I'm in a highly dynamical world.

It makes it more challenging.

The second thing that in a generative model we should have is the generative model has a belief about how the world causes its sensations.

Namely, if the world is at any given state, by my estimation, beyond my Markov blanket, what is the most likely sensation y that I will be experiencing?

So these two are the key components of a generative model.

So mathematically, this is how you show it.

x dot is literally the velocity of the world, how fast it's changing.

Mathematically, it's just dx over dt.

And then you have some function of the states, x, and causes, nu, and theta, the parameters of my generative model, plus some random fluctuation, omega x. So that equation is called the state dynamics equation.

what it basically is telling you is that the dynamics of the world is driven by x by the position of the world basically and these are all my belief about how the world is changing dx over dt the velocity of the world

And technically speaking, F is called the flow of the state dynamics.

It's the deterministic part of the state dynamics.

Omega X, random fluctuation, is what encodes your uncertainty about your belief about how the world is changing.

The second equation basically connects to the second concept that I introduced here.

It's basically telling you that my belief about my sensation, about what's the most likely sensation that I'm going to be receiving, is encoded in this equation, where my observation

is equal to the g of the function of, again, hidden states, the causes new, and the parameters, some parameters, plus some random fluctuation omega y. It's called the observation model.

Again, omega y encodes your uncertainty about your belief about the most likely sensation that you will be experiencing.

sensation that is caused by the world you notice that we have this these again your hidden state here x and then uh the cause is new now if you're wondering so you you know what the thetas are these are just the parameters of the functional form of fng but if you're wondering what causes are this is something that i'm not going to be focusing on this particular talk but just imagine that if you have a hierarchical generative model these causes are just

a subset of the hidden states, like the hidden states that do not have dynamics, but they are the tools that different levels in the hierarchy use to be able to talk to each other.

So interlayer communication is done using these news or the causes.

These are the ones that basically drive the dynamics.

You notice that that's why we have x dot equals f of x and nu.

They drive the dynamics.

Without them, the layers cannot talk to each other, basically.

Now, if you want to turn this into a belief-based system where you have probabilities in play, you just need to assume a Gaussian distribution over your random fluctuation, namely with mean 0 and some precision over your random variable x and your observation y. Open brackets, precision is just inverse uncertainty.

And close brackets, that's just a notion in statistics.

Now, using this, if you literally replace this notion of Gaussian distribution into your original equation, you end up with this probabilistic notion that the probability of x dot, given all of these three elements,

is distributed according to our normal distribution where again the precision is the same as the precision of your random fluctuation but you notice that because we're summing up f with this guy over here the the mean of that gaussian distribution becomes this f term same story for the your belief about your y your observations and that is why i'm saying that f of x and nu and theta is the expected your expected

dynamics about x dot, because it's literally the expected value of the Gaussian distribution.

Same story here.

g of x, nu, and theta is your expectation about your observation, your sensation.

Again, it is the sort of expected value of this Gaussian distribution, the value that is most likely to occur.

So that's generative model.

Two things.

We know the dynamics of the world.

We have belief.

Let's say we don't know it.

We have beliefs about the dynamics of the world, and we have belief about basically the most likely sensation that we will be experiencing if such and such was the state of affair of the world.

Let's say X was the state of affairs in the world.

now we talked about inference let's talk about bayes rule really quickly now here this is bayes rule and the components of bayes rule are as follows we have the likelihood term which is the probability of my observation given the state of the world we have a prior belief which means that before observing why this is my belief about what the world looks like

We have the model evidence, which is probability of data, and these two together is called basically the generative model.

Again, this is in line with what we discussed here.

This is basically your prior belief about the dynamics, and this is literally the mapping between X and Y, which is your likelihood term.

So I'm not saying anything new here.

These two together are your generative model, and this is your model evidence.

This is a devil, right?

This is intractable.

You notice that in a real-life scenario, we will not be able to calculate this.

And this term on the left-hand side is called the posterior probability.

It's your belief about the distribution over hidden state of the world, x.

And when you map your genital model using basal to this posterior distribution, we call this model inversion.

So whenever you hear model inversion in the context of FEP, that's what we mean by that.

So this evidence, again, going back to our idea of marginalizing a variable out, if you, again, just remind yourself that this is how you marginalize the hidden state or x out, you just end up with the probability of, let's say, sensation y, you notice that

this integration could get really nasty really fast which means that if you have you could have basically any number of hidden states x and for each x you would have a range of possible values so this thing could turn into

a potentially like potentially infinite number of nested integrals basically it can it can become intractable really really quickly so what this means is we will not be able to calculate this posterior probability exactly so what should we do the answer is variational inference

So because you see probability of data, your model evidence is intractable, but at the same time, ironically, it's the true measure of how good your generative model is.

which means that we call this also marginal likelihood, right?

So if it is high, it means whatever sensation you're experiencing right now under your model of the world, under your generative model of the world, the probability of that particular sensation is very high.

It means under your model of the world, everything that you're sensing, you already expected to sense it.

So it means you have such a strong and precise belief about the dynamics of the world and how the sensations are generated from those dynamics that whatever you're receiving is not surprising.

But that's why model evidence is such a strong metric for evaluating how good a generative model is.

But unfortunately, it's intractable.

So can we find a bound to this?

namely a lower bound?

And the answer is yes.

I'm going to introduce the idea of an evidence lower bound in the next slide.

So by doing this, I'm turning the problem on its head.

So I'm converting, let's say, an intractable exact calculation of the posterior, and I'm replacing that with a tractable approximation, well, basically a tractable approximate estimation.

the posterior and that's called variational inference and i'll tell you what why we call this variational by the way because the objective function that we're going to be minimizing to do that is variation of free energy is actually a function of a function it's a functional so wherever you're dealing with functionals and optimizing functionals uh that's where the calculus of variation comes into play that's what what it means by variational inference

on the right hand side i'm just going to put some reminders the expected value and the this particular particular law of logarithms and in the middle this is called jensen's inequality just keep keep keep an eye on this one it just says that the expected value of a log of something is always a lower bound to the log of the expected value of that thing right so this is going to come in handy so let's

study this amazing concept of evidence lower bound.

Remember, P is intractable, we want to find the bound to it.

So this is log of probability of data.

This is how we marginalize x out.

And you can multiply and divide by something, whatever it is.

So here qx is, we call this surrogate, the surrogate posterior over the hidden state.

This is going to be a representative or your approximation to the true unknown posterior belief.

So let's call it qx.

And it's, by the way, it's really a key factor in variational inference and FEP.

So keep that in mind, this q variable, this q function.

So moving on, you do a little bit of play here.

So this sort of Q moves to the denominator.

And you notice that this is the definition of expectation with respect to this particular distribution Q, right?

Just getting the definition from here.

And according to Jensen's inequality, this term has a lower bound, and this is the lower bound to it.

So the expected of this term, the expected value of this term over this probability distribution.

You have the joint here and you have the surrogate distribution here.

And

You see that this right-hand side, again, remind yourself, this is your log model evidence, and we found the lower bound to it using Jensen's inequality, right?

So the lower bound is found.

This guy is your evidence lower bound.

And that's a key finding.

By maximizing this evidence lower bound, you're actually maximizing your log model evidence, and you're getting closer and closer to the true posterior.

Now, elbow and VFE, just want to make sure that we're clear on this.

We have elbow here, but VFE or variational inference is just negative of your elbow.

So if you multiply minus one by both sides of this, you end up with this term, always bigger than minus log probability of data.

This is called surprisal.

and this is called variational free energy that's why we say vfe is always an upper bound to surprise so maximizing elbow or minimizing vfe they both mean the same thing and um this is basically called variational free energy and that's why we call it the functional because this thing is a function of a of another function and it's called surprisal or surprise

and just shows you in a plot that here you've got variation of free energy that's always an upper bound to the true unknown surprisal or by extension you've got your elbow here that's always a lower bound to the true log model evidence

so vfe has multiple incarnations it comes in different forms by playing with the math so if this is your this is your vfe just expand you can just expand the joint and the denominator and then literally use the log rule of the you know the division turned into the subtraction and then you can distribute the expectation across the two different terms and this

um this basically results into like just basically swapping these two terms uh by each other you end up with this equation right and these terms have names so this one actually this expected value between your belief about the hidden state and the true unknown posterior this expectation is called a a kl divergence it measures how different your belief about x qx

is from the true unknown posterior that's why it's called an approximate error approximation error and the second term is your surprise right

um so um if i want to like show you like what this actually means visually this is really interesting so this is your surprisal right and on top of surpriser you're adding this approximation error this is this sort of length over here and then this constitutes your free energy what this means is like free energy is always an upper bound on surprisal and the error that that

gap is your approximation error is how far your belief about x is from the true posterior so by tuning your generative model your variational free energy goes down and when it goes down this gap is reducing so it which means that your q

gets closer and closer to the true posterior which means a better and better perception about the world and this doesn't end here your free energy will get closer and closer to the surprisal um basically by extension to the model evidence which is the metric that we're going to be used using for you know comparing different models with one another

A second incarnation of VFE is, again, we're going to expand the denominator again into this joint.

So previously it was p of x given y times probability of y. Now we go probability of y given x times p of x. And again, distributing the log, and then we distribute the expectation.

and then just you know swapping the terms again you have the scale divergence over here and you have this negative this negative expectation now this thing over here is called accuracy it means how accurate am i under my belief of the world the expect the expected value of

observing y under my estimation of where the world is x so the higher this is it means the more accurate your belief about the world is that that is basically causing your observations but at the same time this term over here is called complexity it means that if you have some prior belief about the world you you will not be able to just move your cue wherever you want it is it has to stay close to your prior belief over here so this is basically a regularizer if you will

And the third incarnation is basically again here, this is the definition of VFE again, you know, the log rule.

So we end up with these two terms.

So this guy over here is called expected.

Sorry.

It's called expected internal energy.

And this guy is your entropy.

So that's the expected value of log of Qx.

We call this entropy.

How do we minimize variational free energy?

We have to maximize our entropy and we have to maximize our internal energy.

Now, this term makes sense that we need to maximize it.

But what does this one mean?

It means that your queue will stay as smooth as possible, as simple as possible.

This connects really well with Occam's Razor, if you're from machine learning background, that the best model is the one that provides the most accurate account of the data

But at the same time, the simplest explanation for that data, this simplicity is enforced by this entropy term.

It stays smooth.

So this is very interesting.

So these were just three incarnations of variational free energy.

And the goal of inverting degenerative models, basically, the GM strives to minimize its VFE.

This achieves two things.

I hinted this just a little bit previously, but it means that the actual value of VFE will approach the intractable minus log probability of data.

This is going to be used for model comparison.

And the surrogate distribution will approach

the unknown posterior belief.

Remember, that was the goal of perception in the first place.

And once you reach to that, basically minimize your variational free energy, you can use the actual value of free energy as the metric, as a proxy for the unknown model evidence to compare different generative models together, right?

So the model with the lowest variational free energy is going to be the best model.

Yeah, I think I've explained that one.

Now,

Just to let you know that the true form of the posterior is unknown.

And you see that the terms like the probability distribution, the joint distribution here is not guaranteed that they're analytically simple to derive and work with.

Because of that, there is this idea that we can actually use Laplace approximation to break down each one of the distributions and basically approximate them using a Taylor expansion.

um particularly up to the third term which means that i'm providing a quadratic approximation using taylor expansion for each one of the components um within variational free energy um unfortunately i don't have the time to go over the detailed derivation but

Suffice it to say that the result of approximating all the components is that the variational free energy simplifies to this equation.

For those of you who are interested to know the details, I encourage you to look at the primer on variational Laplace paper, which is an amazing paper.

It goes through all the details of derivation.

So basically, free energy reduces to log of the joint distribution

and you have the posterior covariance, and then n is basically the number of parameters and the states that you have, and so on and so forth.

Now, predictive coding, this is basically where it gets even more interesting.

It is basically a hierarchical generative model that we're going to be using to model human perception.

And the goal is to invert this hierarchical model.

So it's a powerful framework to describe how the cortex accumulates evidence from noisy stimuli

It's an application of the free energy principle.

It focuses on how this literally fantastic organ can perform probabilistic inference about the most likely hidden cause that has caused the sensory signal.

It assumes that the brain has a generative model of the world through which it constantly infers the hidden states of the world, and it can also learn the parameters while inferring the hidden states of the world.

So model inversion happens by minimizing variational free energy.

Again, even though it's hierarchical, but the concept stays the same.

predictive coding we have this concept of top-down predictions where predictions go from inside out about your sensations right and then the prediction error is calculated like what i described before and then this these errors if i want to be more precise the precision weighted prediction errors are sent back from outside in or they call it bottom up

sort of direction, so that the estimations of the world, the estimation of the posterior beliefs about the world, are corrected, basically.

That's when model inversion happens, when the posterior estimates get adjusted.

And it looks like something like this, we have this hierarchical

model that we have the same story of state dynamics and observation model but here we have this happening at each level and then you notice that these news these causes are the ones that link layer i to i minus one that's the important part that without these news without these causes the layers cannot talk to each other you notice that it is a hierarchical dynamical system uh basically um

now how do we design an experiment um for you know for for this kind of perception neuromimetic modeling using the free energy principle i just want to give you the sort of ingredients here you the designer you first have to define your genital process that's x that's the true uh hidden states i should have maybe said x star yeah x star would have been a better notion

then you will generate the observations this is some sort of some transformation of the axis you can add noise to it you can transform it the way you want but that's going to be the observations that's going to hit the markov blanket this these are what this uh this is basically where the sensory state observes and receives those sensations

You have to define your generative model.

This part is the tricky part, right?

The Fs and Gs in your dynamical system, that's where everything gets really tricky.

How would you define them?

If it's hierarchical, how many layers should it have, basically?

These are the big questions.

You have to define the evaluation metric, that how would you define different generative models with each other.

And then you have to design the online state inference loop.

Now this is, by the way, just for this case, for this presentation, it's just about state inference.

And then you have to compare different generative models.

This is where Bayesian model comparison comes into play.

Now here, you basically use a dynamical system.

Here I'm just using a Lotka-Volterra process that captures the dynamics between a hunter and the prey together.

It's a two-dimensional sort of world, if you will.

So by solving the trajectories, by solving the differential equations, you get to this sort of trajectory.

So you have 1,000 data points here, each of which is two-dimensional.

So this is the unknown states of the world.

right this is the unknown dynamics of the world regenerative process again it's unknown it's beyond the markov blanket

Again, so this is the figure that we saw before.

Now you can assume that you've got the brain here and you've got degenerative process X star on the left-hand side.

The observations Y are basically a noisy version of the same hidden states that you notice that this is really noisy here, right?

So the brain has to receive that and then infer the true states here, right?

So for a one-layer predictive coding network for these particular experiments, you have just a simple sort of generative model, just one layer.

And then I'm sort of comparing two generative models here, where the flow of the state dynamics are different.

On the left-hand side, you have something that we call just a pullback attractor.

We have this 2x2 matrix here, and we have this sort of point of attraction, which assumes that everything collapses into this world.

Just to be clear, it means that my generative model of the world assumes that the world beyond the Markov blanket is attracted to a particular center called psi.

That's what I mean by believing something about the world.

Whereas the second flow, the second generative model,

it's a sinusoidal sort of belief it means that i believe there is something periodic about the world beyond my markov blanket and the g's i just kept them as identity which means that whatever new is is going to be my prediction about my sensation right so i kept the g's identical now the evaluation metric this is very important

as the inference is happening online for every observation you have to make an inference and then predict the sensation and then calculate the prediction error and then eventually calculate your variational free energy because it's happening online you can actually literally accumulate your free energy variation free energy across the entire inference period so at the end you will end up with one scalar value

It's called the time integral of your variational free energy.

They call it free action, right?

It's just a fancy way of summing up variational free energy across the entire inference period.

Basically, it's time integral.

and it is interestingly it's an upper bound to the accumulated surprise so variational free energy is an upper bound to surprise and um free action is an is an upper bound to the accumulated surprise because free action is in and out itself an accumulation of variational free energy

and this is you have to also then define the online state inference loop uh i don't want to go into too much detail here but um basically for each observation you will make predictions and you calculate prediction errors you calculate your free energy you calculate the gradient of free energy with respect to your estimations of the posterior that's the key part and then this is where you have to update your beliefs about the world

and it's you notice you notice that it's a differential equation because the way you're going to update your um your belief about the world it's continuous it happens in continuous time it means between each two observations y i and y i plus one i have to integrate over this update rule to move from my previous belief about the world mu x to a new mu x at the next time step

and that's why the integration happens here and just so you know this equation is basically saying that the amount by which i'm gonna change my belief about the world mu x is first of all the gradient of free energy with respect to mu x right that's typical gradient descent but the second term it serves as a momentum it means that if i'm gonna update my belief about where the world is i'm gonna

consider the velocity of the world as well right if i'm going to estimate the velocity of the world i'm going to consider the acceleration of the world as well it's similar to the idea of momentum in optimization algorithms this is the bit that helps you you know catch up with the chasing target that is the world that i talked about in the beginning

and then by you integrate this differential equation to update your belief about the world and then the next observation happens so this continues for all the observations and you're accumulating your free energy as time goes by and the result will be your your free action so the result is this so this is the first genitive model with the pullback attractor

So this is the inferred state, right?

And this is interesting.

This is the accumulated free action, right?

Very, very interesting.

You notice that free action is having these regular jumps.

It means...

periodically, I'm getting surprised about my sensations.

Remember that if you note here, this is where these nonlinearities happen.

It means that my simple pullback attractor fails to capture those dynamics, so it gets surprised.

But interestingly, where things are linear and simple, I'm not getting much surprise.

So it's almost constant here.

So I'm good at capturing simple dynamics, but not the ones that are highly nonlinear, whereas the sinusoidal one,

you notice that we are capturing the magnitudes much better.

We have a steady increase in free action.

We don't get surprised for some dynamics and less surprised for other dynamics.

We are always equally surprised for everything, which is interesting that here we are getting surprised consistently for everything.

but here we are not getting much surprise for these particular dynamics so one is good catch a good and capturing non-linear dynamics periodic dynamics the other one is better in capturing simpler linear dynamics which is interesting and notice that the reaction here is much lower than the free action here so basically this means that this model is much better

looking at the gen the generative power of these uh gm's so this is the g function if you remember g of x and mu that's the prediction of your one layer predictive coding network about the sensation that's the bit that gets compared with the true sensation and the prediction error is calculated remember that observations just like hidden states are two-dimensional so this is the first dimension of why the true sensation and why had the

predicted sensation, you notice that they're almost close.

And also with the second dimension, it's not doing a bad job, right?

But for the second generative model, again, it's doing a much better job in capturing the magnitudes of the system.

Again, you'll notice that it's not so good in generating these bits, whereas the first model is better in generating more accurate predictions of the first type.

these are the results the pullback attractor and trigonometric the sinusoidal sort of flow you notice that the free action of the second model is lower it's better and mse loss which basically compare compares the estimated x and the true x the inferred x and true x together is also slightly lower so free action shows that

The second model is good.

And this is where Bayesian model comparison comes into play, where we use Bayes factor for comparison.

It basically says that we take the model evidence for each one of the models and we divide them.

Now, because these are intractable, we are using free action as a proxy.

And when you put the values of free action, you get to this value.

because it's higher than one it basically means that you have to pick the second model because it has a lower free action it doesn't get as surprised as the first one and at some point of caution free action versus mse mse as a measure of accuracy should never

and I repeat, never be consulted on its own because it ignores complexity.

So, for example, what if the free action of Model 1 and Model 2, the Model 1 had a lower free action, but what if the MSE of the first model was actually higher than the second model?

Which one would you choose?

Again, you have to choose Model 1 because this has higher power of generalizability to the unseen data.

so it has less chances of overfitting to the data.

We call that free action again as complexity minus accuracy.

So what if we remove complexity?

Again, we will overfit.

So that was important.

Some final thoughts.

You can definitely learn the parameters and also estimate uncertainty about the world.

So these are the things that are not covered in this presentation, but you can do that.

This is where the separation of time scales will come into play.

The DEM algorithm does exactly that.

This is dynamic expectation maximization.

I encourage you guys to take a look at that algorithm.

Using that, you can solve the triple estimation problem.

Now, can I go beyond x dot?

Yes, you can.

That's where you jump into the world of the generalized coordinates of motion, where you're not only estimating x dot, but you're also estimating higher temporal derivatives of the world.

You have a system of coupled differential equations rather than having just two equations, which is very, very interesting, actually.

Also, remember that active inference is not the same as predictive coding.

Particularly in the philosophy communities, I've heard that people use active inference when they're talking about predictive coding.

Remember that in predictive coding, we are simply making sense of the world.

There is no concept of planning or action in play.

The ML community, unfortunately, does not work with the dynamics of the world and AI basically is going to the opposite direction.

Instead of using smart data, we are just going bigger and bigger data.

So we would like a world that ChatGPT would also ask you a question and becomes curious about you to receive information that it selects, basically.

So where should you start with, uh, with the free energy principle?

These are the resources that I strongly recommend you some videos on YouTube.

Hopefully you can later on, pause this video and go through these links, some papers that I'm recommending here.

And the last one, the two books that I believe the red one, the predictive minus for philosophy community.

And the first one goes through the math extensively.

It's a beautiful book.

And the videos, I recommend that you guys start with the videos in the first place.

And I would like to just acknowledge our funding from the Marie Curie and also my colleagues Simon Urbas and Professor Friston, and also acknowledge the folks at UCL, UCD, and Monash University who have always supported our work.

And here's the link to the code that everybody can just take a look and run.

The README file is self-explanatory.

Unfortunately, I ran out of time, and I won't be able to show a demo.

But yeah, that's it.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Mehran.

That was great.

And we have 10 minutes if you want to show anything, or I can ask some questions.

But we have till five minutes after if you want to show anything, or even just scanning the repo could be cool.

okay sure sure sure that's great thank you for that but just wanted to comment your your educational materials and the youtube channel are great and and they are they're an excellent supplement to the textbook and to the math learning


SPEAKER_00:
I appreciate that.

Yes, absolutely.

So yeah, I also have a YouTube channel, ML Don.

Feel free to take a look.

I'm actually reading the active inference book on that channel, so hopefully it would be of interest to you guys.

And this is the repository that is publicly available.

The README file is pretty self-explanatory.

And this is just a one-layer predictive coding network for the task of inference and modeling human perception as a task of inference.

These are the same plots that you've seen.

So basically, all the functions are here.

Everything you need is here.

So the main function is the one that you're going to be dealing with.

And this YAML file is where you actually choose the parameters.

of your experiment.

Just to show you in action what it looks like.

So if you actually clone this repository on your machine, you just have to go to the YAML file and just do a quick scan of the README file.

But basically, this is where you define your generative process.

For example, you can say I want it to be a Lotka-Volterra process.

And this is how I'm going to be picking the DT and the total time to actually solve the trajectories of my generative process.

You can define your generative model here.

You can define the dynamics to be like a pullback attractor or a trigonometric one.

The likelihood, for example, is identity here.

These are the dimensions of your x and y, 2 and 1.

You might wonder why it's 2 for x. It's because you have x and x dot together, where the world is and how fast the world is changing.

And this is just y in your generative model.

you can increase them that's where you jump into the world of generalized coordinates of motion but this is beyond the scope of my talk today again this these bits are beyond the scope of our talk today this is where you basically talk about the correlation between the noise process across different levels of the generalized coordinates so the noise on the velocity how does it correlate with the noise process on the acceleration your belief about the acceleration of the world

So how do they interact with one another?

That's where these values come into play.

And then this is the kind of noise that you will use to alter the true states of the world and generate your observations.

For example, you can use a colored noise here.

You define the mean and basically the standard deviation of noise.

And we're using the sort of kernel here that convolves with the white noise to actually generate a more smooth

noise.

The reason being that all the signals that you work with in biological and organic systems are believed to have been generated by some sort of dynamics.

That's why we keep them as smooth noises, infinitely differentiable noises rather than just white noise.

And if you actually run this, so this is basically a pullback attractive.

This is the first sort of generative model that we worked in.

So you just run this main function.

So we have 1000 observations, noisy observations, right?

And immediately this happens.

So for every 10 observations, we are accumulating free action.

You notice that free action is ever increasing because it just accumulates free energy.

And on the right hand side, you have VFE or variational free energy.

Again, if you look at the definitions inside the functions folder of how we calculate or compute the variation of free energy, you notice that it's a far more simplified version of what you would see about free energies because everything is under Laplace approximation.

And you end up with far more simpler terms.

And the final result is reaction is this much.

And basically your final MSE loss is 0.53.

And if you want to see the final output, you just have to go into the results folder.

And these are the folders that are generated.

that you have two dimensions in x one dimension and y lotka volterra is a general process for example degenerative model follows a pullback attractor scheme and then your g is just identity this is your free action and then that is your mse loss and if you open it all the plots that i showed you in the presentation are saved as pdf here just to give you an idea like this is your x this is your true invisible

states of the world, right?

And if you want to look at X hat, this is the inferred states of the world.

And these are, for example, the noisy observations of the world.

Yeah.

So I hope that the repository would be of help and of interest to all of you.

Thank you very much.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

What kinds of problems or settings do you feel that this could be adapted to or useful for?


SPEAKER_00:
I would say, first and foremost, this could be used for... Basically, it's all about any kind of problem that's about inference.

You have some noisy observations that you want to infer the hidden state, but in terms of adaptability, you can build on that by introducing parameter learning as well as uncertainty estimation.

So our goal is to

develop this into a triple estimation sort of package predictive coding network and add more layers to it so to have a hierarchical predictive coding capable of solving the triple estimation problem yeah that's the ultimate thing that you can actually adapt this to cool um


SPEAKER_01:
What are you excited about for ML Dawn or for your learning or research in next year?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm very much excited in embedding these kinds of calculations into the world of AI, because as I said, AI is moving, in my opinion, and my humble opinion is moving towards the wrong direction.

Instead of bombarding models with all sorts of data, the model should be able to choose its data.

So I'm very excited in developing this framework into a hierarchical predictive coding network, and then

sort of compare the performance of such a model with other traditional AI-based generative models and basically show its superiority that I believe it has in different scenarios.

And ultimately, this model is going to be used for, in my grand proposal, in the project I'm working on, it's going to be used for modeling hallucinations as a kind of false inference about the world.

And it's going to be used as a proxy for us to understand what happens in neuropsychiatric disorders when people actually suffer from hallucinations in the brain.

So this predictive coding network is going to be a brain-inspired AI model for us to understand what goes wrong in the skull of a human being when they suffer from hallucinations about the world.

So that's what I'm really, really excited about and really hoping to achieve.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

It's like inspired by the brain for the brain.


SPEAKER_00:
Absolutely.

Thank you, Mehran.


SPEAKER_01:
Great presentation and good luck with the continuation of the work.


SPEAKER_00:
Appreciate it.

Thank you for having me.

Okay.

Till next time.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess02

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, we're back and with Dmitry Begayev and the RxInfer developers and community.

So thank you for letting us peek and join into your meeting.

Really appreciative for all the collaboration and learning that we've had with RxInfer this year and looking forward to your updates.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks for having us.

Yes, so yeah, usually we have update meetings about the development for Ericsson FIR, but since we have now active entrance symposium and we also have new PhD students in our lab, I decided to make it a bit special and today we... So I will briefly introduce Ericsson FIR again for people who are not familiar maybe a bit and then we will discuss actual recent developments.

And it's just basically an open discussion, right?

You can stop me at any moment with some questions.

I unfortunately don't see YouTube.

So if there are some questions on YouTube, just stop me and we'll discuss.

So, okay.

So RxInfer is a library for scalable probabilistic programming, right?

But what is probabilistic programming by itself?

And let's mention we want to build an agent like a drone, right?

And we want to build a program for it and write some code.

And usually what we do is we take some data and we feed it into our algorithm and we get the result.

For example, we find the path, right?

But in reality, it's much more complicated because we don't really have precise data, precise measurements of our sensors.

Or maybe we have some wind outside, so our formula is not really correct in these conditions.

And basically, we don't have exact values, but we have some uncertainty around our parameters.

And how do we actually compute the result given the uncertainty around the parameters?

That's the first question.

But more interesting question is actually the backwards question.

So given the observations,

of our path for our agent, what were the conditions under which it has been operating.

And usually it's also circling around certainties.

And in the context of active inference, we can go even further.

So we can say, okay, given the desired observations, like given what we want to see, what actions we actually should take.

given that we don't also know the conditions under which we operate.

So this is what essentially probabilistic programming is about.

And it's very challenging, but good news is that we have the solution for it.

We already have it.

We know how to solve it.

And this is the formula that solves everything essentially.

And this is the Bayes rule.

And it looks pretty simple, right?

It's just like one multiplication, not a big deal.

But it turns out that this formula is really, really challenging.

It's extremely challenging to apply in a real situation.

And why is that?

Well, okay, I can demonstrate why.

If we have a simple program with not a lot of parameters, this formula indeed is quite simple.

So you can actually solve it on a piece of paper and you will get the exact result and it's all fine.

But in real situations, we actually have much more parameters and this formula, it explodes pretty quickly.

And as soon as you add more parameters to your model,

you realize that it's no longer feasible to solve it on a piece of paper.

Actually, you need to write like an entire article about how to solve it for like some specific case.

But we want even more, right?

So we want to not just have parameters, but we want to have some constraints in our system.

Like, for example, physical constraints, like maybe we have an engine power constraint and like,

We have some trees around in the environment.

So when we deal with such a complex system, the math behind is just, you cannot even comprehend it at this point.

And actually, in my opinion, this is a very big problem in the Active Influence community in general, is that math is pretty difficult to read and to double check and to implement.

Usually in articles, we have a lot of formulas and they work in theory, but as soon as we start implementing it, we make mistakes.

Our programs, they have bugs and then it just takes a lot of time to iterate through that.

But ideally, we don't even want to think about it, right?

We want to design an agent and all of this map

under the hood is known, so the space.

And what we want to do is we want to have as many components as we want.

We want to press a button and we want to compile this map, we want to test the port and just deploy it.

And it should result in a robust system that makes reasonable actions under uncertainty in unpredictable environments.

And if you think that's too much to ask,

I would actually draw an analogy with just the regular programming.

So we now talking about probabilistic programming, but regular programming also started or has the same path.

So in the beginning, like a bunch of high level professionals, PhDs, they were designing the very, very first algorithms.

And it was error prone.

They spent months designing a very simple program, spent months designing a computer.

But nowadays, every student or even in schools, you can just download Python and write simple programs.

You don't need to think about how computers work.

You just express your ideas in some sort of a high-level programming language.

and compiler does the heavy lifting for you.

So essentially what we want to achieve here is to have a language for solving probabilistic programming, right?

And you don't have to think about math.

You only want to think about your application.

You want to design your drone or maybe it's a vacuum cleaner or maybe something even more complex.


SPEAKER_03:
Any questions so far?

Maybe from YouTube?


SPEAKER_00:
Not yet.

Thank you, though.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So this is kind of the... But how do we approach it?

How can we approach it?

And in a sense, there are a lot of similar projects in various programming languages as well, and they try to solve the same problem in slightly different ways.

and given that even in this slide there are eight solutions but in reality there are more why do we need a new one why did we decide to write a recent firm where there are so many solutions already developing well the idea here is that for autonomous agents we have a pretty unique set of requirements so if we want to operate in real world

We want to have a very big program because a program of a real world is quite complicated, has a lot of parameters, so it should scale.

It also should be low power because our autonomous agents, they usually operate on battery and you don't really want to have an empty battery soon.

So it should preserve energy in the most efficient way.

It should be able to adapt to changes in the environment, because the real environment is chaotic.

It may change, maybe you didn't account for something in your model, so you should be able to change the model on the fly.

It should work in real time, should be as efficient as possible in terms of performance, and it also must be robust.

So we basically are not allowed to stop our computation,

it should run and should react to the circumstances.

And this is what ARIS Infer is essentially about and what it tries to achieve.

And in order to achieve this, it combines these three main ideas, also in the literature, factor graphs, variational inference, and reactive message passing.

So these are the three key elements

to then we basically try to understand here if we combine them, can we have these properties that I mentioned?

And so to talk a little bit about each of them.

So a factor graph is essentially a graph representation of a probabilistic model.

And a good thing about factor graphs is that they are explainable and they're not a black box.

So we can clearly see the structure of the model and dependencies in different parameters or hidden states and also observations.

And it's also modular, local, we can reuse certain pieces and we can write specialized computations for certain pieces.

So in RxInfer, we have a special language to write such programs.

So I've got this atModel macro that takes the textual description of a probabilistic model and basically creates a factor graph under it.

So a user should not create those graphs by hand and it doesn't automate.

And we can also create submodules, submodules

and we can reuse them in a bigger context.

And as I mentioned, we can, for example, do some local optimizations in our model because we clearly know the structure of it.

So variation inference, I assume that most of you may be familiar, but for most of you who are not, that's basically an optimization procedure that approximates basically

So Bayes' rule in many situations is very challenging to solve directly.

So variational inference is a very clever technique to trade off accuracy and maybe solve the task a bit easier at the cost of accuracy.

And also it's faster because you don't have to solve the original problem exactly.

So the formula actually looks a bit more complex than

base rule itself.

But yeah, the math is sometimes strange.

And in practice, it's actually easier to solve this problem than the original math.

So instead of solving the base rule directly, we approximate the result with a simpler set of distributions from exponential family results, for example, which makes it simple.

And we have also language for constraints for the variation

So sometimes we want to make a mean field over our hidden states, and maybe for some specific states want to be a Gaussian.

So a user also can specify different constraints for different procedure.

And the last thing in our recipe is reactive message passing, which is a central part of the project.

Each message carries a small piece of information required to solve this very complex math behind the inference procedure.

And essentially, in traditional message passing algorithms, they require a fixed global schedule, which has a lot of downsides.

And in a recent ,, we allow messages to flow asynchronously.

And each node in the graph simply reacts on changes

anything in the neighborhood can recompense the result locally.

And it's more robust because if part of the system doesn't work, we simply stop reacting.

But also it, in principle, supports variable update rates for different variables.

For example, audio signals, they may update at a higher rate than videos.

Do we have any questions so far?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I can ask one now and you could go for it or address it later.

Arun asked, what has been the biggest challenge building Rx and Fur so far?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, that's a very good question.

So the biggest challenge, I may say that, as I mentioned, the math behind all of it is quite complex.

But the implementation side is also complex.

So in order to build such a system, you need an expertise in both.

You need to understand both math and high-level programming to make it efficient.

So the combination of both of these elements is, I would say, unique.

And without understanding one or another, it's basically impossible to build such a system.


SPEAKER_03:
Any other questions?

Okay.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So basically to write the probabilistic program, we need to specify our model or a program, if you would like.

We need to specify our variational distribution and we also need to specify how do we compute posteriors.

So we can define models in our package.

we can define variational distributions.

And for the minimization, we use free energy minimization.

Variational free energy minimization is just a single call to information that combines both model and constraints and runs the algorithm.

And it supports both static data sets, but as I mentioned, the whole idea about recent various reactivity, and it also accepts reactive streams of data sets from external sources.

And this is basically, we believe that these three key elements, they do have properties, which I mentioned earlier, and they do allow us to implement all of those.

And RxInfer is free.

It's available on GitHub.

We have a website, we have a documentation.

We also presented various conferences and also on YouTube.

So yeah, you are

we invite you to check it out essentially and see yeah what it can do for you uh yeah so if you have any other questions right now we can uh no because we just had their questions but again yeah free free to um stop me at any moment so uh okay but the question is uh does it actually work

So I had this example of the drone.

And basically, if we want to implement the drone in ARIS Infer, we define the dynamics of the drone, how, for example, different parameters should influence its position and velocity and speed.

And then we define a model in ARIS Infer.

And then basically we create an environment for it and see how the drone would infer the action

given its current state and the goal, right?

So in this experiment, our drone is instructed to fly to the red dot and it actively tries to infer its current position and the trajectory that it needs to take to reach the goal.

And also on the bottom side of the screen, you see that we change the parameters of the world and also the parameters of the drone reactively.

And yeah, the system still operates.

And actually, to be honest, it was much more difficult to create the environment for this drone than the drone itself.

So Arikson first simplified this task, but the environment was still a challenge.

But for that, we also work on a solution, which is called Arikson Environments, which essentially would also hide all of this complexity of building environments for different engines.

And we also, we have a set of other examples, both for static data sets or proactive data sets.

Yeah, just feel free to check out our documentation.

And yeah, we have reproduced many interesting Bayesian inference tasks with a good performance and scalability.

So we are obviously not solving all problems in this world, but the set of possibilities is really,

Other questions?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'll ask a few from the chat.

So Discovery Block wrote for the drone, would RxInfer be able to manage actual image input to infer the position or velocity of the drone instead of assuming the observation corresponds to real values with random error?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, it's a good question.

Not out of the box.

It depends on your model.

So in principle, it's possible to design a model that would process images, but we didn't try that.

So Bataris Infer by itself is indifferent on the input.

So the problem with images as input is that they're pretty high dimensional.

And since RxInfer works on distributions, this image must be processed as a distribution.

So this might be quite challenging in practice.


SPEAKER_00:
But that's a direction to go with the composition of these systems.

So the drone kernel could be designed with an app model taking in beliefs about position or about other features.

And then hypothetically, like in RxInfer or alternative approach to image processing could be brought in and concatenated and used.

And then the kernel belief would remain the same.


SPEAKER_04:
Exactly, yes, you are correct.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, and one more question from Frasier.

What is the largest remaining theoretical difficulty with this approach, real-time inference, universal inference?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, it's a good question.

So the limitations, we will talk actually a little bit about it in the current developments, but I can already in that indeed universal inference is quite difficult.

Because in order to execute the inference procedure, we need to compute messages.

And we can compute them in many situations, but in many situations, it is still way too challenging.

And we are actively working on that.

But yeah, message computation is one of the main challenging components still.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And one last question.

Bert and Arun both asked, have you considered hierarchical or nested models or any of the renormalization type models we've been exploring?


SPEAKER_04:
Great question.

Yes, we did.

And actually, last year, we implemented completely the language that we use for models to support hierarchical models.

And this is one of the directions that we are approaching currently in VICE Lab as well to support more complex hierarchical models and also recent developments in Artif and Print literature.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Questions?

No, no, no.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, these are really good questions, but we can continue.

So what about our current development?

I will talk about two and then I will give a stage to Walter.

So we have an external collaboration with Active Inference Institute about graph visualization that takes the textual description of the model and actually displays the graph.

So we have

data structure for the graph, but we don't have a function that would create a nice PNG out of it, like a feature.

And we have an ongoing project to the universal inference, essentially, to support more models.

So for graph visualization, as I mentioned, it's an external collaboration and it goes really well.

So we have an open pull request.

And for example, for this simple model, for a simple point model, I can generate this nice graph that will show the dependencies between variables in this model.

And I can also generate more complex models or graphs for more complex structures.

And we have also Fraser and Chris joined.


SPEAKER_01:
meeting so if you fraser or chris you want to talk uh something uh here you can yeah you can do that yeah i'll just can anyone can everyone hear me is that uh is this coming yes yes uh yeah just really quickly so i'm i'm fraser i'm the guy in the top right bubble there

So along with Chris and Kobus Esterhuisen, we have a project effectively at the Active Inference Institute, as Dimitri said, in collaboration with the BIOS Lab to visualize these models, to be able to get some handle on what they look like, and ultimately to be able to even debug where certain messages are and where issues are with respect to actual message computations.

There's a page essentially at the, I could show where this is, but there's a very publicly available page where you can kind of see our progress, track what's happening, and even reach out to join us and collaborate where you will.

So it's very much open for collaborators and participation.

Absolutely.

Chris, is there anything you'd like to say?


SPEAKER_03:
Nope, I think you covered it all.

Thank you.

Excellent.

Back to you, Dimitri.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Chris.

If you don't want to add anything, we can just continue.

Please continue.

OK, that's great.

Thanks.

And thanks for your effort, by the way.

This is a really cool stuff.

So I was playing with to prepare for the presentation.

And it essentially just works.

So there are some, yeah, I suggested some improvement.

But yeah, I think it's all good, even in the current stage.

And also, for example, other probabilistic programming libraries in Python, for example, they do similar approach in their modeling and also how they display models.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So the next thing that I want to talk about is universal inference essentially and we already had a question about it.

So suppose we have this model that essentially tells us that we have observations y that are coming from a Gaussian and the mean of this Gaussian is modeled as a beta distribution and y beta is because the variable that is modeled as

So basically, I say here that my observations are constrained from zero to one.

And I also say that the precision of my observations is an exponent of r and r is also from zero to one.

So essentially, it's a pretty simple model at a glance.

But the reality is that this is an extremely challenging model for message passing.

because the messages that we need to compute are not easy to compute.

And the problem is that the result of those computations is essentially a bad distribution.

So it has a very strange form.

that is not parametric or cannot be easily described as a parametric distribution.

So we can also always describe those distributions as a set of samples, but drawing a set of samples is costly and is essentially very difficult to make it real time.

So the idea here is that, okay, we want a nice distribution and you play a parametric and it's usually from exponential family.

And the question is here, OK, how to find this best approximation?

And essentially, Ericsson-Ferrer supports algorithms or approximations that will allow you to specify how you would like to find those approximations.

And one of the recent algorithms is projections.

is a very very new feature so what we can do is we can specify or instruct that it's inferred to use the projection algorithm to beta or to other distributions from exponential memory and it also works around deterministic nodes or just for individual variables and if we combine these specifications so it's a little bit more complex than the original example but even this specification we can solve

inference in this model.

And the result is pretty good.

So here I just display, yeah, generated some data set and I tried to infer the parameters back.

So as I mentioned in the very, very beginning, we have a set of observations and I want to know the parameters with which those observations were generated.

And you can see that

The inferred or projected distributions, they're extremely close to the ones that I used to actually generate the dataset.

And it scales pretty well comparing to other probabilistic programming libraries.

So here on the left side, bottom left side, that's which uses a sampling and takes up to three times more.

Yeah.

real execution time to do this task.

And on the bottom part, we have automatic differentiation variational inference algorithm, which is busted.

But we basically, because it's a new feature, we still try to improve the performance and the performance is not ideal at the moment.

And we already know how to improve it.

Essentially, we have a PhD student that works on this program and it goes really well and

like around a week ago, we had yet a better performance, which is not reflected on this slide, but since it's like just last week, we didn't have to really time to investigate properly.


SPEAKER_03:
Any questions so far?

Well, it's, I mean, a nurse stands for nurse photo system.


SPEAKER_04:
not say it's something like no U-turn sampler.

And U-turn is a term that they use to describe their algorithm.

But yeah, it stands for no U-turn sampler.

It's practically, as far as I understand, one of the best samplers right now to draw from a non-normalized distribution.

And those timings, by the way, so we implement the recent pair in Julia, and those timings are from a different library, also written in Julia.

So these timings are from tubing.

Okay, so we have also, we had already a question about generalizing influx in bit models.

And here I will give a stage to Walter, now.

Hello, everyone.


SPEAKER_02:
My name is Arthur.

I'm also a PhD student in BIAS lab, and I'm going to have a short discussion about generalized inference in discrete models.

So in active inference, we really like to work with POMDPs, partially observable Markov decision processes.

And the simple POMDP or the vanilla POMDP, you can see on the slide.

So we have a joint distribution over states observation and transition matrices.

And we see that we have transition distributions both for the observation model and the state transition distribution.

So both this observation distribution and this transition distribution, they're both categorical transition distributions, but they're slightly different, right?

Because the observation model just depends on one categorical distribution or categorical variable, only the state.

whereas the transition model depends on both the state and the control.

So if we draw the factor graph representation of both these nodes, you can see that they're extremely similar, but they're slightly different.

Now, if we want to go towards this generalized inference, there are two things we can do.

The first is

We just implement this new node, this two categoricals in, one categorical out, and we can just be done with it.

And we could do control in discrete environments, but it wouldn't be very general.

And since these transition distributions are very similar, their functional forms are very similar, the inference rules are also very similar.

So what I'm investigating right now is how we can generalize this inference

in these discrete models such that we can have an arbitrary number of categoricals coming in and transition to a categorical variable coming out.

So this would give us a general contingency tables or general discrete categorical transition distributions in RxInfer.

There are some problems with this because this B matrix,

has a rank which is proportional to the amount of categorical interfaces.

So for the observation model, we just have a transition matrix.

But if we want to do discrete control, then we already have a transition tensor, which maps states and controls to new states.

Currently in ARX and FER, we only support these rank one or rank two Dirichlet distributions.

So this is something that we're working on right now to generalize this inference.

So what we are currently doing is together with Rafael, we are working to replace the rank one, rank two, matrix Dirichlet implementation in RxInferred with a general arbitrary rank tensor implementation.

The working name for now is a multi-Dirichlet.

We're very much open to suggestions.

I am currently deriving rules for this general transition node,

So Thais already in his dissertation has the rules for the rank one and rank two, ten factors and matrices, and I generalize them to arbitrary rank tensors.

And then I will make this new transition node, which takes an arbitrary number of interfaces.

So what can we do with this?

With this, we can do control in discrete models.

So you can see on this slide that we have an agent which is navigating a base.

And this is the type of stuff that will be possible with the generalized inference in discrete models, because we will have categorical states coming in with categorical controls coming in and a categorical state coming out of this.

So we would be able to go towards building agents in discrete environments with discrete controls.

So we can go ahead and solve public peace as soon as we're done with this.

Thanks, Valter.


SPEAKER_04:
And here it is.

Here's the entire presentation that gives an idea of what our extender project is about and what we are currently trying to develop.

And yeah, maybe we were a bit too fast, but we have plenty of time for discussions.


SPEAKER_03:
Do I have more questions online, or?


SPEAKER_00:
Razor, if you want to ask your question directly.


SPEAKER_01:
He has one, but he's also in the comments.

Yeah, just, I was interested, I'm relative, I'm very, very interested, I did mathematics and computer science for my actual degree, very interested in the mathematics of the generalized inference and node constraints and all of that.

To what extent does message passing per se, the process of message passing, to what extent does that influence issues around non-conjugate inference?

Is it effectively kind of only dependent on the content of the messages?

Or does the actual process of message passing have some kind of non-trivial effect on the resulting inference?

I'm just curious about that.


SPEAKER_04:
So the problem with non-conjugate inference in message passing lies in the fact that in order to compute a message, we need to compute an integral.

And in general, computing an integral is not possible on a computer.

I'm talking about indefinite integrals that have no boundaries.

So for an integral that has a boundary from A to B,

say you multiply integral from A to B, you can decompose it into regions and then solve this integral numerically.

But for unbounded integrals that take from minus infinity to infinity, basically it is impossible, right?

Because we have a finite memory of computers and you can always create a counter example where it doesn't work.

And it's even worse in

in multidimensional spaces, so-called cursive dimensionality.

And this is why people are coming with many clever methods to take those integrals via sampling.

So sampling is essentially an algorithm to take an integral.

So with non-conjugate inference... So let me phrase it the other way around.

So with conjugate inference,

Those integrals, they can actually be simplified to an exact formula.

So you don't really need to solve the original integral.

You solve a much simpler problem because you can rearrange some terms and something just cancels out and you get the exact answer.

If it's not conjugate inference, you cannot do that in general.

So you need to actually solve this integral.

And here is why you need those approximation methods like sampling or projection, which essentially try to solve this problem, but at the cost of accuracy, because we cannot afford infinite memory in our computer.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

I see.

So if I just try and... So it effectively boils down to clever ways to compute integrals in ways that it's not going to take too long.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
exactly exactly and you you also have to remember about dimensionality of your problems so for example as i mentioned one of the recent developments that we just uh included in our extent firm would allow you to project a high dimensional gaussian distributions uh

Because before, so a Gaussian distribution can be described with its mean and its covariance matrix.

So, which means that for high dimensional Gaussian distribution, the covariance matrix is quite large, so it grows.

And we recently added a simplified version of a Gaussian that doesn't store the entire covariance matrix, but only the diagonal of it and only

the same elements on the entire diagonal.

So the number of parameters is essentially linear to the dimensionality and it scales much, much better and it allows you to yet again solve bigger problems.

Yeah.

In general, this is a quite difficult problem.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll ask a couple questions from live chat, if that's okay.

Okay.

Okay.

Arun asked, is RxInfer being used in production right now?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, we actually have been contacted in the past.

Yes.

I'm not, I'm not aware of any company actively using it.

We actually, we have a spin out from a technical university of mind that we, yeah, we founded the startup.

from BIOSLAB group, which is called Lazy Dynamics, which the entire idea is to commercialize Ericsson-Ferrer to make it a professional toolbox with really good support.

I mean, it's always going to be free for research, but Lazy Dynamics will create nice tools around Ericsson-Ferrer to make the process of creating models easier,

making process of deploying those models easier, debugging models easier, but essentially RxInfer is free and perhaps someone is already using it in production, but we may not know it.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, great.

Okay, next question from Dean tickles.

He wrote, Do your rules self organize?

Or do they remain constant?

Does the rule recognize its own limits of applicability and adjust accordingly?

I'm just wondering if these rules can morph into heuristics.


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, you were glitching a bit.

Can you repeat the question?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Do your rules self-organize or do they remain constant?

Does the rule recognize its own limits of applicability and adjust accordingly?

I'm just wondering if these rules can morph into heuristics.


SPEAKER_04:
No, like message passing, if the question is about message passing update rules, they work independently.

And this is also one of the main ideas of this approach is to not have any sort of global variables.

And yeah, the graph is essentially each message is unaware of any other message or computations such that we can run them asynchronously and do not have any sort of shuttling mechanism

they should cooperate awesome okay next question from bert he wrote is it possible to add a deep learning encoder and train it using messages yeah we actually have i think we have an example in documentation where we use a neural network and we also use the normalizing flows inside ericsson fair so yeah that's definitely

We also have an example where we use differential equations to infer parameters of differential equations.


SPEAKER_03:
Maybe questions from UP students about the approach?

No?

Okay, that's good.


SPEAKER_00:
What do you all usually do in the meetings?

How does it go and how are you going to be taking things in the coming months?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, we already discussed the recent developments and already showed that.

We do exactly that.

We go through the current developments and we try to see what we can do next.

So maybe here, if someone in the chat

I would just post what, for example, they want to do, right?

Like what kind of applications they try to solve with Active Inference that would help us also to change our agenda.

Because we have some certain things in our agenda, so we want to continue with graph visualizations.

For example, in the current version,

We don't have constraints visualization, but constraints are pretty important for the inference.

So this is the next step in our agenda to also implement constraints visualization.

We also have non-conjugate posterior computation in our agenda, generalized inference in our agenda.

But for example, people can also comment on their uses.

Or they can also, for example, open a recent GitHub repository and open discussions, right?

So maybe not right now.

Maybe if someone watches this recording, or maybe someone who is online but still don't have a concrete example, you can always go to GitHub.

open discussions and just drop your ideas there and we can discuss and maybe we adjust our goals of the project together.

And we are also looking for collaborators.

Again, Fraser and Chris were super helpful.

Thanks.

But if more people want to collaborate, it's an open project.

You can always just join the organization on GitHub and drop your ideas and collaborate.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Also, I wanted to highlight Kobus's examples at Learnable Loop and also the documentation that you all maintain.

And just looking back at our meeting notes from the beginning of the year and looking at the version history of RxInfer.

It's something really new.

It's really been one of the highlights of the year and seeing how it's all developing and a coin tossed.

I mean, never has such a simple, seemingly simple statistical situation been such an amazing learning experience.

opening and it's just exciting to see how the examples start to flow in and then those are useful for learning and they're also useful for training code models and the

the the paradigm difference with rx infer which i think you very quickly move through with the app model declaration and reactive message passing is is really distinct from the script-like flow of essentially all other active implementations

So it's just really exciting to see.

And also that this isn't just about action perception modeling.

We also see in the examples more conventional statistical models.

So that helps bring continuity between the joint distributional modeling of active inference and all of these more standard statistical problems.


SPEAKER_04:
I also noticed that

because I stopped presenting, I had the chat on YouTube and I see a question, what's the best way to get started with the hiring sector?

And I think the best way to get started is to go to the documentation that is in the page that is called Getting Started.

But yeah, so basically to start with the documentation that goes through the process of installing the library, writing your first models,

And then we have also a big collection of examples.

As I already mentioned, maybe some of the applications you can already find here.

We have also examples about active inference, but not only.

So this global parameters utilization uses neural network under the hood.

So with LSTM-driven dynamics,

Something is broken.

We need to open the issue back.

But basically, this example uses Bayesian neural network to train parameters and then later on use it.

And we have also external examples from Cobus.

We have also a series of tutorials on RxInfer on YouTube from toko.jl.

uh from theory point of view i really like the book that is called uh model-based machine learning which only by john win so this is a also a very good starting point it also explains the concept of uh yeah factor graphs stochastic nodes deterministic nodes the run inference but also it it explains the concept of running

inference, essentially.


SPEAKER_03:
I have a question, actually.

So the project of no conjugate posterior computation, I mean, it sounds similar to the variational inference.


SPEAKER_04:
How is that graded?

So variational inference is a very, very good question.

So variational inference indeed reframes the original problem.

as an optimization problem and you can solve it as a black box indeed.

So you parameterize your distribution, you take gradients and you do a simple optimization problem.

And actually it does already solve many problems.

But in our recent case, we actually do not treat models as black boxes.

We decompose those computations in a series of smaller computations

which in a sense helps us because we don't need to run this big global optimization procedure.

But in the result of this decomposition, this individual computations messages, they still may be difficult.

And this projection algorithm is indeed sort of a variational inference, but at a smaller scale.

Okay.

Yeah.

But what you maybe referred to, I can also refer to this ATDI algorithm that they also showed in my slides, automatic differentiation variational inference, which takes the entire model as a black box that just differentiates through it.

And yeah, it doesn't care about contribution.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you for this.

Any last short comments from any of the RxInferred team?

okay thank you again for for letting us kind of wander into your lab meeting and really looking forward to the collaborations that will continue okay yeah thank you thank you again for inviting us uh and yeah we are looking forward all right until next time bye

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess03

SPEAKER_02:
Hello, we're back with Samuel Nehrer, Jonathan Larsen, and Peter Wade discussing ActiveInference.jl, staying with the ActiveInference plus Julia theme.

Thank you all for coming on and sharing this work.

So looking forward to it.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, everyone.

It is a pleasure to be here.

So like Daniel said, we'll present on

a new package for doing active inference simulations, but also for applying it to data in Julia.

And we will leave time for questions at some moments during the presentation, and then some time in the end.

Additionally, we're three people, because we've been working on this together, so we'll alternate a little bit with the setting.

All right, let's record.

So first, it's nice just to mention who we are.

So we're all at Aarhus University.

I'm a PhD candidate and Sami and Jonathan are students who have been working on developing this package with me.

And we all come from computational cognitive science, specifically called cognitive modeling, where you model behavior in computational models.

And of course, within that specifically, predictive processing models, including active inference models.

And that's why we made this package.

And we use this in the context of computational psychiatry for clinical questions and also more broadly for just modeling behavior.

And this package is part of a somewhat larger project of developing software for these kinds of research questions in Julia.

And I'll start with just giving a brush up on what cognitive

modeling is in general, so some members of the audience might be familiar with this, but others might not.

Just to set the stage for an introduction to ActiveInference, you all have seen this before, so we'll go through it briefly, but it's nice to have this on our fingertips.

Then we get to the meat of the matter, which is, of course, how to do this specifically in code with ActiveInference.jl, both simulating behavior and also fitting it to data.

And finally, if there's time, we have some applications and some future work that we'll be happy to spend some time.

We might skip that as well.

All right.

Cognitive modeling or computational cognitive modeling comes out of psychology, comes to science where the main question in those fields is to find out what are the mental mechanisms that

makes us do the things we do.

And so the classic perception-action loop, we have to pick it here.

People who maybe do that too.

It's going to be our active instance book, where you have some agent, which could be a person, but it could actually also be an animal or even an organoid or even a simulated thing, system that receives inputs from its environment and takes actions that changes its environment.

And we are here interested in essentially, and I don't know if you can see my cursor, but essentially the relation between those observations and the actions that are created.

So basically the path after the observation error ends and before the action error starts.

And traditionally in psychology and cognitive science, this has been done experimentally.

You take people out of natural situations and control laboratory situations where you measure, well, you control both of these.

So you decide what they observe and you measure what they do.

And so the kind of classical example of this is a computer screen.

You show people some images, something, maybe you ask them to classify them or predict what's going to happen and you measure what they do.

And then you have a measurement of inputs and measurements of outputs.

And you then create some theory.

that will make some prediction as to how they relate.

And of course, there's a big field.

You might have theories of personality types where you predict that actions will change faster depending on inputs.

There's theories of reinforcement learning, et cetera.

And so importantly here, we're using already natural science approaches, experimental approaches with quantitative analyses, but still with purely conceptual theories.

So theories are not formal as they often are in, let's say,

have mathematical theory and the trick is often to go from some conceptual theory to a quantitative prediction that you can then test and specifically give me a moment here sorry about that and specifically

As many people know, there's been what's called a replication crisis in psychology and cognitive science, where the whole issue is that the experiments don't replicate.

And that's partly due to statistical methods issues, but also partly due to problems stemming from the fact that our theories are not clearly formulated.

So one sentence that's saying that there is social learning might mean many different things.

And so in a recent attempt to address this,

is to move into the formal field, just like in physics.

So computational models of this relation between oscillations and action.

And this is inspired by physics.

So in physics, people are no strangers to having things they can observe.

In our case, it's the behavior, but in physics, it can be, let's say, radiation from the sun and then trying to make inference about something you can't observe.

In our case, the mind.

In this case, it's perhaps the molecules of the sun.

And so the methodology is exactly the same.

Create mathematical equations that will describe how actions evolve over time given observations in the environment and test them on how well they describe empirically collected actions in observations.

And here I just put on one of the very classic cognitive models, which is the Scholar-Warner, where you have some very, very simple equations that describe how actions depend on the observations in the previous time step with some classic learning data.

And that's just to say that many of the first cognitive models were very simple.

In a few equations, you would kind of describe these.

I think primarily in three fields is this approach used where you have some

person or some system, and you want to find formal models of its behavior.

That's in computational psychiatry, where you want to use it to understand psychiatric conditions.

Mathematical psychology, which traditionally has been broader.

It's essentially the same questions, but a different community and different types of models used.

But also broader, just behavior in general, not specifically psychiatry.

And computational neuroscience, where you want to relate these models to

example neurobiological processes that could implement and they also overly like overlap with artificial intelligence and engineering and so on all right so i think a primary use case especially in our field of active influence is theoretical simulations where you just take something on let's say learning or let's say learned helplessness you create a simulation that can do that

create that kind of behavior, and you suggest this as a proposed mechanism of how that behavior comes about.

You can use this for one agent, doing one type of behavior, or you can use it for many, and then you're doing agent-based models, specifically cognitive agent-based models, where you rely on actual cognitive theories to make them.

But you can also apply it to behavioral data.

And here you're often trying to either find out what mechanisms provide actually empirically observed data,

You might want to distinguish, let's say, clinical populations from each other and what's called computational fingerprinting.

You might also use results here to inform future theoretical simulations.

You can have ABMs where every agent has parameter values that you found in an experiment.

And you can also use this to design future experiments.

We use simulation to make sure that your experimental design will give you as good results as possible.

And finally, you can also apply

these approaches in machine learning and engineering.

And here, of course, you can make robots that use current models that people might also use in a way that in general technology and knowledge of biological systems have always worked with each other.

So in the same way you might be inspired in how to build a plane by looking at a bird, you might also be inspired in how to build an image recognizer by looking at a human being.

Our packages specifically target

the application to behavioral data.

And so they can do their simulations and also in principle be used for engineering purposes.

But if we optimize them for this situation where you have participants, you put them in an experiment, you get behavioral data and you use those models to understand the data.

And that's what distinguishes it from some of the other software tools that are present.

And PIME-DP now has this capability also.

But otherwise, many of the, and there is in the MATLAB SPM software, also some ways to apply it to data.

But otherwise, the focus has often been on theoretical simulations or on machine learning.

And if you look at packages like RxInfer, which is incredibly powerful and well-made, then also, at least to my understanding, focuses more on the machine learning engineering part, where the ultimate goal is to use these models to build tools that can do things

or maybe for simulations, but not to specifically apply to behavior.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.


SPEAKER_01:
And I'll just give a sense of what the workflow here looks like, because if you come from theoretical simulations or engineering, this might seem really weird.

You start off designing hypothesized models for how people work.

You then check these models before applying them to anything to whether they are worth applying.

simulate behavior with some parameters.

You then estimate those parameters and you see if you can actually estimate the real parameters.

If you can't recover parameters that you know are true, you can't trust this when applied to real data.

And also prior and posterior predictive checks, where you just check that your model can actually generate the kind of data that you might see in an experiment.

And if it can't, it's also not worth applying to real data.

Then you fit it to data, which means finding out what parameters of my model, what they must have been to generate the data that I did observe.

So in classical models, there will be learning rates.

You ask, oh, this person adapted this fast, so his learning rate must be this and this.

In the context of active inference, it's usually parameters of the generative model, the A matrices and B matrices, for example, that we want to estimate.

And finally, we can also estimate how well the model fits our given data.

Because some models might describe some data better than others, we might want to use this to select them.

We use this to relate parameter estimates to some measure that's across participants.

Often this is clinical populations.

We might say, are learning rates or are AMA trees parameters different between clinical populations?

But it might also be in relation to, let's say, age or psychopharmacological interventions, etc.

We're not related to within participant things, let's say physiological correlates and the QBI, pupil dilation, etc.

But the primary use case, of course, is neuroimaging, where you say, according to my model, this participant now has a high prediction error.

Do I see a difference in brain activity at this moment compared to when he has low prediction error?

It's often to find out what the neurobiological implementation of the computation that we think people do

And finally, you might compare models and ask questions like which of these hypothesized models are the ones that best describe the data and therefore perhaps the actual mechanism within people.

So you could compare an active inference and reinforcement learning model, or let's say two active inference models with different generative models inside.

Finally, it's worth mentioning that fitting this to data, there are many different approaches.

Broadly speaking, there are Bayesian and frequent system methods.

They have different advantages and disadvantages.

We usually use Bayesian approaches, and that's a long discussion of why that's nice.

They propagate uncertainty.

They don't have so much data.

But let me go to that just to say that there are also other ways to fit models to data.

And within Bayesian methods, because you can't do exact Bayes to fit them, there are also approximations.

One classical approximation is variational methods.

where you choose some arbitrary distribution, we call it Q, and you make it be as similar as possible to the true posterior belief about the optimal parameters.

You do this by minimizing the variation of the energy.

And as it happens, that's also what active inference agents use.

Another, in cognitive modeling, widely used method is sampling approaches, like Markov chain Monte Carlo.

There are also others.

where essentially you try out many different parameter values, and for each of them you calculate the likelihood of that value.

You do this in a smart way, but it still takes a long time, and you get a full estimate of the probabilities of different parameters.

They have different claims to being useful for different use cases, so sampling is good for parameter estimates, but they take a long time, and they might not probably work.

Variation-based has some claims to being a better estimate of

quality fit or model evidence, there's a whole few where people are still writing.

If anyone's interested, we can take questions on that.

But importantly, the tools we make here can do either of these two things.

Finally, it's just worth mentioning that we as researchers use Bayesian methods to understand people's behavior, but within active inference, we also theorize that people use Bayesian methods to understand the world.

It's nice to keep those separate.

We might use a sampling approximation to patient influence to fit our models to data, but still believe that people use a variational base to understand their environment.

And so in the following, when we talk about generative models, we're not talking about our model of people.

We're talking about people's models of the world.

And again, do ask questions in that.

That's one of the tricky points sometimes when we're doing this, what's called metabation modeling.

There are many paradigms within cognitive modeling.

Mathematical psychology have many, many ways of modeling, often specific behavioral tasks.

There are these old cognitive architecture models, ACT-R and SOAR are the biggest ones where people are also trying to do unified models of behavior in general, which rely on very different assumptions than active inference.

And often we're not aware of them.

Perhaps we should be, so I'll just bring them up here.

And they're kind of raw, old school computationalist models, different modules interacting.

There's of course reinforcement learning models where you assume that people do actions, get rewards from the environment, and then try to find actions that maximize those rewards.

There are many others like deep learning models, et cetera.

But of course, today most evidently there are Bayesian mind models, where you think that people's minds use Bayesian inference of some sort to understand the environment.

There are many schools of Bayesian mind models.

You might look at Josh Tenenbaum for a different school than ours, but active inference specifically belongs to a variational Bayesian mind model.

We use variational approximate Bayesian inference as a model of how people work.

And this has close ties to predictive coding and predictive processing.

So broadly speaking, we might call this variational Bayesian predictive processing models.

They can be just a perception, like hierarchical regression filters or

plenty of models out there, or they can include action as well.

And when they include action, it's called active inference.

So variation of Bayesian predictive processing models of perception and action is active inference.

And now we'll give an introduction to that, but we'll give time for one question before we move on.

Are there any questions?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

I'll ask one, maybe you'll revisit it later too.

Arun asked,

What's the biggest challenge you faced building this package?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a long and technical discussion.

I think the main thing is that in Julia, there are many ways of doing what's called the auto differentiation, which is a technical thing that you need to do the parameter estimation.

And there's just a whole ecosystem of packages doing that, and we've had to

become very familiar with those to find the ones that work the best.

And that's not an easy task.

Part of the package is to hide that from the user so they don't have to engage with it.

I don't know if you agree with that.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
One more question just while we're paused.

Fraser asked, is there anything in ActiveInference.jl that is particularly suited to compositional agents or collectives?

Kind of leading you into your paper, I know.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'll return to that in the end if we have time, but basically you can use the same method that we use to make inferences about

given a human participant in an experiment, instead of a human participant, you can use it on a simulated collective and treat that collective as if that is also doing some kind of cognition or active inference at least, which is, of course, fundamental to active inference in general.

We expect a cell to do active inference, but also a person and also a collective.

And so if we treat a simulated collective as, let's say, a foreign system that's doing something we don't know what is,

We can fit a model to that in exactly the same way we do to a person and make inferences about, let's say, the parameters of that simulated collective's guaranteed model of the environment.

And in the end, if we have time, I'll just show the results from that paper where we do exactly this, just demonstrating a lot to our example.

That's an exciting question, obviously.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

All right.

All right.

I will just briefly touch on the software ecosystem that we built the package in.

So firstly, why Julia?

It's fast and it's very intuitive, meaning that if you come from Python or MATLAB, you can carry a lot of the same intuitions over into Julia.

And then it has a community that is growing quite fast of people doing data science, machine learning, and cognitive modeling.

Then Julia is natively auto-differentiable, which means that you don't need to have a backend in another language to do auto-differentiation, which makes it very fast in Julia.

For this, there's a very nice package called Turing.jl, which is just a package for probabilistic programming in general.

And it can do both sampling methods such as MCMC or no-U-turn sampler and variational inference as well.

Then in Julia, there's also a sister package to Active Inference, which takes different kinds of cognitive models and make it very easy to fit data into those kinds of models by wrapping Turing.

And that's where our ActiveInference.jl package comes into play, as this is a cognitive model that through action models can be used to Turing to fit data quite easily.

And we'll show this later in the presentation as well.

Then we'll just briefly touch on some of the core elements of active inference with regards to perception, action and learning.

So for the perception part, this is the minimization of the quantity variational free energy where we through this minimization, we can infer states optimally based on observations.

And there's different kinds of variational inference, sorry, different kinds of algorithms

that we can use to do this.

I'll later go into the specific algorithm that we're using in this package.

Then we have action and active inference, which is guided by the minimization of a quantity called expected free energy.

And this can have a lot of different kind of expressions.

If you look at the ones that we show here in the slide, we have one that's information gain versus pragmatic value, which is basically where you get the explore exploit behavior for free in active inference, which is really nice.

And then we also use the expected free energy to calculate posterior probability over policies, where policies are actions.

So this is kind of like the points that we use to kind of like guide the action selection.

We're also going to go into that a bit later.

Then we have learning inactive inference.

This is specifically for categorical distribution beliefs.

So there's other ways of learning for continuous cases.

However, here we take it for categorical distributions.

And for this, we use Dirichlet priors over the generative model parameters.

This is basically Dirichlet's.

They have concentration parameters that we can then add counts to.

And this is the update equation that we show here, where we have an omega, which is the forgetting value times current concentration parameter.

And then you add the new here is the learning rate.

And then you then add the chi, which is the data observed.

And in this sense, you just add counts to the concentration parameters.

And then through normalizing it, it becomes your new updated generative model parameter.

And we will come back to how that's implemented in the package as well.

And then a quick refresher on partially observable market decision processes.

So we just want to make sure to say that this is one type of generative models in active inference.

There's other types of generative models as well.

And PMDPs, they're not active inference specific in the sense that you can also use it in other frameworks.

And then what we have done in this package is a discrete state space implementation of PMDPs.

You can have continued state space implementation of PMPDs.

The Markovian element of it, though, is that the time steps, they are discrete and not continuous.

So we'll just briefly go over conceptually the different parameters in the PMDP.

And for this, we have created sort of like this little toy environment

to explain this and if you can see this thing here where you kind of like if you imagine that it's a dial where we can spin it in different ways and then the goal is to get state three on top in the little rectangle and so then you have three actions you can spin counterclockwise clockwise or you can just make it stay in place which you would do if you have state three on top for example

But we'll start with the observation state likelihood model.

Basically what this encodes is the agent's beliefs on how states generate observations.

So it's a categorical distribution where each column has to sum up to one.

So in this case, as we have a identity matrix, this indicates that the agent can deterministically infer the state based on the observation.

So if the agent observes observation one,

then it will infer that it is in state one.

And this can be more or less entropic in the sense we could also have a completely uniform column where we just have 0.3, 0.3 for all of these.

And then the agent wouldn't be able to infer the states based on the observation.

All right.

So this was the observation state likelihood model.

Then we're going to go to the state transition likelihood model.

And this is basically how the agents believes that the states change over time.

And so in this case, I've taken the example of doing it for the action of going counterclockwise because this is usually dependent on actions.

So here we see that, for example, if the agent is in state one and it does the action spin counterclockwise, then it believes that the next state it's going to be in is going to be state two.

And the same if it's in state two, then it believes that it's going to be in state three.

And so that's the state likelihood transition model.

Then we have the prior preference.

And so this is basically where we kind of like get to encode kind of like the preferences or the goals of the agent.

This can be done both over states and observations, but in our case, we have done it for observations and this is the case in our package as well.

So here, for example, for observation one, we have encoded a dislike for this observation, which is coupled to the state one.

And then for observation two, we have neither dislike nor preference.

And then for observation three, which is coupled

to state three, which is kind of like the goal that we want, we have set a preference.

And this is important as this kind of encodes the pragmatic value, which is then part of the calculation of the expected free energy, as you can see here below.

Yes, and that's the C parameters.

Then we'll continue to the D parameters, which are basically just the agent's initial belief at time one.

which state is it going to be in.

And here we just encode it to be certain that it's going to be in state one.

Then we have the prior over policies.

It'll just quickly introduce the notion of policies where policies are collections of actions that can have a specific link determined by the policy link, which is basically how long in the future, how many time steps in the future should the agent plan.

So for this case, we only have one time step in the future.

which is why we only have the three actions here.

And this is also sometimes described as the agent's kind of habits, meaning that it has a preference for certain actions.

In this case, we have given it a uniform distribution, meaning that the agent doesn't really have any preference over any policies.

All right.

So now that we have the generative model down, I'm going to show you how to implement this in our package.

And we're going to do this by providing a work example of a teammates environment

where the agent is going to learn the reward probabilities in the arms.

And for this, I'll just quickly have to introduce the notion of factors and modalities.

So factors are basically different kinds of states.

So in this case, it would be we have location states and we have reward condition states, where reward condition states are whether the left arm or the right arm is going to provide a reward.

Then we have modalities.

Modalities are basically different kinds of observations

And so here we have a location observation, we have a reward observation, and we have a queue observation.

And I'll go into these when we get to define them in the generative model.

To start using our package, you can just add it from the Julia registry using the Julia package manager as shown here.

Basically for this code, you can run through it by yourself and it should be able to run.

And then we initialize the package and we also import the environments module, which is important for the teammates environment that we're using as an example here.

And then we initialize the TMAs environment.

And here we just set a 95% probability of providing reward in the reward condition arm.

So now we can create the actual generative model, the PMDP generative model.

And you can do this manually by yourself.

But then you have to make sure that the generative model parameters are typed in the correct manner, which is shown here where it has to be vectors of raise for AB and vectors to vectors for the C and D and vector of floats for E.

It's very similar to object arrays in NumPy.

However, we have created a helper function that makes this a lot easier.

And so I'll just quickly go through the arguments that the helper function takes.

So the first argument is the number of states in each factor.

And so remember, we had two factors.

We had the location state factor and the reward condition factor where we had in the location factor we had.

four states, we have the sense, the cue location, and the two right arms, so that's four.

And then we have two reward condition states, reward condition right and reward condition left.

So we take this as a vector and give it to this function as the first argument.

And then the second argument is the number of observations in each modality.

So we have four, we have three different modalities in this case, where we have four observations in the first modality, the location modality, we have the location, sense, cue, and the arms.

Then we have the second modality, which is the reward modality.

It has three observations.

It has the observation of no reward, reward and loss.

Then we have the last observation modality, which is the Queue observation modality.

These we also take as a vector and give to the function as a second argument.

The third argument is the number of controls for each of these factors.

We have two factors, the location factor and the reward condition factor.

We only want the agent to be able to control the location factor, so it can move freely between the locations, but in the reward condition state factor,

it shouldn't be able to control what arm should be the reward arm and so therefore we just give it a one in this case then we have the policy link which i have described before it's how many steps in the future does the agent plan and then we have the fifth and last argument which is the initial fill which basically says like when we have cons when we have made the structure of these journal to model parameters uh what should be the initial filling of these and here it takes both

It takes zeros, which we've chosen in this instance, and it also takes the argument random, which is nice for testing, and uniform, which is the default in this case.

Good.

So now we just, having created this helper or these generative model parameters, we just need to fill them with the appropriate values.

So we'll start out with the observation state likelihood model.

And remember, this is the one that encodes the agent's beliefs of how states generates observations and then infers states based on the observations it receives.

So in this case, we have the location observation, which is not as interesting to us.

Basically, it's an identity matrix, meaning that the agent just infers the correct states because we have encoded to do so.

And then we have two matrices here because we have for each of the location states, which is one matrix, and then we have two matrices, one for each reward condition state factor.

And if you go to the second modality, which is the reward modality, this is the one that is interesting to us.

Because if you look at the first column and the last column, this is the queue and center location, we see that it expects that these are going to provide the observation of no reward.

However,

For the second and third column, which are the right and left arms, we see that in the second row that it has a 50% chance that it believes that this state is going to produce a reward observation.

And then if we go to the third row, we see that it has a 50% chance of generating this, or the agent believes that there's a 50% chance of generating this observation.

So in this sense, the agent doesn't know which of the arms is going to provide the reward observation.

And this is the

modality that we want the agent to learn.

We want it to approximate the actual reward probabilities in the teammates environment.

Then we have the queue observation modality, which basically just tells the agent that only when it's in the queue location does it correctly get an observation that informs it on the reward condition state of the environment.

And then we're going to add a prior over a, and this is where the learning part comes in.

The prior over A is the Dirichlet distribution, and the way that we create this is basically just that we copy the structure of A, and then we add a scaling concentration parameter, which basically says that these counts in the Dirichlet distribution, if they are very high, like if we give a high scaling concentration parameter, each new data observation is not going to matter as much.

If we set the scaling concentration parameter low,

then each data observation we have is going to matter a bit more.

And then it's important to say that, and this is a bit clunky, but this is now going to define the A matrix.

So the prior over A is going to define the A matrix, meaning that the A matrix that we just made is not going to be exactly used.

However, we used it as a template to create the prior over the A.

Great.

So now we have the observation state likelihood model.

Now we need to encode the state transition likelihood model.

And this is the matrices for the first factor, the location factor.

And basically, we just note here that we have rows that are filled with ones, meaning that from wherever the agent is for that action, it goes to that place that it wants to go to.

And then we have the second factor, which is the uncontrollable one.

which is the reward condition factor.

And basically this identity matrix just tells the agent or the agent believes that the reward condition state doesn't change over time, that it stays the same.

Good.

So now we come to an interesting parameter, which is the prior preference over observations.

So we have a vector here for each of the modalities.

However, the one that we are interested in is the reward observation.

So in this case, the first index is the index of the observation no reward, and we set no preference or dislike for this.

The second index is the observation of reward, which we set to have a preference for that it wants the reward.

And then we have the third index, which is the loss observation, which we set a dislike for.

Yes.

And then we continue to the D parameters where we had a vector for each of the factors.

We have the location factor.

where we basically tell it that it's going to start.

The first index is the sender location that we're just telling it that it's going to start in the sender location.

And then for the second factor, which is the reward condition factor, we just have a uniform distribution, meaning that the agent does not know what the reward condition is going to be.

Good.

Then we have the last of these parameters, which is the prior over policies.

And we're just going to here provide it with the uniform

So this means that as the E parameters are the habits, it's not going to have any habits in this case.

We see here that we have 16 different policies because we have a policy length of two and we have four actions.

So the total number of combinations of these two actions is going to be 16.

And then as I said, we just give it a uniform distribution over these policies.

Good.

So now we're almost ready to initialize the active inference agent.

Before we do that, we have to specify some settings.

And I'll just briefly go into these, what they do.

The policy length we have talked about.

The use utility basically means, should we include the C parameter preferences that we just set?

And we've set this to true.

Then we have the use states info gain, which basically says that in the calculation of the expected free energies, which is going to guide action,

And should we include the expected information gain?

And then we have the use parameter infogain setting, which basically says that when we calculate the expected free energy, should we include the expected learning or updating of the generative model?

Then we have action selection, which can take two values, either stochastic or deterministic.

I'll go into what they do when we come to the function that actually uses this setting.

Then we have modalities to learn, which basically specifies what modality do we want the agent to learn.

In our case, we wanted to learn the reward observation modality, so we specify this by giving it two.

We also have factors to learn.

This is only relevant when we're doing B and D matrix learning, so it's not going to be relevant in our case.

Then we have the fixed point iteration number of iterations and the fixed point iteration tolerance, which is basically saying that.

When should the inference algorithm stop so you can set it to either as we do here after 10 iterations or when the difference between iterations are equal to a lower between this threshold.

Yes, the last thing that we need to define to initialize the agent.

is the parameters here i'll just briefly go over what they do the gamma is an inverse temperature function on the expected free energies then we have the alpha which is in this temperature on the action selection and then we have the learning and forgetting rates for the priors over a b and d

parameters, which are the ones that we currently have learning for.

The ones that we are interested in at the moment, though, is the prior over A, which is the learning rate and forgetting rate for this, which we're going to set to its default value of one.

And the values here are all the default values.

Good.

So now we can initialize our active inference agent by providing it with the generative model and the settings and these parameters.

And we are almost ready for the perception and action loop

in itself.

And before we do that, we just have to specify how many iterations does this loop need to contain.

And then we reset the teammates, which just gives the agent like an initial observation.

And this is the perception action learning loop, and it has five functions.

And I'm going to go through them and just briefly explain how they relate to active inference.

So the info states function is the one that actually does the minimization of the variational free action.

the variation-free energy.

And this is the perception part of active inference.

Here in our package, we use an algorithm called fixed point iteration, also known as coordinate ascent variational inference.

And here we also just provided a picture of an observation where you can see that we have these three observations, the location observation, reward observation, and the queue observation.

we have the infrared policies this is the one that actually calculates the expected free energies and is affected by the settings that we talked about before and the gamma and the e parameters it returns the expected free energies and it also returns the posterior over policies which is and it's this posterior probability that we are going to be sampling from when we are sampling actions

And so basically this function sample action just samples from this posterior probability over policies.

And it is affected by the action selection, where it could be either stochastic or deterministic if it's stochastic it just samples from the probability distribution, but if it's deterministic it always takes the policy with the highest probability.

Then we have the update eight, which is where the learning occurs.

And this is where we basically add the Dirichlet counts to the prior over A, and then it updates the A by normalizing the concentration parameters.

Then we have the step teammates, which is basically just the agent interacting with the environment, and then it provides the observation for the next iteration in the perception action learning loop.

So this is the loop, and this is the one that is also going to be used in the model fitting part.

And I think we're taking some questions now.

One question.

One question.

Yes.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

I'll ask one question from Tin Tin in the chat.

They wrote, hello, thanks all for this great work.

Have you implemented Bayesian model reduction or incremental model construction slash structure learning with ActiveInference.jl rather than manual construction?


SPEAKER_01:
happened no that's the shortcut yeah so the package is just now ready for deployment and there's many ways to extend it which we'll work on but also i mean if people interested in collaboration to develop the package so this is exciting for two reasons like in two ways by the way um basically model structure learning it can either be model structure learning from the perspective of the agent

learning the structure of the environment.

They can also be unstructured learning from the perspective of us researchers wanting to find out what kind of structure a given agent has in the environment.

And both of these purposes are the same thing we would like to do.


SPEAKER_02:
I think a useful kind of connective tissue question.

Where would you put ActiveInference.jl in relationship to what PyMDP does in Python and what RxInfer does in Julia?


SPEAKER_01:
So PyMGP was originally a port of the SPM functions into Python, brilliant work by Connor and colleagues, where they make it modular and easy to use, but made for theoretical simulations only.

And I think this summer, they just finished Jack's reimplementation of PyMGP, which means now you can also use it to fit to behavior.

But it's not designed

It wasn't primarily designed for that.

And it was also not made for engineering purposes.

Python is too slow, although I'm sure you could in principle.

And since then has come the C++ package, right?

Which is much faster.

And I think, but harder to use because it's in C, although there are records in different languages, that would be useful for machine learning.

RxInfer,

implements active inference and many other things on only style factor graph, which is a very efficient and powerful way of thinking patient inference and variation of patient inference.

And that is optimized much more for engineering purposes.

If you want to build something that does something using active inference, go C++ or RxInfer.

And if you want to apply it to behavioral data,

then go pymdp or active-entrance.gl.

And there are some tools for this also in MATLAB.

But I think our package and pymdp are made to make this easier.

And as you might notice, we use much of the syntax from pymdp.

So we're heavily inspired by that.

And in the next part, you'll see how to use it to apply the package to behavioral code.

Does that answer those questions?


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Yeah, perfect.

Definitely.

The functions look great and your team's understanding and clarity around the problem setup, taking that all the way through the helper functions for the matrices, that's where so much of the friction is.

So this makes it really clear.

It's a great open source point.


SPEAKER_01:
It's also where a kind of future development, yeah, it was really happening there.

So the API can be improved for sure, and we will work on it.

Because I think one of the main challenges active inference has faced as a tool for cognitive modeling is that it's hard to use and hard to understand.

And that's why much of the mathematical psychology world, for example, just leaves it.

They say, we have a two or three equation model.

Why would we use your beam of a machine instead?

But just as it has been the case with many other methods,

making tools that make it easy to use and conceptualizations that make it easy to understand is the kind of thing that will make these models feasible and therefore used more broadly.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's making me think like RX Infer is the car factory, this is the bike, and Active Inference is the wheel.


SPEAKER_01:
You can think of it, yeah.

You need a logo.

All right, let's do the last important section and we'll see how much time we have.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, because we're short on time, I will need to skip through a few of the sections, but I hope it's going to be all right.

So I think Peter already mentioned that we have this sort of environment of packages in Julia, and one of them is action models, which is sort of a system package for us, which mediates the data fitting process for us, right?

So here we are essentially going in the opposite direction where our inputs and the actions of our experimental subjects are known.

But now we are interested in the hidden or latent parameters of the subjective generative model.

So there's a sort of core component of action models is the action model function, which

depending on our model can be an arbitrary function which takes a single input which in our case is a single observation it updates the states of the agent and then it sort of quantifies the probabilities of actions so we end up with a probability distribution from which we can assemble our actions right and so in our case we have this nice function called action pure mdp

which is our active inference action model.

And it takes these two arguments, which is our initialized AI object with the parameters of the generative model, settings, et cetera.

And it takes the single observation and then it outputs the action distribution.

So in this particular case, we have two action distributions, one for each state factor.

And then another core component of action models

is an agent, so it sort of wraps our action model function and our active inference object in a more abstract structure, which we will be using for pitching and for simulation as well.

And it also stores parameters, states, history, etc.

All right, now I'll just allow myself to skip through some of the convenience functions so I can just go straight to the data fitting, if that's all right.

Okay, so this is, I would assume, the most interesting part of this.

So how to actually fit active inference models to data.

So all of our fitting functions kind of operate on Turing, and we wrap all of the necessary Turing operations in our convenience functions for fitting.

So let's say, for example, we want to fit a single subject and we want to recover a single parameter, a sort of minimal, simple example.

So we start by specifying a prior.

So here, let's say we want to recover our action precision parameter alpha.

So we set a prior for it, let's say the Gaussian with a mean of six and sigma two and set it in a dictionary.

And then in case we want to put more parameters at once, we just add them to the same dictionary and their corresponding prior distributions.

And so now we can use the create model function, which will instantiate our probabilistic model on our data.

And it takes these inputs, which is our initialized agent, it takes our priors and our collected observations and actions, which we collect, let's say, from a behavioral experiment.

And in this case, we're just using some data from simulated teammates.

So here we, our actions,

is a matrix which has rows corresponding to timesteps, or let's say trials, and columns corresponding to state factors.

And similarly in observations, we have columns corresponding to observation modalities.

And then we'll have our model object instantiated, which we can easily fit in a single line using our fit model function, which will run the sampler with appropriate defaults.

And then we can, like, obviously people would want to pass some more specific settings into the sampler.

So here I'm passing, for example, the number of iterations per chain, and I'm running four chains, and then I'm using the distributed module to run the chains in parallel.

Right, and then we, after the sampling is finished, then we will end up with the results object, which contains our chains, and then we can

work further with this, right?

So I'm just going to quickly go through some of our other convenience functions, for example, to rename chains, which will rename the names of the parameters in our chains to something more, more intuitive.

And we can extract quantities from our chains that we can just simply display the results of, of our chain.

So again, the summary statistics, some information about, about the conversions of our chains, quantiles, et cetera, right?

Or then we can just

Here's a sort of native Julia uploading function so we can pass our chains to it to take a look at chain traces or posterior distributions.

Or what we can do is we can sample from our prior.

So here I'm taking a thousand samples from the prior and I'm using our plot parameters function to plot the posterior distribution against the prior distribution for our

synthetic participant, let's say.

Okay, and this is the part that's going to be mostly interesting, I think, for people in computational psychiatry and cognitive modeling.

And it's the case where we want to fit a full data set.

So in this case, let's say that we have some data with 10 participants, and let's assume that we have two clinical groups in our data.

can be i don't know control and whatever psychotic or it can be young old right and we can simply pass the whole data set with our collected data let's say from from our behavioral experiment to the same create model function so it instantiates the the probabilistic model on the whole data set

And then additional things that we need to tell the function is which column to use to differentiate between individual subjects and which columns contain our observations and which columns contain our actions.

And again, we have our model instantiated on the whole dataset and we can just pass it on to our fit model function.

And again, this following is sort of the same procedure as before.

can play around with our recovered chains here we have the recovered values of alpha for each participant using native Julia functions to deploy the chain traces and again we can let's say sample from the prior and plot the posterior against priority solutions for each participant right and then

So keeping also with this default procedure in cognitive modeling, now let's say that we have our estimates and we want to see where there is actually a difference in our two groups.

So here I'm just extracting the quantities from the chain and I'm getting the estimates, which in this case are medians.

And we can see here that there are indeed two groups present in our data.

After, let's say that we run some statistics on our estimates, then we might be also interested to see whether there's any correlation with other states of our agent.

And let's say some physiological data, but here I'm putting the state action prediction error, which then my people want to correlate, let's say with brain data or pupilometry, for example.

And for people who might want to use variational inference for various reasons over sampling, the good news is that Turing can do variational inference too.

So here I just sort of remade the tutorial that you can find on the official Turing web page where I'm

In the beginning, just initializing the variational inference algorithm with a sort of default number of samples and a default number of iterations.

And importantly, I'm setting the automatic differentiation backend to reverse mode automatic differentiation.

And then in the VI function, which runs the variational inference algorithm, I'm just reusing our probabilistic model, which we have already created previously.

So this is very nice.

And what we end up with is our variational posterior, which is a type of distribution.

So we can sample from it or work further with it.

And just to rather quickly wrap up.

So we're currently working on the documentation.

We know it's important.

So it should be done in the next few weeks, let's say.

Until then, you can either reach out

or you can refer to Action Models documentation, which is really nicely written.

Okay.

And yeah, just briefly, just to summarize what we need to do in our next potential future.

So we need to optimize.

The package is fast, but there are still a lot of things that need to be improved.

Then the idea was to, for example, be able to fit

all parameters because for now we were only able to to recover the the sort of hyper parameters and what's been called the non-matrix parameters but in principle one can also one should be also able to fit an entire let's say a matrix or c matrix which would be really nice and then okay we can um extend the parameter learning to all other uh parameters of the of the generative model and that idea was to introduce a sort of custom parameterizations where

the user could introduce a temperature parameter on an A matrix, and this could be also in principle then recovered using data fitting from empirical data.

And last, I'm just going to say that for our fitting, we are using reverse automatic differentiation, which is fast, but we are also planning to start experimenting with other engines which are currently under development in Julia also, which includes Enzyme and

Mooncake, which might be potentially faster.

And then on the side of action models, Peter has been working for some time also on the possibility of adding linear regressions.

So the idea would be that we could fit the data, we could recover our estimates, and we could

run linear regressions with our estimates or with other variables that we might have.

In one model.

Yes.

Which is statistically up to you.

Yes.

Okay.

And the last thing you're going to hear from me is that when you decide that you want to start experimenting with our package and you encounter an issue or do you have any specific feature in mind that you would like us to implement, please feel free to open an issue.

Any kind of feedback will be greatly appreciated.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

And we're out of time.

So I'll just briefly mention this point that you can treat a whole group of agents as one agent and do cognitive modeling on a separate paper.

So I'm sure there'll be time to talk about that at another time.

Yes.

I think that's it.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Sol.

This is a huge advance.

It's really awesome.

Brings a lot of features a lot closer to people's hands and minds.

And it's exciting that we'll continue developing and learning about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Till next time.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess04

SPEAKER_01:
hello welcome back we're here with shanna dobson discussing descent conditions on hyperphantasia a new model of self-information looking forward to this presentation followed by questions at the end so thank you shanna super looking forward to this hey daniel great thank you for the invitation i'm excited to present these new ideas on hyperphantasia so i hope this relates to someone and thank you all for listening


SPEAKER_00:
So a small outline, I'll be discussing the fantasia spectrum and its two extremes, afantasia and hyperfantasia.

And then we're going to discuss what I'm calling the memory continuum.

Then we're going to review what I've been calling the oneiric self, constructed as the profinite set.

Then we're going to review Grothendieck's one categorical theory of dissent.

And then I'm going to try to present a new model of categorical mental imagery from the hyperphantasia perspective using, I think, these very beautiful categorical sheave techniques of specifically Grothendieck dissent.

So dissent theory is a super powerful tool.

And I hope you all like what I'm trying to do there.

Then we'll pause at what are called descent conditions on hyperphantasia, pretty much how the sheaves work, and why I think sheaves are really good for something like hyperphantasia, which is characterized by pretty vivid mental imagery and profound episodic memory recall.

And then last, we're going to actually model surprisal itself or self-information functorially as a category of descent data.

So if you've been following my work, I tend to like to categorify

everything and so uh we'll see if we can actually categorify hyperphantasia all right cool so i'm just going to start with the the big results because it's going to take me a while to get there so i always start with the main idea so pretty much i'm going to categorify episodic memories as we're called fibered categories and then so the idea is that you're going to fix a particular memory m and you're going to study memories over that memory

So this is in the vein of hybrid categories.

So hybrid categories are very beautiful.

They're almost like parameterized categories.

And so hybrid categories, particular category over a fixed category C.

So for me, episodic memories seem fibered.

They seem like they're memories over memories, as I think selfhood is fibered.

So I've given many talks on that.

Clive Waring, the famous case of having both a retrograde and anterograde amnesia.

Clive has about a six second working memory with purely semantic memory.

Not a lot of personal memory besides remembering his wife, but everything else, not so much.

So the selfhood of Clive is in question.

What's the perception, the frequency of perception of Clive?

I think that's very, very tricky stuff.

So if selfhood itself is fiber, we're going to consider these categories of memories over a fixed memory.

So I have the idea to use descent to actually represent hyperphantasia.

So the idea is that you have these memory sheaves that are satisfying descent.

And to satisfy descent means that they form a stack, which is a very particular sheaf that takes values and categories and not sets.

Okay.

And so then this pair at the end, this F star phi, which I'll describe in these maps, is going to be what we call the categorical descent datum.

So I call it, this is our sheafy surprisal.

So if you could sheafify surprisal or self-information, I think you do it this way.

So surprisal would be constructed as the sheafification of memory.

All right.

So, and you would say, uh, there exists the following, uh, the descent conditions on Fantasia and it would be those.

Cool.

All right.

So let's start with the Fantasia spectrum.

Oh, sorry.

So this is what I'm going to get to.

Um, I think they're pretty good ideas.

And then, uh, so let's actually dive into.

Fantasia itself, which I think is very, very, very beautiful topic.

So what is Fantasia?

What is this Fantasia spectrum?

And so it has to do with the characteristic of, you know, creatures having visual imagery.

And so the Fantasia spectrum itself is a relatively novel neuropsychological spectrum used to classify to what extent an individual constructs mental imagery and visual imagination.

which is quite strange.

We're so used to it, but it's very strange that you have these pictures, quote, in your mind.

Where do they actually exist?

And this fantasia spectrum, so this ability to imagine visually, has two extremes, and they are quite extreme.

So aphantasia is characterized by the absence of mental imagery, and hyperphantasia, characterized by

profound, extraordinary mental imagery, heightened visual imagination, so detailed and vibrant, imitates reality.

I myself seem to fall on this scale.

And the reason, again, I know this is that one of my dear colleagues introduced me to the spectrum and said, Shanna, I think we were writing a paper together and said, actually, I think we went on opposite sides of the spectrum.

Everyone knows I told this story.

And together, I think we've written

like the most amazing things okay all right so let's start on the aphantasia side so when you say when you know the tendency to say lack you know it seems to say something negative but it's not really so aphantasia is just characterized by the absence of just particularly mental imagery doesn't mean all imagery so it is an image-free mind but it has conceptual imagination okay

So if you were to say, so the imagination of anyone who falls on this classification, it involves other senses and abstract concepts besides visual imagery and sensory details.

So perhaps the way of thinking and visualizing is analytical.

So everybody knows my little girl Artemis.

I talk about her a lot.

So if I was aphantasiac with respect to saying someone said,

you know, how do you imagine Artemis?

And I would say, well, I cannot mentally picture Artemis, but I can think about the idea of Artemis.

And there's Artemis, right?

So perhaps like her fluffy tail and her being white, like wouldn't actually appear to my mind, but I would think about the idea of Artemis and I think about it very deeply, right?

So contrast this to what is hyperphantasia?

So hyperphantasia is characterized by sort of extraordinarily vivid mental imagery and heightened visual imagination and also episodic recall.

Heightened sensory details in episodic memory.

So Shana, what was your first ice cream cone?

And there's, you know, just lush sort of dolly-like exquisite imagery that comes out of that.

So detailed and vibrant imitates reality that you actually say, well, which one?

Which one is quote more real?

The one quote in my head or the one like outside of my head?

Tricky.

And so I can actually picture Artemis so vividly as if I'm really seeing her in real life.

And so for episodic memory, these are personal memories sort of based on sensory perceptual data of which mental imagery is a particular form.

So that is why hyperphantasia and the

and how you recall episodic memory are so incredibly linked.

So with this, I've started thinking about sort of the distance to and from memories.

So this is a concept that I think would be exciting to explore, which is why I'm doing it.

And so if you ask yourself a strange question, like what is the distance to a memory?

Normally people would call this a timestamp.

That happened to you three weeks ago, something like that.

What happened to you then is not what's happening to you now.

We call this a timestamp, sort of a way that you can mentally file away an event and to keep it a little distant from you.

So, but I have a question.

So for hyperphantasics, what if there were no distance to a memory?

I find this to be the case for myself.

People say, well, that happened then.

That happened then, it's not happening now.

I sort of have a problem with that sort of thinking, that sort of logic.

I question the timestamp that people are using to actually say a statement like that.

But let's imagine, what if there was no distance to actual memory?

Would that mean that it's always happening?

it mean that it was always happening well what if that distance were actually not measured by sort of the counting numbers or the real numbers with a linear ordering before or after so this is sort of the profound leave i want everyone to try to imagine so an event happened to me two weeks ago if you were thinking according to the sort of like standard number line you would say well two weeks ago

was before like now it's like now is the zero point and so you know normally events with a timestamp have a linear ordering that happened then this is happening now that was yesterday this is today so i just want to ask like what if that distance were actually changed the metric on that distance was actually changed so if there was no linear ordering about before or after this would be very curious so for me the distance seems the distance to and from memory seems more like it's a

p-adic.

So I invite everyone to sort of try to think of the distance to memories as more non-Archimedean in the sense that there is no before or after.

So if you've been following my work, I'm pretty enchanted by the p-adic numbers and things like this.

And so the p-adic numbers actually have no sense of linear ordering.

They are kind of more fractal-like.

Now, this property that you're sort of just zooming in, but there's no notion of bigger than or greater than.

And I think that would actually be very interesting to try to evaluate memory on a timestamp of something that's not bigger or less than.

So my claim is that the distance of, or to, or from memory is p-adic.

And that's going to lead me down this exploration.

So the second concept I want to talk about that I've been playing around with is the idea of a memory continuum.

So I want to ask the question, what is the space of memories?

If anybody saw the latest Blade Runner, you see there's the memory maker.

She's in charge of actually making movies and movies and memories.

And she's actually sort of kept away because she says she can't really leave this prism that she's in.

But she's charged with making memories.

So I want to ask the question, what is the space of memories?

So you have them.

My great colleague Chris Fields and I are always asking the question, why do you experience memories?

It'd be very interesting to find the first creature who experienced a memory.

Not why you have them, but why do you experience them?

All right.

So what is this space of them?

If you were to actually put them in a category, you could.

I was actually more interested in, if you dive a little bit into that, well, what is the actually topology on the memory space?

Could you actually cover it with something?

Can you think about memories in terms of open sets?

Are memories topological?

Do they sort of intersect, which it sounds like they do?

What sort of properties do they have?

And so to think about memories mathematically, I think it's kind of a new idea.

So not only what is the space of memories, but what is actually the shape of memories?

What do these actually feel like, look like?

And so I want to actually think about the concept like, can you actually mathematize the duration of memories?

How long do they last?

Some memories seem to have expiration dates, and some memories seem to be holographic.

I'm really interested in how memories last.

how long they would actually last if they were actually considered with a different metric.

So for myself, I notice a certain density of memories.

And what do I mean by that?

So density in the mathematical sense, not heaviness of densities.

Although that would be interesting, like some memories are so heavy, they'd probably implode.

Some memories are sort of big, light, they'd float in the bathtub.

So the density of memory is, I'm not talking about the physical property, but what is often called emotional valence sort of has this positive, this plus minus charge associated with experiential memory.

So if memories can act like sort of black holes, or memories are sort of like black holes, they can literally warp

the thinking, if you think about it.

So black holes, you know, actually intend to, if there's very, I mean, they're dynamical, but when they're rotational, when they're rotating and things and spewing out these plasma jets, they can actually warp the space time around them.

I've always been fascinated by that.

I seem to have memories that do the same thing.

So if they warp the thinking, what happens?

Well, any object can be turned into a black hole.

I just have to squish it and be on its Schwarzschild radius.

So memories as objects, something to be like to think about.

So density in the sense of, OK, like a teaspoon of a memory that was as heavy as a black hole would do something, but not that kind of density.

I want to talk about the mathematical density of memories.

What would that even mean?

So if you take density from the standard form where you normally prove that the rationals are dense in the real numbers, this is the sort of density that I want to think about.

So the rationals are dense in the real numbers, which means that between any two real numbers, you can always find a rational number, which means between any two real numbers, you can always find a real number.

So that seems like a light statement, but then it sort of gets terrifying to know that between any two real numbers, you'll always find another one.

Unlike the property, say, for counting numbers or the positive integers, between the integer, the positive integers 2 and 3, I will not find another integer.

But between the real numbers, I will.

So I thought, hmm, for me, it seems sort of the same.

Between memory A and memory B, there seems to exist a memory C. And I can continue this forever, it seems.

For me, between any two memories, there is another one and another one.

I can always find another one.

So the memory density and the memory continuum, I think, is something that could be looked at as a hyperphantasia until I run out of memories.

So between any two memories, there is another one and another one.

I can always find another one until I run out of memories.

But that's where the hyperphantasia kicks in.

between any two memories there exists a hyperphantasia memory right so this hyperphantasia for me is a sort of memory continuum so um one of my brilliant colleagues at art center constructed this beautiful image which i think for me actually shows me um this is sort of what i think about as a hyperphantasia right so the density of memory that

I could be brushing my hair inside that memory of me brushing my hair with my favorite brush.

There's more memories inside my hair, memories inside of memories, inside of memories, inside of memories, right?

And it just keeps going on and on and on and on.

So I want to play around with another concept called miso memory that I've been thinking about.

So is there actually a duration issue with the density of memories, whereas the real numbers always exist?

If I'm talking about between any two memories, there's another one.

How long does that last?

The real numbers seem to always exist.

Seems that between any two real numbers, I will always find something.

But what about memories?

Not sure about that.

What is memory at the MISO scale?

So this is a scale that Daniel and I, we've been having talks about.

So sort of between the micro and the macro, you have this MISO, which is sort of this slippery sort of interstitial happenings.

And so what is memory at that scale?

I'm very curious.

Is memory just the thing that sort of comes through with the macro side?

What would MISO mean in terms of that?

Is this like an almost memory?

So I have almost memories at the MISO scale, but then what does that mean?

So what would a MISO memory actually be?

Well,

Thinking in terms of density would allow more variations of what memory looks like.

So sometimes you have memories that aren't quite out of the oven yet.

You have some memories that have been mixed.

Some memories are fluid.

Some memories can phase change.

And so I really think it's really important to think about the density of memories by opening up this new scale.

So sort of from microcircuitry of neuronal processes, micro memory.

This is sort of what I'm interested in.

So for me, memories feel non-Archimedean, since I'm going back to the p-adic metric.

It's a fantastic metric, in my opinion.

So the p-adic number system, again, just a brief recall, is a non-Archimedean system that is the completion of the rational numbers q under the p-adic metric.

Repeated notes of prime number.

Interestingly, so this is sort of the Oz-like property of these numbers.

So p-adic numbers are close if their difference is a high power of p.

P-adic notions have no notion of linear ordering.

Their shape resembles a self-similar set.

That's the fractal language I was talking about.

Okay, so just a little more technical.

So again, for me, the memories feel non-Archimedean.

And so informally, the ring of P-adic integers Zp are written in base P, and they admit infinite expansions to the left of the decimal point.

So p-adic integers take this form of sort of the sum a n p n, where a n is between 0 and p. Addition multiplication performed on the p-adic integers with the sort of carrying method used to add ordinary ones.

So the p-adic metric introduces a non-Archimedean norm on the rational numbers.

And the fun part of this, fun fact, is that for a non-Archimedean norm on the rationals, every point of an open ball is actually the center.

So I want to think about that.

Instead of actually having like a canonical center in the Archimedean case, every point of an open ball is the center.

So this sort of what some would call a disorientation, maybe it's sort of a superpower.

This could be the space from which hypermemory is made.

The fact that every point in this open ball would be centered.

So really, what metric are you using?

Do hyperphantasics and aphantasics use different metrics on the topology of the memory space?

This is what I'm interested in.

So are they using different distances to and from memory?

So at best, you'd probably just have isomorphism classes of these timestamps instead of, I'll just say, yeah.

So for me, memories feel also profinite.

This is a concept you've been following me.

I talk about a lot.

I'm inspired by Schultz's work.

So a profinite set, also called a stone space, is a compact Hallsdorff totally disconnected topological space.

I've been enchanted by these for a little bit.

It's also defined as an inverse limit of finite sets.

That's our notation of the inverse limit of our SI for SI finite.

So the smallest, what is called light, so a light pro-finite set, everybody, is just a countable inverse Lomit finite sets.

And so the smallest infinite pro-finite set, it's actually called the one-point compactification of the integers.

So you go all the way through the integers and you adjoin infinity.

And then also the Cantor set, which I'll talk about in a little bit more.

All right, so fractality is this concept that I'm studying for my thesis work.

And fractals are such strange, beautiful creatures.

They actually sit between Berkovich spaces, which are famous rigid analytic spaces, and the p-attics.

So they're between these.

And the p-attics are totally disconnected.

So Berkovich spaces are these topological spaces, like I just said, in the setting of non-Archimedean analytic geometry.

So fractals are sort of in between.

And so fractals have this property.

It's very difficult to define what a fractal is.

So there's been some contention about the definitions back and forth.

But everyone agrees that fractals have one property, that they're self-similar at all scales.

So I want to ask if memories are self-similar.

What would it mean to actually have that?

What is the shape of memories in something like the dream space?

So we're going to call that the Oneiric self-memories.

What does it actually mean to have the memory space in an Oneiric setting?

We're going to explore that in just a little bit.

So memories seem local.

confined to some sort of particular area, but they also seem met up, right?

So in some great work with my brilliant colleagues, Hector Manrique and Michael Walker,

We're trying to figure out sort of a, you know, how would you construct the oniric self?

I had this idea like, hmm, I think you could struct the oniric self as itself as a profinite set.

And so what we're looking at here is the different topologies and like on the memory space in the waking state and in the sleep state and actually the construction of selfhood in the dream space and then selfhood in the waking state.

So just to quote one of our passages here.

So we say, in stark contrast, the oneiric state events occur disconnected from one another in a profinite space that's compact, hostile, topological, so namely a profinite stone space, where events dreamt by our oneiric self are not stored relative to linear time.

So hence, a plausible model for dream time would be a ring of p at integer zp considered as a topological space.

So we're trying to figure out an event in a waking state and an event in a sleep state.

These seem to be stored differently and to construct different narratives of personhood.

That was Hector's idea.

How do I construct the notion of self in a waking state versus self in a dream state?

self in a dream state you know that you can be here and then you're all of a sudden you're uh you're you know flying with uh like falco and then all of a sudden you're at erewhon these are my dreams and um the question is you can get from one place to another very very very quickly instantaneous um or you seem to be nowhere in particular at no time

And so the question was, if I had all these events happening in my dream space and I couldn't store them as dream, I may start having waking state fights with people who did stuff to me in my dreams.

I'm like, Daniel, how did you do that to me?

And he's like, Janet, that never happened in the waking state.

I'm like, oh, okay.

So you have this very separate storage space, which keeps dream things there, and you're not constructing.

the sense of waking self based on the dream state events.

Beautiful idea.

And so why did I say, OK, let's construct the dream state as a profanity set?

Well, the Hasdorff criterion ensures that there's no simultaneous experience occurring in the oneiric dream state.

You need to keep these events separated.

So every point in the profanity space uniquely represents an event that has occurred oneirically.

um simultaneous experience is something that i'm after as well in my my work with my brilliant colleague robert pretner also my work with chris fields um so what would it mean to have a simultaneous experience that is something um that we're still working on more like that that is that is a waking dream but so you want to have these events being uh hausdorff they're kept separate in the dream state so you don't have a sort of an inception going on thank you christopher noel all right

So the total disconnectedness condition actually accounts for a crucial difference between awake time and dream time.

So Chris and I had this idea that a key aspect of the construction of waking time, however, is the assumption that between any two distinct events experienced by some agent A, other things happened, non-agent specific events occurred that A did not experience that some other agent B may have experienced.

Okay, so in the waking state, between any two distinct events experienced, say I'm agent A, and I'm giving this lovely talk for everyone listening, and then I'm going to go give another talk.

And so the fact that in between these two talks for me, something else happened to Daniel.

And Vince in the Oneiric state, though, I think don't have this property.

They're actually totally disconnected so that you wouldn't have this notion that between any two things that happened for me, something else happened to somebody else.

All right, so canonical sample of a profinite set is the actual Cantor ternary set.

So do I have an image of this?

Okay, yeah.

So the ternary set is constructed iteratively as an infinite process from an infinite process.

I take this closed interval 0, 1 represented by the solid red line.

And what I do is I actually remove the open middle third from the actual closed interval 0, 1.

leaving me with two intervals remaining so i actually have two line segments closed zero to one third union at two thirds to one and what do i do i do it again so i remove the open middle third leaving me with the you know um remaining line segments

And I continue this process infinitely.

So the Cantor set actually consists of all the points that remain that are never deleted from the original interval.

You can see there's end points of the line segments that are never deleted.

And so beautifully, that Cantor set is actually uncountably infinite.

So it's the scary infinity having the same number of points as the closed interval 0, 1, right?

So shown here is just the first seven steps of the infinite construction.

It's always nice to be defined as an infinite process.

So this is the Cantor set.

And so the points that remain are sort of like this Cantor dust.

you add them all up it's the scary infinity okay so this canter ternary set is nowhere dense has no interior points and it also has measure zero so it's considered negligible small so back to our um uh back to our paper so like so if the oniric self is composed of these events that occur in a stone space um then the oniric self would be like canter dust everyone and negligible

So the self-similarity of the Cantor set, it's sort of like fractal, and it could experience what we're calling these time loops by the urinary cell.

But of course, the cerebral neuronal microcircuitry is yet to be demonstrated, which maintains alternative storage systems, right?

So do you have these alternative storage system?

And what causes the switching between them?

How do you actually know to file event A as a dream event

and keep it separate from event B. So strange.

And what would happen if this actually sort of flipped?

All right.

Okay.

So the self-similarity, the Cantor set, I'll just show you this image, is the fact that there is a, like the Cantor set is similar to itself upon magnification and translation of its pieces.

so if you look at this highlighted piece pink and that i have like the pink highlighted piece so you can have two copies of that diminished by a factor of a third and translated produces the original c right so very strange that these this set is self-similar and that's why i think it's actually very curious but the self-similarity is what i'm interested in in the actual memory space cool

all right so let's get just a little technical and then i'll wrap up all right so this new model is going to be based on these categorical sheaves like i showed the final the main results in the first slide so the idea is to model for hyperphantasics um model episodic memories as light profinite sets which means these countable inverse limits of pro of um of finite sets

So then we're going to actually use a claim, a theorem that Chris and I have in our paper, that entropic categorizations are actually condensed sense.

I'll recall all these terminologies.

And then reframe recall in terms of representable functors.

So I think recall could have a very beautiful form in terms of representability.

And I'll go over that functor.

Then you want to construct hyperphantasia by adjunction, and hyperphantasia would be constructed as surprisal.

So phantasia itself is sort of like self-information, and so self-information by the way of the actual visual spectrum, or if you're a phantasia.

So then you would reframe further these memory sets as categorical sheaves and put the descent conditions on them.

And then you'll model self-information as a category of dissent.

Okay.

So it's like, firstly, everybody always asks me, why sheaves?

You know, like, why are you so fascinated by these things?

Well, I really believe and support Grothendieck's work.

So Alexander Grothendieck always said that it was sufficient to study the category of sheaves on a topological space.

So he is so brilliant.

He really revolutionized just algebraic geometry, descent theory, really beautiful things.

order to comprehend the topological space so all you need is a category of sheaves on the topological space love that so she's enabled what well they enable this local analysis of the space they assign data to open sets you don't really get this local global phenomenon a lot and then the category of sheaves on the space actually encapsulates its geometric properties like cohomology groups these capture topological invariants

and structure.

So the category of sheaves on a site is actually called a Grothendieck topos.

A site is going to be a category with a topology.

So unlike a topological space but a categorical version of this.

So a Grothendieck and particularly a Grothendieck topology on a category is going to be a set of morphisms which act like the open sets or the covers of a topological space.

So this Grothendieck topology is going to be very rich and

I just think he was really onto something here.

All right, so a site.

Let's define that real quick.

So a site is a category equipped with a Grothendieck topology.

And so given a Grothendieck topology J and a small category C, you can define the category of sheaves on C relative to J, which is this SHC comma J. And this is a reflective subcategory of the category COFF.

of sets, that's a functor category, of pre-sheaves on C. And so reflective subcategory refers to the image maps reflecting each other.

So this, you're going to have this functor from C to the category of sheaves of C relative to J, given by what's called the composite of the UNITA embedding, which I've talked about before, with the reflection, that's called, or the sheafification.

And so this composite functor is going to be fully faithful, which means injective and surjective on the omsets.

If and only if all the representable pre-sheaves, which are these set-valued functors, are actually sheaves.

So descent is going to be the sort of generalization of the sheave condition from pre-sheaves on these higher categories.

So a topology with this property is really importantly called subcanonical.

So let's define a profinite set.

A finite set is actually a compact Hausdorff totally disconnected set, as I said.

So it's defined as an inverse limits of finite sets.

So let's just talk about what an inverse limit is.

So you have some sort of index set, I. And so the pair, this pairing is going to be a partially ordered set.

And so say we're working in groups and group HOMs.

So we'll let this AI be a family of groups.

Suppose we have a family of homomorphisms.

Fij, note the map, goes Aj to Ai for all i less than or equal to ij with.

So Fii is going to be the identity on Ai.

And then Fik is Fij precomposed with Fjk.

And so this pair, Ai, Fi, is going to be an inverse system of groups and morphisms.

And so the inverse limit is actually a subgroup of the direct product of the Ais.

so you construct a as the inverse limit which is all the a's in this um in this direct product such that so ai is fij aj so fij of aj is pulling out the ai component

Okay.

All right.

So a little technical.

Sorry about that.

Right.

So light for a finite set is actually just going to be, I'll just make this nice.

So light for a finite set is just a countable limit of finite sets.

Right.

So you can define it in terms of size, weight, but countable sounds good.

So again, an example of a light for a finite set, the finite sets are the smallest infinite for a finite set is the one point compactification of the integers.

And also the Cantor set.

All right.

So let's go back to what a condensed set is, and then I will be done in about 10 minutes.

Okay.

So what is a condensed set?

So remember Schultz and Klaassen, they had this idea of like, how do I define a sheaf over a point?

Super revolutionary, very cool idea.

So there's condensed sets and there's light condensed sets.

And so a light condensed set, it's a sheaf on the category of light per finite sets.

So

This is not a Hartshorn sheaf.

This is a categorical sheaf.

So you write it as this.

So light condensed sets are actually sheaves on the category of finite sets.

And so they have this proposition that there's a more general way of thinking about these.

A sheaf on a category is normally a set-valued functor.

So you let condenseC denote the category of condensed objects of C, where C is a small category.

And then, so the condenseC can be represented as a category of small sheaves on C. Great.

So what we need is this, the equivalently condition.

So condenseC can be represented as a representable functor, which takes this form C off to set.

All right.

So here's the cool part, right?

So to summarize, we're trying to get an episodic memory as forgetful functors.

All right.

So if you model memories as these profanite sets and you reframe recall as left, working as left junction, which is kind of like an inverse map.

So we recall

the famous proposition that any set valued functor with the left adjoint is actually represented.

That's powerful.

So what is a forgetful functor, right?

So it's a math that sort of forgets some sort of structure in the original space.

I think memory is all about forgetful functors.

What do I need in this moment?

What do I not need?

Short-term memory, long-term memory, personal, semantic.

You're eliding something in order to create meaning.

So the forgetful functor, for instance, from compact Hausdorff topological spaces into all topological spaces, we'll call this functor U, has a left adjoint.

You can informally call it an inverse map from the topological spaces to the compact Hausdorff topological spaces.

And it sends a general topological space to a compact Hausdorff topological space.

This is very beautiful.

It's called a stone check compactification.

And it comes up in the work with profinite sets.

Right, so the stone check compactification is in general very large, but this is sort of like an example of what you're forgetting, right?

Yeah, I'll just say that, right?

So you're like forgetting the compact condition and to get to topological spaces, right?

Okay, so let's get just a little technical, but I'll just kind of go quickly through these slides.

So why is Grothendieck interested in descent theory?

What is this, right?

So kind of a scary definition, but it's okay.

So the theory of descent can most aptly be characterized as, so from the point of view of infinity category theory, which I've given some talks on.

So descent is a study of generalizing the sheave condition on pre-sheave, right?

So I mean, pre-sheave is a tool for tracking this local data.

And sheafifying it pretty much means you're giving very strict gluing conditions on these things.

So you want to study the generalization of that sheaf condition on pre-sheaves to pre-sheaves with values in higher categories.

So that's why we're calling this the infinity category point of view.

So those higher pre-sheaves that satisfy descent are called infinity stacks.

And so again, I think like gluing and recall or like gluing, sheaf gluing would be a nice

Mathematization of vivid,

profound imagery that imitates reality.

That's what I'm saying.

So I think it's in the gluing conditions where the hyperphantasia works.

Okay.

So more generally, descent theory studies the existence and uniqueness of an object in a higher category, provided some inverse image functor, which produces an object in some other category.

So you can sort of reconstruct the object from a higher category itself.

I'll just say this.

All right.

So the non-uniqueness is normally parameterized by equipping this object, F star u, with an additional gluing data, which we'll call gazai.

So this pair is called a descent datum.

So you have a reconstruction procedure of u from the actual data.

And so that's actually called a descent.

Okay, so the section of descending is formalized as what is called a descent condition.

So again, getting this F star map.

So you have an object U and a higher category CX and an inverse image functor, right?

So F star is just an inverse image functor.

from the higher category to a not a lower category c y okay so think of f star as an inverse image function that's what we're looking for so inverse image pulling this thing back and then this gluing data okay that's what we're looking for so to get very beautiful with this you could say every infinity one category of infinity one sheaves is a sub infinity one topos of the infinity one topos of pre-sheaves on a small category

So once again, that's something an object that you have is reconstructed from another object.

So it's this sort of like local to global phenomenon.

Right.

I will say

Each infinity topos is a reflective subcategory and a localization, which is sort of like a way of saying adding inverses of an infinity one category and a collection of morphisms which are sent to equivalences by the left adjoint of the inclusion.

So precisely those objects such that the pre-sheaves are precisely the local objects, this is an isomorphism in the homotopy category.

Homotopy investigates these continuous deformations of objects.

So the descent condition is how you actually descend from the higher category down.

So hyperphantasia is going to be this particular reflection, localization.

That's what I'm thinking.

Another one of my colleagues did this self-portrait of herself in a black hole.

This is sort of like, for me, what I think about as descent as a hyperphantasia.

You have a memory upon memory between any two memories, you have another memory.

So memory of self, memory of what I was, memory of what I could be.

Since there is no linear ordering, the time for the memory space can go both ways, I think.

And so having like spaghettification in the black hole and having redshift around the black hole and time sort of stopping,

But then you have that layered on the sense of self.

So I think for someone like me, if you're like, oh, describe yourself, it'd be something like this.

And so the image itself has so many layers just sort of on it.

So descent ingredients would be something like, so a more gentle way of saying this is that

that descent has a somewhat formidable reputation, as you can see, amongst algebraic geometers and almost everybody.

So in fact, it simply says that under certain conditions, homomorphisms between quasi-coherent sheaves, which is just sort of like a sheaf of modules over the structure sheave of a ring space,

We have a structure that conditions, sorry, that homomorphisms on the quasi-coherent sheets can be constructed locally and then actually glued together if they satisfy a certain compatibility condition.

And then while the quasi coherent sheaves themselves can be constructed locally and glued together by isomorphisms, that satisfies something.

So going from local to global is actually the same notion that I was saying earlier in the category theory sense of reconstructing data from higher category to a lower category.

All right.

So you have this notion of category theory, of a category in which descent theory works.

And these categories are actually known as stacks, right?

So what you really want to say is that in working in descent, you naturally work in fiber categories.

So that's why I said, you know, you want to fix a certain memory m and consider this set of memories over m. And so you actually call a fiber category as a generalization of a functor.

It's called a lax 2 functor or a pseudofunctor.

And then a pre-sheaf is going to be a functor.

A pre-stack is a fibered category.

And a stack is a category of sheaves on the site.

So this is how everything sort of works.

So you associate with a fibered category, oversee the data for a pseudofunctor.

And then so stacks are going to be the correct generalization of sheaves.

And you're going to get this nice notion of the sheaf of categories.

so if you want to actually say um so in a nicer way like what does descent mean when you're gonna you're gonna hear this everywhere like in that sort of literature and arithmetic geometry uh so to say you know descent for quasi-coherent sheaves these certain these sheaves of modules um or to say something satisfies descent you're going to say quasi-coherent sheaves satisfy descent with respect to

A particular topology, FPQC, stands for phase, really flat, quality, compact, just a specific topology in the gluing map.

To say something satisfies descent is to say that they form a stack.

That's all we're going for.

So when you say that the memory sets satisfy descent, I mean that you can actually stackify them.

So this word subcanonical is, again, very powerful.

I want to mention it one more time.

And I'm talking about the topology on the memory space.

I'm hoping that you need something that's like the topology needs to be sub canonical.

OK, so topology on a category is called sub canonical.

Every representable functor on C is a sheaf with respect to the topology.

So every representable functor

is a sheaf.

And then a subcanonical site is a category endowed with a subcanonical topology.

So a fun fact, because this is fun.

The name subcanonical comes from the fact that on a category C, there's topology known as the canonical topology.

This is the finest topology in which every representable functor is a sheaf.

Very beautiful.

So these concepts of subcanonical, I think, can be infused very beautifully into this notion of surprisal

So what does it mean to sheafify a functor?

So the construction of the sheafification of a pre-sheaf on sets on a topological space can be generalized.

I'll just say, so to sheafify a functor, we're just going to add the sort of categorical definition of what restriction map is.

In the interest of time, I'm just going to go over this.

All right.

So if C is a site,

and F from C-optic sets as a functor, then we're going to say that FA, C-optic set, is a sheafification of F, an amorphism from F to a sheaf factors uniquely through FA.

These are diagrams.

So there exists a sheafification up to FA, which is unique up to a canonical isomorphism.

This is the thing that I'm actually using in my work.

OK.

This is technical.

You don't need this.


UNKNOWN:
OK.


SPEAKER_00:
So let's get to the descent condition.

So why is this actually important?

Again, why am I looking at descending or pulling back memories?

Because I think that's what leads to the vividness and also the notion that there is no distance between these things.

So let C be a site.

A fibered category over C should be thought of as a functor from C to the category of categories.

So you fix a category, we want to look at the category of categories over that category.

So a stack is, morally,

a sheaf of categories of C. All right.

So if C is a site, the functor from C optoset, we also consider it as a category, vibrant insets.

Big note that f is a pre-stack if and only if it is a, it's called a separated functor, but f is a stack if and only if it is a sheep.

So this is the reason why you need, this is the reason why I'm working with like sheeps and what it means that if something satisfies descent, sheep becomes a stack.

okay so um there's an archetypal example of descent that you work with the category of continuous maps and that category is fibered over topological spaces by this functor p sends each continuous map to its co-domain

And then, so suppose that F goes from X to U, and G, Y to U. These are two objects in the category of continuous maps, mapping the same object in the topological spaces.

So you want to construct a continuous map phi from X to Y over U?

Yes.

Okay.

So I don't want to talk about this.

Okay.

So in this, because I'm already out of time.

So in the new model, the idea is, again, if you categorify these episodic memories as these fiber categories I've been showing, fix a memory, look at the set of memories over this.

And then so episodic memories would seem to be fibered in the sense that they lie over each other.

And so it's this sort of stack that I'm sort of interested in.

So memories stack for the hyperphantasia

And this sort of stacking-ness is what leads to the vividness.

So the descent conditions would be the following.

You use descent to represent hyperphantasia, memory, sheaves, satisfy descent.

And then this pair f star phi would actually be the categorical descent data.

So therefore, if you actually use this stackification method, then you get a surprisal as a sheafification of memory, right?

And so what you can do is this, right?

So the way that, so I have some results that I'm sort of thinking of.

And so you construct this functor from the category topological spaces over a profinite set.

And then you just get the

final, the ideas, right?

So there's a specific topology called the pro-attel topology, which is sort of like the attel topology for specific morphisms.

And that topology is a subcanonical.

So based on some of Schulz's very powerful theorems and his work on perfectoid spaces, remember the subcanonical topology is very important that every representable functor is a sheath.

So Schulz has this lemma that says the fibrid category is sending any perfectoid space to the category of locally finite three OX modules, the structure sheet, is a stack on the v-site, this is called the v-typology, on the perfectoid space.

Okay, so using these

using that Lemma and his other work on the V-typology, I thought, okay, we're just going to sort of shift these to the memory setting.

So I'm going to say let Y be a condensed set of episodic memories, and the functor which assigns to an extremely disconnected space is a profinite set.

The category Y over S is a stack for the protel topology.

So this right here would be the way of actually showing that

showing the actual descent conditions on the episodic memories.

Second claim, I recall topological space is a condensed set number, which is a sheep of sets on the Protel site.

The fiber category sending any X?

in the category of continuous maps to the category of locally free, locally finite free OX modules.

This would be a stack on the Protol site on condensed C. So on the actual condensed, the category condensed sets on C. All right.

So these results would be, how do you actually get, how do you sheafify the memory space?

And these themselves would be the descent conditions on Fantasia.

So these two claims would be actually like my new model of self-information would be, okay, you construct surprisal in this sheet condition and surprisal is actually just how far stacked your memory space is and rethinking surprisal in terms of descent, in terms of what I can recall back.

Because if I could actually theoretically recall everything, I think I would have no surprisal, you know, and I'll just say thank you.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
it was amazing shana thank you in the last minutes i'll quickly ask some of the great questions in the live chat okay i'll begin with the one and only dean who wrote if p attic as non-linear

Do we suspend the concept of next?

Do we begin at a place of all?

With all as our moves starter, do we need thresholds?

i.e.

all puzzle pieces are present and each is connected regardless of order of application, all pieces simply fit.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow, go Dean.

Yeah, I don't know if Dean's still there.

Yeah, Dean, please respond.

That's a great idea.

Do you get rid of the idea next?

Yeah, I think so.

I think so.

That would be pretty phenomenal.

Does this happen next or does it happen at the same time?

So Dean, yeah, do you mean like all in the sense of... It's not that everything happens at once.

I like your idea of all.

I think all can be zoomed into.

And so, yeah, abandoning the notion of next, that does sound a little radical, doesn't it?

Yeah, there would be nothing next.

It's more sort of like it's more now.

So I don't know if you're abandoning it.

You're just sort of, it's phase changing.

I love Dean.

Such a good question.


SPEAKER_01:
To the next question by Bert, who wrote, what about memories of imagined objects or events?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So Bert, that's actually what I'm trying to like poke at here.

Memory of an imagined event.

So if you're like me that between any two memories, there's another one.

And then between any two memories, there's like a hyperphantasia memory.

I don't know.

I'm starting to call into question like memory of an imagination, imagination of memory.

And so how do you work that sort of discursively?

And also,

Like, does the event get, like, when does, when, when are you, when, like, are you able to realize that the memory of that thing was imagined?

I don't know.

But yeah, I think the questions that you're asking is sort of the mess that I'm in on this MISO scale.

On this MISO scale, when does the memory of the imagined object turn into the memory of like a real object?

And so I think, Bert, you're in the same space that I'm in.

Why is it that the thing you call memory is just the thing that comes out and it's in the macro world?

But Daniel, I don't know.

What does it mean to have a memory of something imagined?


SPEAKER_01:
Would we even know?


SPEAKER_00:
I like your language there, Bert.

I'll just say thanks.

I'll look into that because on the hyperphantasia scale, I'm not sure if I'm doing that all the time.

So, you know, Meisner acting says you're living truthfully under imaginary circumstances.

I think this is pretty much people all the time.

But yeah, yeah, yeah.

So in what, and that's why we're interested in these sheaves, in what layer does the imagination, the imagined object flip into?

Okay, that didn't happen.

Store it over there.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, and...

a question string of questions from sonia who wrote could this lead to a typology of how hyperfantastics quote picture conceptuality a space of abstractions and how a-fantastics

Afantastics conceptualize or perceive complex visual situations.

Do afantastics abstract infinitely into the future?

No gru-blean spatio-temporal ambiguities possible, and hyper-fantastics hold gru-blean for experience all the time, implying a different type of spatio-temporality or conception of infinity.


SPEAKER_00:
yes sonia sonia hey all right yeah grublin like okay that's yeah fantastical i love that yeah yeah yeah so um yeah sure what whatever you're calling your spatial temporal uh construct and whatever that space is yeah i think um absolutely has to do with um the topology the typology of how your memory space is constructed yeah so on the aphantasia side you will have no problem

working with just the idea of the space.

You aren't, in a sense, limited by trying to perceive the visualization of a tesseract.

Well, this is a 4D spatial object.

I can't perceive that.

But as an aphantasic, I can go in the infinite process of working on the idea of the tesseract, which Sonia does so well.

Sonia is the master of discursivity on taking a concept and just looking at every possible part of it and how it reflects on itself.

um and so i think both of these both of these extremes are going to work with the uh absolute reflection of these two spaces so yeah the topology of something like an aphantasia in the memory space and the topology of a hyperphantasia memory space absolutely is going to reflect um just like based on something that's taught reflect your spatial temporal um

like construct, but also I think I'm interested in like the frequency of the spatial temporal concept construct that you're working with.

And then even that itself would have like an expiration date.

So I love that space time for an aphantasia is totally different than space time for the hyperphantasia.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, last question with a short answer.

Dave Douglas wrote, are a phantastics actually devoid of imagery, blind from birth would be considered separately given that their fantasies are kinesthetic?

Or do they, quote, fail to access their fantasies?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, I love that.

Yeah, that's great.

So again, I'm more versed on the hyperphantasic side, which is why I went that way.

I like that.

Feeling to access their fantasies.

And again, and so I don't think any of this is sort of like negative by any means.

They sort of, you can say they go beyond visualization.

Why do I only need to see in the 400, 700 nanometer range?

So I think they could be actualizing their own fantasies in the analytic, in the fact that they don't need to actually be hindered by a visual representation.

that they can access it through the idea of it.

So say Artemis was my fantasy or something, okay, that I don't have to like visualize her.

It's weird, but that I can, the idea of Artemis, I have immediate access to.

So I really like that claim, but I also think it's not a failure in any way.

I think they're actually getting the fantasy on the idea front.

Such good questions.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Shana.

It's been a great year with MathArt and all of our colleagues.

So looking forward to how this all continues.

Thanks a lot.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you so much.

Thank you so much, Dino.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess05

SPEAKER_02:
Hello, welcome back.

We're here with Matthew Brown discussing real-time active inference for adaptive robotic control.

So put away the memories that you haven't had yet and let's talk about robotics.

Thank you, Matt.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Daniel.

This is going to be a bit of a change of direction, although that was a really great talk.

I'm looking forward to reviewing a lot of the talks from the last day.

That was pretty amazing from China.

I'm Matt.

Great to be here.

Super excited to share updates about what we're doing.

Just to give a little bit of background on myself,

I've been working in artificial intelligence for a little over 20 years, including time in the defense industry, writing AI for video games, things like Halo, Bioshock, Splinter Cell, those franchises.

And over the last 10 years, I've been working in more serious AI, particularly in deep reinforcement learning and now in active inference.

notably built the first commercially available deep reinforcement learning platform, which was bought by Microsoft in 2018, is now the autonomous systems platform there.

Currently, I'm at a startup at ThoughtForge that I began about five years ago.

ThoughtForge's technology started as a personal research project back in 2007 that never really ended, exploring biologically plausible alternate approaches to machine learning.

And over the last couple of years, I've been applying it to adaptive real-time control for robotics.

That's what I'm going to be going through today.

Just a quick brief agenda on what I'll be talking about and go through quick.

Well, not so quick.

I'll go through an introduction a lot about the high level concepts, then dig into briefly the history of the project and the implementation.

And then go into some of the more interesting topics in depth here, network self models, embodiment, synchronization, a lot of the tools that we're using to get these robots to do interesting things.

And then spend some time talking about what we've been doing with robotics.

So show some videos, perhaps, and just explain a little bit about the direction that we're going over the next couple years.

So I'm not gonna spend very long on this slide as it's probably redundant as the topic du jour.

I will just briefly emphasize the last point on the slide here, which is about how the free energy principle provides a unifying framework that explains how adaptive behavior, perception and action can emerge from the drive to maintain a stable internal state in a constantly changing environment.

This is gonna be a theme throughout the talk.

So I figure point that out.

And this one as well, I'm probably not going to go into too much, but it's worth noting the last two points here about organisms don't passively respond to sensory input, but also actively shape their environment through actions that fulfill their predictions about their sensory experience.

And then also about how active inference explains how organisms achieve complex self-directed behavior by combining sensory processing with active exploration.

This is also going to be a common theme throughout the talk.

Now we're going to go a little bit deeper into what we're specifically using for our robotic models and the roots in cybernetics.

In particular, the relationship between the free energy principle, active inference, and cybernetics, which might be obvious to many people at this symposium.

Cybernetics here being

pioneered in the 1940s, also describes self-regulating systems that adapt to their environments and also kind of views agents as goal-directed systems seeking to maintain equilibrium through feedback loops.

The goal here being to minimize free energy or surprisal

the FEP and active inference.

And active inference kind of operationalizes this through continuous adjustment of beliefs and actions.

And these cybernetic ideas are foundational, I believe, to how the free energy principle and active inference view organisms as systems that maintain their states within a predictable range and also resist entropy and disorder by adjusting internal and external variables over time.

Now, digging one step deeper into the approaches that we're taking here, I'm gonna talk a little bit about the cybernetics of Ross Aspey in particular.

Cybernetics Ross Aspey, he formalized many key ideas, homeostasis in particular as the process by which an organism regulates internal conditions within a narrow optimal range in the face of environmental changes and disturbances.

He's known for,

these are probably the two biggest things he's known for the good regulatory theorem and the law of requisite variety uh the good regulator theorem commonly is quoted as every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system um or more accurately every good regular must contain a model of that system um and with the law of requisite variety the the

common quote is, the only variety can destroy variety.

And another way of thinking about this is a system must be as complex or more complex than its environment in order to manage it effectively.

Or if one system wants to effectively manage or control another system, it must be at least as expressive and at least as complex as the system it's controlling.

In the active inference framework, an agent maintains homeostasis by minimizing prediction error, effectively predicting and compensating for environmental fluctuations.

So this is how Ashby's ideas really kind of come into play here.

Ashby's emphasis on adaptive regulation through internal models aligns very closely with active inference's process of continuously updating beliefs and taking actions to minimize prediction error and maintain desired states.

Ashby's view of homeostasis as a self-regulating feedback system is effectively a form of active inference.

Both involve an agent using internal models to anticipate and counteract environmental changes, preserving stability and adaptability through continuous self-correction.

And Ashby's law of requisite variety here highlights the

you know a lot of the successes of active uh when activism is successful uh and uh of maintaining homeostasis here um relying on the system's capacity to generate a diverse and precise range of predictions and actions uh without sufficient variety of responses the system would fail to adapt leading to a breakdown in homeostasis and an increase of prediction error predictive error um

To exemplify these ideas, Ross Ashby constructed a device known as the homeostat.

This was back in the 1940s.

This was a demonstration of learning as adaptation as stability.

And he believed that behavior is adaptive.

It contributes to the maintenance of these essential variables.

And there's some various ways of looking at what he was doing here.

Some called it an isomorphism generating machine using feedback to generate distributed homostasis.

via ultra stability.

And I'll get more into that in a little bit.

But that's kind of the approach that we've taken here at ThoughtForce.

And then there's kind of a long description here from one of his books about what the homeostat was and how to construct it.

And I'll also talk a bit more about how you would construct a homeostat in a moment here.

Here's a quick high-level abstract view of Ashby's original homeostat.

This is abstracted away in a way that reflects modern views of mathematical networks here, where you can define a network as a set of nodes with connections and weights.

Then he defined ultra-stability as

the mechanism that powers the race of state space exploration, which is used as part of this law of requisite variety.

And I'll talk in the next slide a bit about that.

The network as a whole creates a dynamic attractor set as a kind of a self-consistent, self-reinforcing model.

And the network can be seen as kind of a network of reciprocal constraints.

The original homeostat only had four nodes here, constructed from recycled World War II bomb parts.

So this is pre-digital computer era.

And there's a diagram here kind of conceptually explaining how it worked.

The original homeostat itself, I think, is at the university right now, but the description of how it actually works is somewhat abstract.

At Thoughtforge, we used a lot of his technical journals, which were released by his family, I believe, online in the last 15 years or so, to kind of get more detailed information about the properties and how they're constructed to get a more accurate description.

reconstruction of the homeostatic.

Briefly, I'm just going to talk a little bit about ultra stability.

Ultra stability is the property of the individual node in this network that enables the group property of homeostasis.

The ultra stability here is talked about in Ashby's books and papers.

So I don't think it's necessary to go through a deep, deep analysis of it.

But the ultra stability mechanism is kind of the local

the local mechanism within a node that drives the active process of self-organization and criticality across the network.

And it's core to the function of how the homeostat works.

And it is constructed by a double feedback loop with a low level feedback loop that performs like a linear transformation and then a high level feedback loop that updates or changes that linear transformation over time.

I like including this letter.

This was a letter from Alan Turing to Ross Ashby way back when they were kind of debating on whether or not to go with analog computing or digital computing.

here Ashby being supportive of the analog computing paradigm.

And this letter from Turing is basically saying that his computer, the ACE, was more general and more universal than Ashby's computer because you could implement Ashby's computer on Turing's machine.

um and it's just kind of a fun little piece of history here i i like including it um just to provide some context about the time when aspie was kind of considering these ideas uh and why they were kind of lost to time in a lot of senses at least within the com you know computer science world um and i also like to bring this up because uh i think it's the first at least

at least in my mind, it's the first time that we really started conflating computation with cognition here.

And where Turing had a universal computation machine, while Ashby was kind of envisioning a universal adaptation machine, something closer to cognition.

And this feels very similar to a lot of the debate we're seeing today with whether or not deep learning machines are intelligent or if they can get to AGI.

I think that a lot of the conflation

computation and cognition goes all the way back to the origins of the analog versus digital debate within computer science.

So the next question is, how do you actually build a homeostat?

And I took Turing's advice and simulated it.

We built a simulation of the homeostat.

And the reason why a simulation is useful as opposed to an analytical solution is because of the chaotic nature of how these systems reach equilibrium.

I used to have a quote here from but essentially you can't account for a lot of the chaotic interactions in the systems with loops algebraically.

The circularities and the chaos that's necessary for these to stabilize require that you do this iteratively.

And that means building a simulation that you can kind of step forward and

on the fly generate the chaotic interactions, essentially, as opposed to analytically.

There's lots of references here with the three body problem, a mapping of a line onto itself, this kind of concept of deterministic systems.

Once you have three deterministic systems interacting with each other, you inevitably get chaotic behavior.

That is kind of leveraged as the creative

creative energy that drives the

the learning process in this kind of a system.

The techniques that we use to actually simulate this, and this is, oops, I'm getting ahead of myself here, come from a field known as software radio.

We started out by going through Ashby's technical journals and his writings about how the homeostat was constructed.

And we started out by building out accurate analog level digital simulations.

And then from there, we kind of abstracted out all of the

mechanism specific machinery in the analog systems that are not necessary for the actual function of ultra stability and homeostasis.

So kind of going from this kind of very, very precise analog system to kind of abstracted implementation of these four nodes.

Once functional, and this was simple enough to kind of

further abstract into more kind of modern day network theory implementations where we can kind of build out very, very large networks, similar to how it's done with deep learning that could be connected into arbitrary network topologies as opposed to the original four node network here.

And again, just to kind of reiterate here, the network as a whole can be seen as a self model.

Each node in this network is effectively trying to predict its neighbors as it seeks equilibrium.

And the local ultra stability process tunes a node's local connections and the resulting positive and negative feedback loops that define it.

And these overlapping loops become self-reinforcing or self-repairing over time.

Once you've reached kind of a...

convergence with these feedback loops.

The final self-producing set of loops is a kind of self-model where each node is trying to predict all the others.

And so once all the nodes kind of reach a global consensus, this model can be considered self-consistent and reaches homeostatic equilibrium.

um this genera this can also be seen as kind of a generative model uh composed of emergent self-stabilizing homeostatic feedback loops uh and these loops uh are maintaining this homeostatic equilibrium in a critical state and this is kind of an important note for

why it is incredibly sample efficient, which is going to be very important for robotic applications here.

The idea here is that maintaining this homeostatic equilibrium at a critical state makes it very, very sensitive to prediction error.

The smallest predictive error can trigger a global structural change.

So you don't need to back propagate

with a large dataset in order to change the behavior of the model, a single misprediction can effectively trigger a cascading set of redefinitions where the whole network destabilizes and then reconverges on a new attracting set.

This can also be seen as a form of synchronization, and we'll get into that a little bit later.

And the prediction error reaching zero kind of marks the establishment of a new adaptive synchronization manifold.

And the synchronization first starts with immediate neighbors at each node and then spreads through the entire network as a set of compound hierarchies of feedback loops.

Looking at the time here, sometimes I could switch screens and show demonstrations of this, but maybe I'll wait a bit later to do demonstrations of the original homeostat or a larger homeostat, just so that we're not switching screens too much, in case that's useful.

All right, now we're getting into some of the more interesting stuff, less talking about history of cybernetics.

So the homeostatic network itself seems like a lot of work in terms of, you know, there's a lot going on there and it's not connected to any environment.

It's just...

learning itself in coming reaching to convergence without kind of any um sensory or motor actions so um we have this model that can adapt to its internal structure to reach homeostatic equilibrium through a kind of self-synchronization process next step is how do we actually get this to drive uh behavior uh and this took you know a couple years to kind of work out the engineering uh conceptually it's pretty simple um but it will get very complicated very quickly um the short version is that the sensors and the motors uh um

basically we define sensors of motors and they define how an agent is embedded into an environment.

And the network topology separately kind of defines the adaptive capacity of the homeostatic agents model.

The sensor definitions themselves here are

kind of defined externally from the model itself.

They provide a mechanism to influence the behavior of the system by providing priors in the form of preferred sensory states or preferred environmental states.

And these act as teleodynamic priors, kind of externally defined dynamic set points for the homeostatic adaptation.

And these sensors can be seen as input attracting sets, which can even be modified in real time or animated in real time to generate different kinds of behavior

from the same model at runtime without having to change the model structure or anything like that.

The motor definitions then provide critical affordances for how the agent can modify the environment to help provide a basis for future sensory predictions.

And the spurred states of the sensors become the preferred outcomes of the motors through this reaching equilibrium state.

And the model's behavior ends up being biased as desired.

So this is how we get it to do useful behavior in a robot, for example, from something that is

seemingly just reaching equilibrium and i guess one important or salient note here is that in a real world environment the you know there's it's reaching pure homeostatic equilibrium is is actually quite difficult unless you're uh unless you're very special circumstances um

So to expand a bit more on that, the network diagram here is kind of an overly simplified version of our homeostatic network, but meant to kind of visually explain how to think about these, and particularly here embodiment of these models in kind of

environment here.

Coupling a model like this to an environment through sensors and motors is kind of a form of embodiment here, meaning there's a kind of a specific time and place that this model is operating.

And there is kind of a temporal component here where the

the model's sequence of sensory behavior actually is relevant.

The inputs to the system are not independent, which is kind of different than traditional, what you would imagine, backpropagation-based perceptrons, how they function.

And one thing that's interesting about this, and it's worth pointing out here, is that there's no forward or backward, no feedforward or feedbackward directions in this kind of network.

There's no front or back or top to bottom.

The only thing you can really kind of

direction you can kind of take from a model like this is distance from sensors or motors or how close to the environment a particular node is.

Otherwise, relative location is pretty much everything.

As an individual node, where am I relative to the rest of the network?

And it's common for people to think of machine learning models these days, especially if you're

used to think about deep learning or traditional perceptron-based backpropagation models, to think of it as a sequential flow of processing.

Like, I take in an input, I perceive or I do planning on the input, and then I generate an action.

That's not how these networks function.

Instead, everything kind of happens all the time and everything's overlapping.

What I mean by that is, this is not a sandwich model, I guess, is the term.

Time simply advances and information moves from one node to another

all in parallel.

So in traditional deep learning, it's kind of an atemporal process where information goes from the inputs to the outputs instantaneously.

And there's no internal time, unless you're working with recurrent neural networks, and there are ways of adding a temporal aspect of it.

But the temporal aspect is really a fundamental feature of these types of nodes.

What that means is

The network itself, the homeostatic feedback loops come to be dependent on expected sensory signals, meaning the deeper parts of the network are generating predictive signals forward to the sensors.

In order for this to function, the deeper parts of the model have to be actually actively predicting the sensory inputs that are coming in.

This, I believe, also means that it ends up becoming grounded in the embodied experience itself, meaning the homeostatic self-maintenance of this network is composed of environmental signals from the real world or whatever embodiment you've put this model in.

and as part of its kind of predictions and expectations, meaning the actual sensory experience is

what is being predicted.

And so what the model is actually generating is derived originally from this essentially embodied experience.

The expectations and predictions for the consequences of motor actions are kind of embedded in the behaviors that are being generated, embedded in the signals sent to the sensors from deeper in the network.

At the same time as these kind of predictive signals are being sent to the sensory regions, actions are being sent to the motors.

and these actions at any moment are not based on the latest input but based on predictions about what the model believes is going on in the world world and how best to to kind of satisfy the sensory inputs or get the the model into a preferred state or a lower energy state or lower surprisal state um these kind of these motor actions are accompanied in parallel by sensory predictions that are all moving kind of to the to the to the

this the uh the i don't want to say the front of the network but the the abstraction that defines the embodiment you know go to the sensors and motors um it kind of in parallel um this is this may be familiar to people who are who are um have read about perceptual control theory and predictive processing and very much uh

along those same exact lines in terms of what's going on here, in terms of actively generating predictions to counteract sensory input.

The motors here end up being kind of a critical part of making the future sensory experiences easier to predict as part of this whole process.

Another way to look at this homeostatic process is through synchronization.

The homeostatic process can be seen as generating an adaptive synchronization manifold between the agent and the environment based around minimization of prediction error, basically

minimizing the difference between what I'm predicting the environment is doing and what the environment is actually doing.

This is kind of a synchronization as prediction process where when the two systems are synchronized, they can be thought of as predicting each other, anticipating the other.

Individual nodes are using ultra-civility to predict their neighbors.

And then when at equilibrium, all the nodes are synchronized through these feedback loops, the synchronization

between the nodes spreads to hold network synchronization at this point.

Ultimately, this synchronization spreads across the sensory and motor abstraction between the environment and an agent.

So you kind of get an agent environment synchronization process through this.

Looking at it another way, these overlapping feedback loops interact and synchronize with each other as part of the homeostatic self-maintenance.

As these feedback loops extend from motors through an environment back into the sensors, the model gains the ability to anticipate the consequences of its own actions.

And the capacity to synchronize internal states with something in the external world without direct communication is kind of critical to this.

The synchronization means that the internal states become

they come to resemble internal states of the other system.

And when at this kind of synchronized homeostatic state, it's also in this kind of critical state, sensitive to local prediction errors.

And like I mentioned before, this is kind of critical because that allows internally the model to completely restructure itself or redefine how it predicts sensory experience at the very slightest misprediction.

And this is very, very critical for sample efficiency.

To contrast this with deep learning models or deep reinforcement learning models, you need a very large amount of data to kind of change the domain or the way in which the models are behaving in the world, while in these kind of models, they can kind of change with the slightest, one piece of data can kind of trigger global restructuring.

So one interesting aspect here is that in order to maintain the synchronization manifold, the network must be able to converge to equilibrium faster than the environment can destabilize it.

And so this kind of goes back to Ashby's theory of the good regulator theorem or the law of requisite variety, where the model has to be more complex than the environment is trying to control and has to be at least as expressive as the environment is in terms of coming up with solutions.

And, you know,

I was going to go a bit more into synchronization and how once the network is synchronized with the environment, once two elements internal to the systems are synchronized, they can coordinate without direct communication.

This is important to the whole process so that the sensor and motor abstractions don't have to be the direct link between an aspect of the model and an aspect of the environment.

Once synchronized, those two pieces can

coordinate in terms of their behaviors will be coordinated without direct communication between the two.

So now onto some more fun stuff.

The killer application of all this is robotics.

Other early avenues we looked into is, for example, applying this for anomaly detection where you can kind of use the network as a thermometer for surprisal.

The other way you can kind of use this applied to like modern deep learning is for like a model drift detection where you can kind of use the model to detect when a deep learning system is being used.

on a uh if if the input stream to a deep learning system is being is diverging from the model uh domain so like if the sorry the the training domain so if the data set you used to train it on is starting to differ from how it's actually being used uh this could kind of uh be useful for that um but really i feel like

Robotics is really the killer application for this, especially when you consider the embodied nature of it.

The embodiment is kind of a requirement for how this model works in terms of having to be embedded in an environment.

This could be a virtual environment as well, but it has to have some sort of sensory motor coupling to something external to itself.

Also, the ability to kind of

understand context over time and understand that even for a sensory input that is the same as some other, a sensory input at another time, the things that have happened previous to it are relevant.

And so building up this context awareness through interaction with environment is kind of critical to how our models work, but also very important for robotics.

And then real-time adaptation of the model, being able to update the model in real time as actions are being performed,

is kind of a really useful technique in robotics in order to enable dexterity and adaptation in the moment that is missing from a lot of robotic applications here.

And specific to deep reinforcement learning and deep learning

ways of doing robotic control, there's this field known as Sim2Real.

And so Sim2Real problems come from, deep reinforcement learning is where they're commonly referred to, but it's where the models are sensitive to simulation fidelity.

The idea being that you've trained a model in simulation and how the model behaves is very sensitive to

the specifics of the physics in that simulation or the actual fidelity of that simulation.

So moving to the real world often shifts the input domain and deep reinforcement learning and deep learning models are not usually robust to these kinds of changes unless you

drastically increase the amount of data through domain randomization, which causes other problems such as the curse of dimensionality.

There's all sorts of solutions to the sim2real problem.

For us, we sidestep all this by leveraging real-time learning and adaptation.

So when the model is presented with something new or unusual,

in the moment we we don't we don't separate the the training phase from the deploy you know the the inference phase it it as it's inferring it's doing the updating and the learning um and this this kind of solves a lot of the center real problems um as the model is able to adapt to whatever differences uh happen in the real world that were not represented in the simulation um

So this is a long-winded explanation of why we went after robotics for applying these kinds of models.

Digging into the more robotic side of things in terms of technical detail, in terms of how we're actually implementing this, for a lot of our interoperability between a lot of different robots, the model itself doesn't really care what kind of robot you apply this to.

So you get a lot of hardware agnosticism where you can take a model built for one robot arm and apply it to another robot arm, for example,

and the model will adapt to any kind of kinematic differences between the two, that kind of thing.

This is a diagram of how we fit into ROS.

ROS is the Robot Operating System and it's the open source academic

software framework that is used across that supports a lot of robots.

It's not used in a lot of industrial settings, but it's incredibly flexible in its ability to experiment and try new things.

And so we've kind of used this as our kind of beachhead robotic stack implementation.

These

homeostatic models are particularly small.

They only operate typically about 30k of memory.

They can operate on edge devices, no GPU needed, no cloud needed.

In fact, you want to run it as close to the robot as possible to minimize latency in the control phase.

It just runs in a single CPU.

Because of our implementation of ultra stability and this homeostatic networks are

quite efficient model uptake times our sub millisecond.

So this enables us to update the model and update that synchronization manifold as a task is being performed.

We've clocked the networks being able to run up to 80 kilohertz, but for most robotic control algorithms, 500 hertz or 1 kilohertz

typically fantastic and most robots don't support anything above that um and there's you know there's also some also some other interesting aspects to the the the technical side of things where the models are small enough and we're talking 30k here where um analytical explainability is possible where we can take a look at a robotics action and actually analyze the homeostatic network to figure out um which sensory inputs or which you know which motor output

which sensory inputs led to a particular decision.

And because the models are small enough, we can kind of use different kinds of network analysis approaches to figure that out.

On the more technical detail side, in case it's useful, our models are built in C++ and we have a Python wrapper.

So that gives us a lot of integration to capabilities to lots of different robots, which is useful and fun.

I'm just going to go through some of the applications that we've done in the past, and I could bring up a demonstration and do it live.

This was a use case we did for a company for adaptive inspection.

They had a use case where they have autonomous vehicles going through a field, and they needed a robotic arm to compensate for movement or unexpected orientations and

configurations of the autonomous vehicle base without knowing ahead of time what it was going to encounter.

And so, yeah, this was kind of a fun, interesting, pretty simplistic model that we built for them.

And you can see kind of a fun video here of it in our lab kind of tracking this QR code.

And going one step further in terms of difficulty, this was another use case from a different customer.

They had a challenge of, they were seeing an injury with turning high pressure gas valves.

And they wanted to automate this with robots.

The problem was that they never have a good accounting for what kind of valve or what kind of, you know,

thing that needs to be turned what it was going to look like well the shape of it was going to be if it was going to be rusty and difficult to turn or if it was going to be covered in oil and slippery or if the edges were going to be worn off so they needed something that can adapt to this high level of variability in real time without access to the internet because this was on you know remote locations and so we built this model for them and you this is kind of a fun little video of it

We've turned this into an interactive demo that we've brought to conferences, which is kind of fun here.

This is just recorded on a cell phone.

You can tell it's real based on the production qualities.

But this was that valve turning model that we created before, except we've just kind of adapted it here so that we can show off

people torturing it in real-time, live, as it tries to turn these bolts of various shapes and sizes.

Some interesting things to note here, the original model that we built for this only took about 15 seconds to train, three examples, essentially, and it was only trained on a single bolt shape here, this square, in fact.

And then what we do is we kind of show how it can kind of generalize to all these other different cases here in real time without having seen any of these examples before.

And at the beginning of the video there, you can kind of see on the screen, it's our internal debugger, but it's a fun visualization because you can see the homeostatic network

um learning in real time as you kind of move this um this uh panel of bolts around um i'm just stalling a little bit there we go as you can see those little those little squiggly lines there on on the screen um that's the that's kind of a viewpoint into the 30 of the nodes of the network kind of um updating in real time as we're as we're kind of having it turn these knobs here

Getting into the less interesting stuff, but just to kind of show where we are as a technology, this is a platform we're building.

Currently, this is used internally to develop new models.

And we have some interesting tools here that allow you to effectively search ranges of topologies to experiment with different kinds of

network topologies for a particular task and then see what the performance looks like in simulation and kind of iterate on this.

Eventually, you'll also be able to connect your robot to the platform and download the model directly so that you can go straight from designing a goal specification, we call it a goal specification, but really what you're doing is you're defining those teleodynamic priors in the sensor definitions as part of that

embodiment definition, and then you go and you evaluate what topology is optimal for that definition, and then you can deploy this directly onto your robot in the real world and try it out.

next steps or the direction that we're heading um is is kind of interesting um right now a lot of the models that we're building are very kind of small and uh task specific um but we're building them in a way that is recomposable so the the idea here is instead of building one model that does a task like turning the valves this that that task is actually composed of three smaller models and the idea here is we're building up a library of recomposable sub models

so that we can kind of recompose them in simple ways to go after new tasks.

So the idea here is we can take, right now we only have a handful of submodels, but over the next year or two, we're building out this larger library of submodels that can be recomposed to go after a much wider variety of tasks.

So this diagram here is meant to show how we're kind of looking at building up this framework of recomposable models.

Eventually, that platform you saw, this one here, eventually we'll probably open this up for the public to go and compose their own models from these recomposable submodels.

And then we can even string together

you know, many models together and have a framework for deciding when to use which model.

Because they're only about 30K of memory, you can really kind of load up a robot with, you know, let's say a thousand models, for example, and you can kind of get a lot of generality just from a collection of sub-problems being solved individually in a robust manner.

So I went through this talk pretty quickly.

I figured I'll just end with some current work that we're looking at.

Right now we're working on a, this is just kind of an early look in simulation of an insertion task we're working on.

What's interesting about this is that we can't use vision for a lot of this because once the insertion process happens, the arm kind of includes the view of it.

So we're incorporating

force sensors so that we can kind of wiggle, you know, tight fitting pieces into a housing, for example.

And you really kind of need to build in this kind of nuanced feeling of, you know, wiggling something into place.

This comes very naturally to humans in terms of filling your way through a problem.

And so we're working on building up the submodels needed here for high frequency, for storage sensors, for wiggling things into place to broaden the amount of applications that we can start attacking with this approach.

So that's some current work that we're working on.

I kind of blazed through that really quickly.

I could show some live simulation demos, but maybe questions.

Maybe it makes sense to just move on to questions.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Matt.

That was awesome.

I'll ask some of the questions in the chat.

Maybe we'll still have time to see the demo, but that was really exciting.

Okay, I'll start with Black Cat, who wrote, very cool.

How would you say interoperability challenges change from software to hardware?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a good question.

There's different ways to think about it.

Moving to software, things I think get a lot easier.

Hardware is always hard and always time consuming.

For us, we're using ROS to get a lot of interoperability between different kinds of robots, but ROS is not optimal for a lot of situations.

And so there is gonna be some sort of low level drivers

that we'll have to write that are going to be hardware specific.

But for the most part, most robot manufacturers or OEMs, they have an interface that provides some sort of joint control.

So the models right now are generating effort-based controls that we then convert into positional-based controls because that's the most common.

Most robots do not support effort-based controls.

But pretty much all robotic arms in particular have some sort of joint space control interface.

So we can basically...

all we need is kind of a driver to translate the output of the model into joint space controls for that particular robot.

The other thing that's kind of interesting and you don't get this with deep reinforcement learning is that we don't actually specifically tell the model

um what each motor output does we we just have we just specify how many motor outputs there are from the model um uh although i guess we could overestimate we can give it more more actions a larger action space than it actually has and we'll just kind of learn to ignore or it will just

there will become no correlations between the unused actions and the sensory space so it ends up being unnecessary um but because we don't actually specify what each motor action is doing um it learns that uh meaning like it it will in the first couple of milliseconds of interacting uh with the it considers the robot part of the environment let me put it that way so in the first couple milliseconds of

controlling this robot, it will build up those correlations of, oh, if I apply a positive effort on this joint, it moves me away from my target.

Or if I apply a negative, it gets me closer to it.

It kind of figures out those correlations as a process of learning how to get to equilibrium, if that makes sense.

And as a result of that,

We get a lot of hardware agnosticism.

So with that valve turning model, for example, it was originally built for a different robot.

It was originally built for a heavy six degree of freedom arm.

The customer ended up deploying it on actually a different heavy robot with an additional actuator.

and the model can kind of, you know, we basically added an output to it, but the model can kind of adapt to that situation there.

For those videos you just saw, and at that conference, we then took that same model and deployed it on a different manufacturer with a six-degree freedom arm, and it kind of just figured out, you know, what it needs to do differently.

That robot is really nice because it fits in a suitcase, so it's really great to travel with.

So from the moving to software, and especially moving to this particular way of looking at the interface, it buys you a lot of interoperability

bonuses that you don't get with other approaches.

But you're still dependent on the hardware OEM's driver-level interfaces.

But generally, those are all the same.

The interfaces are all the same, even if spinning up the robot might have different mechanisms.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Six degrees of act-inf.

I'm going to cluster two questions together.

So Arun asked, how much of this is or will be open source?

And Alexandra Rorbia asked, wonderful talk, Matt.

I'm a huge fan of the homeostat, as you know.

Have you given thought to perhaps translating the homeostat to its core set of equations dynamics and contributing them to open source projects like NGC Learn so others can appreciate its value?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, great question.

And great.

I'm glad to hear Alex is on the call.

These are both great questions.

I'm always torn in terms of like what to open source and what not to open source.

I think eventually, we are going to open source a lot of this.

Right now, the intellectual property of this approach is

one of the things that is most valuable about our current business.

So from a business perspective, in the short term, we're probably not going to open source a lot of this.

We are expecting to open up our platform to a wider audience over time.

And actually, I should follow up with Alex.

We have actually kind of distilled down our implementation of the homeostat, at least.

You know, there's a lot of interpretations.

I want to say there have been five or six implementations of the homeostat over the last 80 years or so.

And they're all different, which is kind of interesting.

There's a lot of room for interpretation.

But at least our implementation of it, we have kind of distilled down to a relatively simple set of equations.

And they...

are very very similar to kind of the the um equations using the perceptron with a couple of very subtle changes and the the subtle changes here having drastic effects uh one one is that we've added state to the to the to the node um which really changes how how you think about these things as perceptrons are generally stateless and so the adding of the state there kind of adds that temporal notion so even though it's a subtle change it has drastic implications for how the actual model works um but uh and actually i might

I was trying to see if I have it as an extra slide here in the talk.

I might follow up with Alex and share those, the equations.

I'm less concerned about sharing kind of, you know, the approach and the equations for our definition of the homeostasis because these are very, very difficult to implement.

And I would kind of welcome more ideas and activity in the space.

And I need to take a closer look at NGC Learn.

I keep seeing things being added to NGC Learn and it's,

relatively new package, but there's a ton in there.

And I really kind of need to take a look at what's in there.

And if we do open source, it does make sense to maybe integrate that as potentially an option in ngc learn.

A lot of it depends on whether or not the interface is compatible with what we're doing.

And I say that not because as a limitation of ngc learn, but

more of as a limitation of how people think about machine learning models.

Most frameworks that are built around deep learning, their interfaces kind of assume atemporal behavior, where each input-output relationship is independent of the others.

But I think it's a matter of me just taking a look at NGC Learn and how it's structured and how to actually interface with it.

But I think if we do eventually open source the code, that might be the best avenue to doing it, just because that way it would be alongside a lot of these other great ideas for non-backpropagation-based machine learning.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Matt, and also really appreciate sharing that insight.

It isn't open and shut, and just because we can open source something doesn't mean we could or could in that way or should tomorrow or whatever it happens to be.

So hearing your...

your well-worn experience about all of this is really insightful.

Okay, another question from Alex.

He wrote, how do you go about designing the structure of your homeostat net?

Is it a random graph that you instantiate or some other graph type?

Does it depend on the robotic control problem?


SPEAKER_01:
That is a great question.

And just right off the start, I'll mention that it's unsolved.

It's something that we're still working on.

In terms of how we do it now, so longer term, I would love to start with a random graph and then have some sort of...

metric for evaluating what graph is better than another graph for a particular use case, and we're probably pretty close to there.

And then we could have some sort of mutation function, and that way you could kind of evolve what the right topology is for a particular graph.

I think that actually has a lot of promise, and I'd really love to get into that kind of stuff.

Right now, what we're doing is

a half step in that direction.

We have found that the topology has a big impact on how good the model is at performing particular tasks, meaning you can take a random model and then try to have it turn valves, for example, but often it'll do a pretty poor job or it'll be slow or it'll be a little wobbly.

And so really kind of fine tuning what the topology is for a particular task is critical if you actually want

a really effective robotic control model uh and so the way that we've been solving this is um for specifically robotic control we've come up with a a way of parameterizing the topology um and this kind of constrains the search process for what is finding the right topology and then what we do is in that platform you saw in this platform the primary thing that this platform is doing is providing an interface to do that topology search so

In the back end here, when you actually are trying to find what is the optimal topology for a particular use case, what's actually going on is that it's using that kind of parameterized search space and doing a big search.

And so we're actually leveraging some cloud compute here for this.

Not a ton.

It's not particularly expensive.

The training process only takes about 15 seconds per model.

So we're using AnyScale, which is built on an open source technology called Ray, which is...

really good at spinning up, let's say, thousands of CPUs at once.

And so the idea here is we can go and spin up 20,000 different topologies and then evaluate of those 20,000, which one is optimal for a particular use case.

And this process takes about five minutes.

And so we're trying to get that as short as possible so that this is kind of a compilation time interaction, as opposed to training the model for a day and then coming back and seeing how it performs.

You can go and explore 20,000 different

topologies and figure out which one is optimal for your particular use case so that's our current approach which is kind of like a brute pro force approach um but longer term i would love to get to that evolutionary uh approach where we kind of start with a random model maybe we can estimate what a good starting size is or maybe we have some sort of um uh some you know uh

heuristic for deciding whether or not to shrink the model or grow the model.

But to contrast it with deep learning, this is one of the downsides of the approach is that the topology itself is

is very critical for good performance.

As opposed with deep learning, you can often just go with a larger model and just give it more data, and you can kind of get the same performance as a smaller model.

I think this makes sense from a biological standpoint in the sense that our brains are not just randomly connected.

They are evolved over time.

And you can imagine how some brains might perform better at certain tasks than other brains.

And so I think this topology-dependent behavior is

not necessarily problematic or wrong.

It's just something we have to deal with.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

I'll read a comment from Scott David.

This is, as most emissions from Scott's language model, it's not necessarily a question.

So if you have a response, go for it.

And then I do a question that also connects with Ian and a little interoception.

So Scott wrote,

It is interesting to consider the hardware software question of application of active inference in light of the historical encounter of Claude Shannon with von Neumann when Shannon was encouraged to apply the second law of thermodynamics to his quantitative theory of information.

There's a lot better.


SPEAKER_01:
I might need to take a look at that in text form and come up with a coherent response textually.

But there's a lot there.

There are a lot of Shannon-level information constraints at the hardware level, especially when you're talking about update rates.

For example,

the model, the model as part of its embodiment has a temporal aspect to it too, in terms of the frequency of updates of the model has to be consistent, like you can't update it, you know, 100 times per second, you know, for one second, and then a million times per second for the next second.

So there is, there are kind of interesting information theory dome, you know, problems here with, you know, Nyquist theorem, like, as the sensory inputs are coming in, are you getting sensory inputs at a high enough frequency to actually

make interesting inferences about them.

On the robotic side, there are absolutely control constraints.

If you're only able to take an action once per second, you're very limited in terms of what you can do with a robot, as opposed to if you can take an action every two milliseconds, there's a lot more nuance in the feedback process in the control.

So there's absolutely some information theoretic stuff on that interface, in that embodiment definition.

For the most part, I haven't

I don't want to say we've done anything particularly innovative on that side.

It's just these are all things that you kind of have to understand as part of the constraints of the implementation.

But definitely send me the text for that question, and I'll try to come up with a more coherent and thorough response.

There's a lot in there.


SPEAKER_02:
cool and the historical part was was epic um okay here's a a question so ian not sure which parts you listened to from prior maybe matt give a first pass but i was really interested when you mentioned the difference between the position sensors and the effort sensors so how does that play out in robotics and then like into the interoception and introspection angle

In what ways does our postural adjustment relate to positional inference and effort inference?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a fun question.

Unfortunately, I have a feeling my answer is going to be not too interesting in terms of we're not doing anything particularly innovative here either.

The outputs of the model are almost unitless in the sense that they'll kind of adapt to their embodiment in terms of like, so we've kind of been interpreting them as efforts or like you can think of this as like torque controls.

For robotics, this is problematic though, because first of all,

I want to say 90% of robots or 95% of robots don't support torque-based controls.

There are just a few robots out there that require that.

And for the most part, they're confined to research applications.

But the reason why they exist and the reason why there's a lot of interest in it, especially with deep reinforcement learning, is if you can go to effort-based controls or torque-based controls directly to the robot, there's a lot of nuanced behavior you can get.

You can get really kind of

compliant behavior where the robot's applying just enough force to perform a task.

That way, if you bump into it, it's not going to hurt anything and it'll be compliant.

And you can kind of get a lot of nuanced behavior with torque-based controls.

But the reality is that 95% of robots don't support that.

They just support either velocity controls or positional controls of some kind.

And so to solve that, we basically convert the effort output of the model into a relative positional change.

And then we basically integrate that relative positional change over time to get an absolute positional

control.

Not particularly interesting on that side, but it is kind of a technical note that's a bit challenging on the robotic side of things.

I hadn't really thought about it enough from an active inference perspective in terms of what does that mean for the attracting set that you're bringing in.

A lot of it is because it's somewhat disconnected from the sensory inputs.

The positional controls end up impacting the environment in some way, and then

connecting the dots kind of indirectly, that affects your sensory inputs.

But it's not like the positional versus effort outputs of the robot are directly changing how our sensory experience happens.

It's more that it might change the effectiveness or the capabilities of your robot to alter the environment, if that makes sense.

But maybe I need to think a bit more about that, because that is kind of an interesting aspect that I hadn't really considered enough.


SPEAKER_02:
How does that play out in the body, Ian?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh yeah, that's really interesting.

I've joined this conversation late, but thanks for including me, Daniel.

So yeah, I was kind of listening to that with interest and thinking of

you know, how we, as a human, something simple like the concept of being hangry, hungry and angry at the same time and how that affects our behaviour when you've got competing kind of interests or physiological variables that you're trying to deal with.

And then thinking about, okay, a robot, something simple to start off with, like maybe one of these robotic lawnmowers that needs to go back to its docking station to charge up for fuel.

so it needs to end the task it's doing and move back to its docking station and charge up but as robots get more sophisticated and they're trying to please humans more but there will be some kind of, I don't know, some limit to its

um capabilities it's internal processing or power that's and maybe at some point it will face you know absolutely you have to weigh up all of these and come to some computation about what it needs to do next to satisfy its own internal honestly i think ties into some of the stuff that alex has been talking to about with like mortal computation as well um if i'm going to be honest the robot control models we're making are


SPEAKER_01:
Far less complex than an actual biological entity like a human.

But you're absolutely right, because you're going to have all sorts of here.

Right now, we're kind of having these kind of first layer sensory inputs kind of defining the telegenic priors.

But you can imagine like a hierarchy where you have like other models that are feeding outputs that feed into your motor controls, because these motor controls are kind of the end point.

for modifying the environment.

But you can imagine why you would be reaching for a cup of water is driven by some other network that's saying, oh, you're thirsty.

And so we just, you know, I'm just not nearly there in terms of complexity yet.

But I think you're right.

Eventually we will be, especially if you want to have robots that are fully self-sufficient, fully autonomous, know when they need to repair themselves and then going out and performing those repairs, whatever that might be.

Maybe it's charging.

I think you're absolutely right.

I think that's the future, longer term.

I love it.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Matt.

Great times.

Till next time.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, likewise.


UNKNOWN:
Bye.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess06

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, Octopus, and welcome to the fourth Active Inference Symposium.

Thank you for joining us.

We're looking forward to your session titled Cognitive Bifurcations and Mathematical Explorations.


SPEAKER_01:
So in case you need a reminder of what the abstract for this talk was, and I had to look this up this morning, thinkers and thoughts have a co-evolutionary relationship.

This relationship is especially clear in the arena of mathematics, where mathematicians forage for mathematical statements and structures in a process governed by complex and potentially unstable rules.

We will give a partial mapping of the structure of this space, which necessarily relies not only on rigorous mathematical logic, but also on subjective beliefs, metacognitive heuristics, and creative play.

So I've done a magic trick here.

All of these things are claims that are in need of evidence from my perspective, and the goal here will be to

provide some evidence in that direction, but also to engage in conversation.

So in the construction of expertise, I have no ambition here to play the role of expert.

There are certainly qualifications and evidence that I could point to, my experience as a math professor for seven and a half years, my lived experience as a neurodivergent individual for 42 years,

my my time spent in an octopus identity for the last three years openly and none of those things makes what i say here more valuable than what you think about them the only request i will make is that i've given a lot of effort into thinking through these thoughts some of which were quite difficult that showed up for me and i ask that you will give some level of effort towards finding the value in those thoughts and how they can be mapped to your reality

Let's move from the abstract to abstraction.

When people think of mathematics in the modern sense, they often begin here as both its value and its difficulty.

We might imagine that Bob and Alice both have some cows.

Bob has two and Alice has three, and they're curious how many cows they would have if they combined their herd.

Alice can bring her cows to Bob and they can count them then if they have the physical process of counting at their disposal.

a cognitive tool of one-to-one mapping between objects and objects, but they can also do it conceptually.

One of the things that abstraction enables is the ability to move information about physical perceptions more quickly than the physical things themselves can move.

In other words, Alice doesn't have to bring her cows with her.

If she can bring the concept of three or the idea that she has three,

So this is another aspect of mathematics that is often highly valued and highly contentious in relation to the ways in which we realize and reify scientific practice, education, and other ways in which mathematics shows up in our lives is how are we actually giving a physical body to the concept that we are hoping to represent?

The fact that two apples are conceptually in some sense the same as two cows or two fingers is one level.

A level above that is the fact that we can attribute symbols to these representations.

Anything from two interlaced I's in the Roman numeral setting, to two in the Hindu Arabic numeral setting, to words like to and do, to two dots, to two fingers.

Two fingers are physical, yet somehow they're also a basis of abstraction, because the idea of abstraction includes the fact that there must be something concrete to abstract.

And this two fingers are included on the page of abstract representations, partially because I like the idea of things having bodies.

I like the idea of the number two having lots of different bodies.

How many bodies can one idea have?

But also I like the ambiguity here between the two and the three, because in some systems, the way that I'm showing this here would be interpreted as three and in others as two.

So with that ambiguity in mind, there is no slide three.

Please do not discuss slide three later.

We will not bring it up again.

And in fact, it is not advantageous to you to do so because the claim that there is no slide three is an idea wholly owned by eight arms, nine brains.

And if you want to discuss the fact that there is no slide three, there will be a licensing fee involved.

Thankfully, some ideas are open to discussion with no financial transaction involved.

And one of them, as we finally come to slide four, is a very important concept in mathematical pedagogy

called The Rule of Four.

I think this encapsulates thinking that might have been going on for a while before it was formally published, but the first time I encountered it was in the excellent calculus textbook by Hughes, Hallin, Gleason, and McCollum et al.

This was the first calculus textbook I looked at when I was an undergraduate student.

And it was also the first calculus textbook I looked at when I was a beginning professor beginning to teach my first calculus class.

I'm afraid that far too many students probably completely skip this section, which is in the pre preamble.

But one of the key concepts that it elucidates is how to think about mathematics.

And it's not saying this is the right way.

It's saying this is a way, and this is a way that the textbook uses quite profitably.

It's called the rule of four.

And it says essentially that when you encounter a new mathematical concept, there are four distinct but interrelated ways that one might think about it.

You could give a verbal description or a definition.

You could draw a graph or some type of diagram.

You could use numbers in the sense of data.

Or you could use a symbolic representation, like a formula or an equation.

And the extent to which these are distinct and interrelated highlights the value that each of these may have to individuals as a latching on point for thinking about difficult mathematical concepts and calculus.

It also eliminates some of the privilege that might exist around specific representations, around the idea that symbols might be real math, whereas when we explain them at a high level, somehow that isn't real math.

For instance, if we look at the types of mathematical works that mathematicians actually produce, it might be surprising to undergraduate students what percentage of this is not what they would traditionally think of as symbolic.

And what I would mean here is,

equations and formulas like we get to page three and finally we see something that looks like a symbolic mathematical expression but the majority of the work here is spent on words and diagrams visuals

A large portion of this is in the theorems, of course, which are something that is a very individual feature of pure mathematics.

But let's not get bogged down there.

Let's simply say there are many different representations.

And one of the challenges of an effective instructor is to map between these different representations so that people who might feel most at home in one of them can use that as a leverage point for accessing the other ones.

Based on my background, I'm a defrocked math professor voluntarily, also a chaos magician, and so I'm very, very tempted to try to build a functor between this rule of four originating in mathematics and this four-quadrants model of human experience advanced by Ramsey Dukes in his book known as Sysopomy.

which says that there are these four lenses through which human beings can process and structure experience.

There's art, religion, magic, and science.

It's so tempting to try to do something like say the symbols are the magic and the words are the religion and the numbers are the science and the graph is the art.

And I'm going to resist that temptation because I think it's

it might be a useful initial temptation but the resistance of the temptation provides its value instead i'm going to hold this as an idea we'll return to it in a moment where it will play against some other concepts that we're likely to encounter i will stop here for a moment and say something impromptu though which is um there's a practice in this world of chaos magic called belief shifting

where the magician consciously and intentionally adopts a specific belief as if it were something they believed to be true.

And there's a very related practice in mathematics, which is the construction of the axioms or the adoption of the axioms.

So in mathematical proofs, once you adopt specific axioms or specific assumptions, the conclusions should follow not without effort, but in a clear logical flow.

Mathematicians are capable of adopting different axioms.

And this produces what I'm going to call a cognitive bifurcation.

So a cognitive bifurcation, since we've already split things into four, that may be too much.

Let's try to get things back together and just split it into two.

One place that a cognitive bifurcation might show up in the history of mathematics is in the different types of geometry that geometers think about.

So one of the features of modern geometry is the realization that the parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry is not possible to prove from the other axioms of Euclidean geometry.

And so the parallel postulate says that given a line and a point not on that line,

there is exactly one parallel line, or there's actually one line that passes through that point parallel to the original line.

And if you choose not to adopt this belief, as Riemann played with in the idea of one of his lectures, it opens up a whole new world of non-Euclidean geometry, both spherical and hyperbolic.

So the axioms that we adopt and the beliefs that we intentionally choose to consider are powerful tools that can open up new conceptual playgrounds, but also quite dangerous.

Alice and Bob probably feel very safe in this world.

Even if we don't admit a slide three, we admit a number three to describe how many cows one of them may have.

And then the question is, are these all the numbers?

And if they are not, in which directions would we be willing to consider?

Perhaps we are asking what comes after five or after the number after five.

And like a child, we realize that we can continually add one and there is no a priori upper bound.

And we come across the idea of infinity.

Perhaps we start to look for what could be in between the numbers.

And so we discover numbers like one and a half or 1.1.

Or perhaps we make a dangerous leap in the other direction, and we admit the possibility that there is a number which says that you have no cows.

And why you might need such a number is an intriguing question.

But let's say that we do have one.

When we introduce a number in this way, we need not only to consider the fact that the number exists, we need to consider the ways in which it will interact with the other

numbers that exist in other words the rules so as we begin to if we want to we know how to add numbers that were one through five but how do we add to zero and this is a cognitive bifurcation because now we have a symbol that plays by its own rules and we've opened up a whole new world of numbers to where when we added positive numbers together they always increased and we were always heading to the right

The fact that we can now introduce a number where we add it and identity for the binary operation of addition is an interesting split that opens up more possibilities on the left-hand side.

And I would say this is a cognitive bifurcation.

It says in the definition that I'm adapting from Wikipedia,

A bifurcation occurs when a small, smooth change made to the parameter values of a system causes a sudden qualitative or topological change in its behavior.

It's hard to imagine a change smaller or smoother than putting the circle here and declaring that it doesn't do anything in addition.

And yet this immense cultural controversy when these numbers are being introduced

So I'm going to make the claim that mathematical thinking systems are complex systems.

I'm going to give the highly unsatisfactory proof by authority that this claim is obvious.

One piece of evidence we could point to is that the existence of a parameter bifurcation almost immediately suggests that we're dealing with a complex system.

And yet that is not quite the right way to think about it, especially if we're going to be looking at it from the active inference context.

So let's ask for more evidence and let's not accept proof by authority.

What evidence do we see for the belief that mathematical thinking systems are complex systems?

And one way that we might conceptualize this through a model is at the agent level, where we think about the types of agents who are involved in these systems.

I've heard that there would be people here who like ants.

So I've made sure to include some.

And here's my ant hill.

And here are my ants.

And I have these ants foraging or formulas that they bring back to the colony, which then feed other ants, which are part of the ecosystem, the formulas and the symbols that they bring back in this mathematical world.

of semantics is more than just symbols, right?

It's something that actually contributes to the survival of the colony.

But in order to do that, it must be converted into other things.

So it'd be easy to just try to be efficient through this and reduce it as much as we could to something useful.

I'm sympathetic to that viewpoint because mathematics has to be useful at some level to human existence to justify its existence, I believe.

So if we were looking at this on a belief level, on a probability level, we might say something like with certain axioms as priors,

Mathematical theorems are simply beliefs such that an agent, in order to survive, will quickly adopt correct beliefs with probability 1.

If you want to make 2 plus 3 equals 6, you will quickly run into issues in which everything collapses and it ceases to be a useful tool.

And I'm not opposed to this model.

I just want to say it's oversimplified.

Because many of the beliefs that mathematicians choose to adopt and choose to spend their valuable resources thinking about don't have any immediate mapping to applications.

For instance, the question of whether or not zero is a natural number is something mathematicians will argue about.

What is the utility in foraging for this belief?

Perhaps you can think of one.

But I think it speaks to something else that could be happening that mathematicians throughout the centuries have seen, which is that the claims of truth that you make are not entirely limited by the axioms that you assume and by the process of logic.

There are larger questions here, cultural questions of identity, ontological questions of what is real.

What does it mean for zero being a natural number to be a true statement?

Mathematicians find it useful to disagree about this.

The conversations that we have about these things make us better mathematicians, I feel.

I'll never forget when my PhD advisor explained to me why he believed that zero was a natural number.

But there's no mathematical proof that can provide this.

It's an axiom that you accept or do not when you define these numbers.

And when we talk about types of numbers, there's a famous cognitive bifurcation that occurred at some point in history, which is the division, the discovery of the fact that not all numbers are rational.

Not all numbers can be expressed as a ratio between two integers.

If you're not willing to accept this, then you cannot come up with a solution to x squared minus two equals zero.

And of course you could, by authoritarian fiat, simply declare that there is no solution to x squared minus two equals zero.

There's a legend that the mathematician Hippasus, who discovered that the square root of two was irrational, was thrown overboard by the Pythagoreans so that he would not share this information.

And I imagine this as a kind of cyberpunk reimagining of ancient Greek geometry, not as an insult in any way to Pythagoras, who I think would appreciate this, but to imagine that there is a geometer who is not opposed to the idea, but opposed to the pathway by which it came through, and willing to use force to ensure that the dangerous doorway stays closed.

So another model of math person, perhaps that we could view as a boundary between wherever math comes from and the quote unquote real world.

And the real world is full of agents already that we can easily map to.

There are institutions, educational institutions, governmental institutions, professional societies.

There's politics where the government may decide certain levels of funding for those institutions.

Business, which may choose to fund the institutions.

to insert itself into the process of politics.

There are funding sources.

There's media.

One thing that occurred to me as I was preparing this talk is we don't often think of mathematical journals or scientific journals as media, but they are.

They're media that's made and constructed like any other.

And then is the question of where math comes from.

Where does math come from?

This is what I've wrestled with a while.

One reason is it opens up some doors that from the materialist utilitarian perspective of like a school of engineering feel really strange.

Where did Alice and Bob first get that idea of numbers?

And does doing math involve some type of contact with these strange things that could happen?

We don't see very much of this in our schooling, which is often about producing symbols, producing people who can follow precise rules with respect to symbolic manipulation.

And at that point, it can become a type of overcorrection.

And I'm sympathetic to this door that, I'm sympathetic to this perspective that opens the door a bit more to the strange, not only by my own temperament,

but also through the lived experience of people who accomplished very effective physical and engineering uses of mathematics, but were willing to express that they were sympathetic to this viewpoint.

So Heinrich Hertz, for whom the unit of cyclic repetition and a computer processing unit is named for, says one cannot escape the feeling that these mathematical formulas

have an independent existence and an intelligence of their own, that they are wiser than we are, wiser even than their discoverers.

In other words, if the intelligence is in the symbols and not in the humans who are trying to work with them as tools, this provides a very different perspective on the creation of mathematical thought and on the ways in which mathematical thought not only originates but also can be applied.

It also points out to some extent the horror that we can be doing when we do this non-consensual cognitive bifurcation of a person, of people, of persons into math persons and not math persons.

often by their ability to match some preconceived rule to arrive at a correct answer, often with an overemphasis on speed.

So as we think about the fact that the people, the persons, the mathematicians, the math persons may be forging for these symbols and formulas to bring back to the real world, what happens if we begin to give

If we as Hertz did begin to give these symbols their own ontology and their own agency to realize that they are also likely out in the wild searching for the people to whom with whom they will engage productively.

So this takes us back to our stranger ideas where we intentionally left the door open.

And here I'm indebted to Gerhard Mayer, who in his article, Magicians of the 21st Century, pointed to Ramsey Dukes' four-quadrants model as splitting reality into the irrational and the rational.

I intentionally left the rational box off here.

because I wasn't sure where to put it.

I would put religion in the rational category because there are very clear apologetic logical arguments.

It's clear that religion at least attempts to play in the same sphere of the rational science does, whereas art and magic would be in the irrational category.

And I am intentionally echoing the splitting here of the real numbers into rational or irrational with whatever consequences this might have.

To quote Heinrich Hertz again, outside our consciousness there lies the cold and alien world of actual things.

Between the two stretches the narrow borderland of the senses.

No communication between the two worlds is possible, excepting across the narrow strip.

For a proper understanding of ourselves and of the world, it is of the highest importance that this borderland should be thoroughly explored.

And the problem as map makers in an ever evolving and some would say chaotic territory, certainly highly dynamic of this moment in space time where we find ourselves is where to draw, where is the border?

If this is the border that we're supposed to be exploring for a proper understanding of ourselves and of the world, how do we know when we are on the border and when we may be inadvertently crossing it?

And how can we enrich our tools for finding each side and productively bringing ideas from one side to the other or whatever travelers are wishing to cross, whatever we call them?

I've recently been reading this book, Symbolism, by Alfred North Whitehead.

And he speaks to this, but he speaks to it in a different way and one that I would challenge, which is very intimidating, to be honest.

But in this essay on symbolism, he talks about essentially two types of symbolism, the symbolism of the church and the symbolism of language and of algebra.

So he initially says that there is a symbolism of the medieval cathedral, but because that symbolism can be dispensed with,

It is on the fringe of life and has an unessential element in its constitution.

And then he says, and on page two here, there is another sort of language, a written language, which is constituted by the mathematical symbols of the science of algebra.

In some ways, these symbols are different to those of ordinary language because the manipulation of the algebraic symbols does your reasoning for you.

provided that you keep to the algebraic rules.

How can something do reasoning for you if it is purely mechanistic and has no agency?

And then he says, this is not the case with ordinary language, which puts up that boundary again between words and symbols, that the symbols can do something, the words cannot.

So I would disagree here with how he draws the bifurcation

between cathedrals and mathematical symbols.

Pythagoras would also have quibbled with that.

For the Pythagoreans, mathematics was very much a religious practice, and they believed that numbers had a spiritual dimension.

But that takes us to very weird places very quickly.

I tweeted this.

I don't necessarily believe it, but you don't have to tweet everything you believe or vice versa.

So let's go to slightly a bit more out there.

But this is coming back to relevance, I promise.

It has to do with the notion of sovereignty.

And so here I'm looking at the article Sovereignty and the UFO by Wint and Duvall, where they talk about how sovereignty is constructed.

And so this might go back to our definition here of a quote unquote real world, an institution, a government, a nation state, even an individual as being sovereign as a particular construction in the world of our experience.

But this has not always been the case.

I loved this quote that they said, anthropocentric sovereignty might seem necessary.

After all, who else besides humans might rule?

Nevertheless, historically, sovereignty was less anthropocentric.

For millennia, nature and the gods, which nature would be in science and the gods would be in religion, were thought to have causal powers and subjectivities that enabled them to share sovereignty with humans, if not exercise dominion outright.

Authoritative belief in non-human sovereignties

was given up only after long and bitter struggle about the borders of the social world.

So again, we're trying to place a border in which who, what could be sovereign depends on who, what should be included in society.

And there's a great footnote here.

Anthropocentrism need not mean all human beings since historically many physical humans were not considered human socially.

And let me go back here and say that perhaps there's a similar construction occurring.

Perhaps this division, some humans are human and some are not.

We would not recognize that today, but we do recognize this bifurcation into math persons and non-math persons.

And I would say it's equally as social and equally as artificial and equally as dangerous.

So where are we now?

So I've opened some doors here.

Perhaps some of them should have stayed shut.

But regardless, they're open for the moment, and we can shut them when we wish, hopefully.

I love this quote at the end about sovereignty in the UFO.

The UFO can be known only by not asking what it is, because this has been totally obverse to my process.

Here I have tried to know mathematics by asking what it is, by struggling very hard with its identity as an egregore, as a concept.

But maybe some things can only be known by not asking what they are.

So I'm sure that this has perhaps been an interesting metaphysical exploration of some different historical ideas and ideas of history.

How is this applicable to ourselves as scholars in an active inference environment?

Well, what I would like to point out is the ways in which some of these ideas that are already dynamic may be changing very rapidly at this moment.

So if we look at the identity of mathematician,

if we are solely confined to a meat space identity that has certain connotations.

But what do we do with someone like Blue Cow?

And I did request Blue Cow's consent to use their likeness and their thoughts.

The creator of the first hyperdimensional computing OS and the super prompt, a prompt god, someone who is a self-proclaimed mathematician who does impressive mathematical work in prompt engineering

mathematical prompts via github and whose appearance is an anime person dressed as a cow can they be a real mathematician in the way that we currently conceptualize math and are the mathematical ideas that they're bringing ones that we are prepared to reckon with as math

And then when they post things like this, what do we do?

Self-identified schizo.

And it's helpful here perhaps to remember that schizo means split.

Another scholar on this emergent one might call parallel or underground genre whose work I respect is Sir Lupin Watson.

His conjecture, soon you'll be able to buy an AI hacker for less than $100,000.

He'll or she do anything for free.

You'll need to pay only once and it will last forever.

This is exactly the bargain of the theorem.

Once you have proven a theorem once with a finite amount of human effort, it remains irrevocably true and will do whatever you ask it to do for free forever.

So if we believe there's a world where theorems come from, what does that say about other objects or other constructions that might share their properties?

I don't have a conclusion.

If I were going to have a conclusion, it would be going back to the thoughts of slide three.

But one reason I don't have a conclusion is that this is not the end of a completed research journey, but the beginning of something we are all experiencing together.

So I'm gesturing at what I know.

then the next question is what do i hope to know well one challenge that i think this immediately offers but also an opportunity is what does it look like to be an institution in a world where these agents these human agents are seriously considering the same ideas as you are and perhaps offering insights that are not being produced at the level of your institution i don't this may be fringe but i think it's to be taken seriously

and i offer it because many people will see the work that for instance terry tau is doing on leading larger mathematical teams that use ai to modularize math and prove more efficiently in an engineering type framework different from the idea of the individual math

it's less likely that the average academic, I believe, would encounter these types of people who are also doing interesting mathematical thinking, not only about the mathematics itself, but about what it means to present oneself as a mathematician or to present mathematical work.

So I hope these thoughts have been interesting to you, and I'm excited to see what they may have brought up in the form of questions and comments.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you ever so much, Octopus.

I really appreciate the number of different ways that you've kind of viewed this topic.

If I may start with a question.

Sure.

As you were talking about this idea that the formulas maybe exist and that they're kind of waiting to fit onto something, it was reminding me of a song by the Icelandic artist Bjork.

I'm not sure if you're familiar with her.

She has a song called Modern Things where it says, all those modern things, they've always existed.

They've just been waiting in a mountain.

for the right moment and it's their time now.

And so, yeah, I was wondering, you know, what do you think about

something like the global economy, which it's, it kind of acts like an entity in itself.

So it's, you know, it's the invisible hand of the market, for example.

But it's the humans that kind of assemble around it, and imbue the meaning on the all the interactions and all the dynamics.


SPEAKER_01:
yes uh i think again that there again there might be a border for instance if we view economics as purely human transactions of material capital it misses a lot i think a lot of economists would say that but symbols are important even there if you look at a unit of currency it is imbued with symbols that are highly non-functional

almost overridden with symbols that are highly non-functional.

And one of the ways that one can assert authority and or immortality is to issue a coin.

And that's what we see now with crypto economic systems is a debate around the individual sovereignty and the right of who is allowed to issue something that can be used as a unit of exchange.

But that's not a new debate.

There were certain Roman citizens who had the authority to issue a token

And then the question is, where does the value of that token come from ultimately, right?

So again, it kicks back very quickly to questions around beliefs and identity and sovereignty.

I guess the thing there is when something is real, to me, it must have more than just a material component.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Daniel, are there any questions from the chat?


SPEAKER_02:
There's a lot of great commentary, Octopus.

It was a great presentation.

Do you have any final comments?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, well, I really appreciate the invitation to be heard.

and the ability to show up as Octoplus.

It's so meaningful to me and grateful to the organizers and the audience and looking forward to seeing what conversations can emerge from this beginning.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Till next time.

See you, Octo.

Thank you.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess07

SPEAKER_00:
Welcome to the fourth Active Inference Symposium, Dr. Giacomo Rossettini.

We're very pleased to have you here and looking forward to your session titled Placebo, Nocebo and Contextual Effects, The Missed Link in Clinical Practice.

Over to you.


SPEAKER_01:
thank you for the presentation and for the invitation to use this talk it's a pleasure for me to be here for the active inference symposium and today i talk about placebo nocebo and contextual effects showing the missing link in clinical practice as i mentioned i'm an italian physical therapist i'm involved in clinician and

I come from Verona, that is a city in the north of Italy and it represents the city of love of Romeo and Juliet and if you have never visited them, my suggestion is to do it.

Before we start, I want to declare that I have no conflict of interest for my speech.

I have organized my presentation to discuss the contextual effects.

Firstly, we will analyze the definition and the constituent dimensions of contextual effects.

the impact on outcomes and treatments.

Next, we will discuss the possible link of contextual effects with the active inference and the implication for clinical practice and research.

Finally, we will conclude with a take-home message.

Contextual effects are defined as the effects of the context around the therapy and are generated by contextual factors.

Contextual factors were recently defined in the international consensus in which I participated.

In the slide, you will find an excerpt of the final short definition, where contextual factors are the perceived cues that affect both the patient and the practitioner and can arise from previous experiences and the immediate dynamics within the therapeutic encounter, or a combination of both.

And from a clinical perspective, contextual factors fall into five broad categories or dimensions that you can see represented in this graph.

On one hand, we have the characteristics of the clinicians with their professional reputations, the appearance, the beliefs and behaviors.

On the other side, there are the patients' characteristics with their expectations, preferences and previous experiences.

Between the clinicians and the patients, there is the relational dynamics in terms of verbal and non-verbal communication, what we say and how we communicate.

In addition to the relational component, the treatment characteristics also play an important role.

They represent the rituality of the treatment.

Finally, the fifth dimension is represented by the characteristics of the setting within which the encounter is being delivered.

such as the environment, the architecture and also the interior design.

Well, all these five dimensions interacting with each other can influence the overall therapeutic outcomes.

The question we have to ask ourselves is through which mechanisms does this happen?

I will tell you in the next slides.

Contextual factors have been studied for their ability to induce placebo and nocebo effects, which represent the effects of the psychosocial context around the therapy.

And to explain how this occurs, I want to start with a clinical example.

This illustration shows a common clinical encounter in which patients with musculoskeletal pain receive a therapy such as joint immobilization, therapeutic exercise, or ultrasound injections.

And during the administration of the therapy, patients are influenced by the specificity of the treatment, but also by various different psychosocial cues, such as the clinician's words, the sight and the sound of the healthcare devices, the smells of the hygienic, and also the taste of the drugs when receiving, for example, painkillers.

Well, all these cues can influence the patient's perception, shaping the experience in a positive or in a negative way, triggering placebo or nocebo effects.

Thus, the positive use of contextual factors can produce placebo effects.

When these elements are used negatively, it produces nocebo effects.

And the clinical effects of contextual factors can be explained through conscious and unconscious mechanisms of action, such as expectations, learning processes, personality traits, mindset and even genetics.

However, among the most important psychological theories, expectations, classical conditioning and social learning are the most widely accepted.

The expectation is a conscious phenomenon through which the patient expects that something will happen in the future.

We need to consider patients, for example, who are waiting to receive a therapeutic exercise or a manual therapy for musculoskeletal pain.

Well, they will predict a positive therapeutic outcome by evaluating all the contextual factors around the therapy we offer as a clinician, such as our worth or our behaviors.

Instead, the classical tableau of conditionings is an unconscious phenomenon concerning the past events.

In fact, patients can learn over time to associate a certain therapy, such as for example an injection, with specific contextual effects that represent the rituality of the technique created by the needles that produce a certain outcome which can be positive or negative.

But patients can also learn from others.

They can learn from positive or negative experiences of other patients, family members, friends or from information they get from social media or blogs regarding, for example, musculoskeletal pain.

But how the contextual factors work in practice?

I will use this image to explain these mechanisms of action briefly.

Whenever patients interact with the healthcare context, they are always influenced by the five contextual factors.

And these elements are encoded by the patient's brain, who interprets them and provides an evaluation and a prediction of their meaning.

And if this interpretation is positive, placebo effects are triggered.

If the interpretation is negative, nocebo effects are stimulated.

And these effects are sustained by a cascade of psychoneuroimmunoendocrinological events at multiple levels of the central nervous systems in terms of the release of neurotransmitters.

For example, negative contextual factors can activate the release of cholecystokinin and the deactivation of dopamine and the opioid systems.

Instead, the use of the positive contextual factors can facilitate the release of opioids, endocannabinoids and dopamine.

And also different brain areas can be activated.

For example, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the grigio periapodal brain and the dorsal horn of the spine are modulated.

And all these specific neurological pathways translated into changes in clinical outcomes.

And using, for example, musculoskeletal pain as an example, if the context offered is positive, the patient will perceive and relieve symptoms.

Instead, if the context adopted is negative, the patient will have an aggravation of symptoms.

And conjecture factors interacting with the treatment specificity are able to influence more the patient's subjective outcomes or the illness dimensions than the objective outcomes that represent the disease component.

For example, pain, disability, experience, satisfaction represent typical examples of outcomes influenced by the contextual factors.

However, not all the changes of the therapeutic outcomes are due by contextual factors or by the specificity of our treatment.

In fact, several confinders can explain the improvements or the worsening of the patient's clinical condition.

An example are reported in this graph.

For example, the natural history of the disease can explain the natural fluctuation of the

towards the means, which represent a statistical phenomenon.

Or, for example, the presence of unidentified interventions, as in the case of patients that present a musculoskeletal pain or receive a manual therapy or a therapeutic exercise and concomitantly receive also a painkiller.

Another question we should ask ourselves is what is the weight of contextual factors in influencing the outcome?

For a long time, it was a common opinion in the scientific community that about 33-35% of the total therapeutic effect depends on the contextual component.

And even if it seems limited, it is actually not, because it is a component influencing clinical outcomes that we should know and we should use in our clinical practice.

And the international debate on the weight of contextual effects has continued to the present day, without finding a conclusion.

Several recent systematic reviews with the meta-analysis has assessed the weight of contextual effects.

What the different authors have observed is that the contextual effects can vary from small to large.

And I report here different examples.

You can see what happened for no specific lobe pain, neck pain, fibromyalgia and also neostratritis.

And the heterogeneity in these results can be explained, for example, by the characteristics of the patients.

the clinicians by the characteristic of the condition analyzed, the interventions considered and also by the characteristic of the statistical metric adopted.

So,

Some students had also provided data on the contextual effects for treatments.

For example, in these meta-researchs, the contextual effects of different treatments was evaluated.

And what we can observe is that the contextual effect is progressively higher in treatment with the highly realistic features.

To go into details, in psychological treatments, the contextual effects account for the 38%.

In pharmacological treatments it accounts for the 61% and in the physical treatments such as manual therapy or hands-on techniques it accounts for the 64%.

Having reached this point, I think that we need to understand how contextual impacts can be related to the theme of this conference, the active inference.

And to understand this, we need to start with a clinical example.

We need to think about the management of patients with persistent musculoskeletal pain, who have negative expectations based on their previous experiences, psychological characteristics,

For example, if we consider a patient with neck pain that in the past has been exposed to exercises and learned that these exercises produce pain, conciliating a negative internal model towards this.

In our outpatients clinic, we offer exercises to our neck pain patients in accordance with the best evidence.

As a result of this direct experience, the patient can have two main outcomes.

At first, for example, it can confirm that the exercises can produce pain, or the patients may not perceive the pain, violating their expectations.

And this violation of expectations is interesting because it can result in two main scenarios.

one adapted and ideal, where patients make an update of their expectations and on their internal model, and a dysfunctional one, where the patients consider this violation as an exception to the rule, or as a result to the chance, and therefore maintain it, and this is referred to as cognitively immunized patients.

We suggest that such differences in updating responses can be understood, at least to some extent, from Bayesian perspectives.

In fact, the ability to make an update of the patient's expectations can be interpreted in the light of the Bayesian model and will depend on the strength and accuracy of the patient's prior beliefs and behaviors.

From a Bayesian perspective, our brains conceptualize and predict

or machine that generates predictions, known as priors, about the expected sensory inputs.

And the integration between the prior and the sensory inputs results in a posterior, the percept, which can be more or less influenced by the prior and by the sensory data, depending on their level of precision.

And let us think about the patients with pain who have negative priors or expectations toward exercise, that represent the sensory input.

And if these priors are very precise and reliable, it will be much more difficult for the patient to rely on the sensory input given by the exercises.

And the prediction error is really minimal and the patients consider the experience as a result of a second chance or an exception of the rule existing in maintenance of the initial expectations.

Instead, if the interpretations are less precise and reliable, it will be much easier for the patient to rely on the sensory inputs given by the exercise, because the prediction error between what is expected and what is experienced will be more significant and will contribute to improving the patient's expectations by generating an update.

And I think this is very fascinating and complex, but it does help us to think about how we can use the context to challenge or make an update of the patient's priorities.

And I will try to help you to understand this point with another clinical example.

With this Bayesian model in mind, it is possible to better understand the clinical scenario presented in this image, where we have a patient with a musculoskeletal pain of the shoulder who has had a negative prior.

In that situation, the patients prefer not to raise their arms because they have been told that the tendons can snap.

On the other hand, we have the clinicians who try to challenge the patient's prior through the tools

the manual therapy, the peripheral reality, the education.

But the clinician also has another separate weapon to use, that the school has the control

by words, cues, behaviors, or rituality that can influence the patient's brain and the patient's prior.

As an outcome of this challenge, we can have, for example, an expectation violation, followed by an update, which is realized when the prior, with low precision, of our patient is updated accordingly with the newly acquired evidence.

The patients lift their arms without any pain and without any types of lesions.

Another possible scenario is represented by the expectation violation followed by the maintenance of the dysfunctional beliefs as the consequence of one having a highly perceived prior, which is considered really unreliable and therefore the newly acquired information and disconfirmatory evidence is not sufficient

such strong pride.

For example, in this case we have a patient with a musculoskeletal pain that during a clinical session managed to lift their arm without any negative consequences to their shoulder, but still believe that lifting the arm will possibly create and lead to the shoulder to break.

unlikely to have, for example, a very high precise prior and might discard the positive evidence, for example, the success in lifting the arm, which might be classified as an exemption instead of the rule.

So, trying to pull the string of this speech, what might be the implication from this talk to our clinical practice?

The use of contextual factors represents an opportunity to enrich the evidence-based therapy.

We know it.

As a clinician, we also need to consider that using contextual factors such as words, touch, the rituality of the technique and the environment could help to challenge the patient's prior and improve the patient's musculoskeletal pain.

However, these observations that arise from the clinic need to be supported by data and more study to substantiate their effectiveness.

Thus, researchers are called upon to integrate contextual effects into their study on musculoskeletal pain.

using, for example, the Bayesian brain and the active inference lens.

To do this, it is important to produce experimental work in the lab and in the clinical work in patients to validate these theoretical models by using, for example, subjective outcomes but also objective physiological metrics.

We are in the end, so I conclude that I want to greet you wishing you to remain curious clinicians, comfortable to see the things from different perspectives and accept the complexity presented in the clinic and also within this image.

Let's not just focus only on the details, the technique.

It is important, but it is not all.

Let us always remember that the scenario in which we operate, it is much more complex and both the context, the moon and

confounders, the search in the sky, comes into play.

Only if we embrace this opportunity and this complexity, we could find new strategies to best manage our patients with musculoskeletal pain.

Thanks for your attentions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Till next time.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess08

SPEAKER_00:
Welcome, John Boyk, PhD, to the fourth Active Inference Symposium.

We're really pleased to have you here and looking forward to your session, Cognar Ecosystem, Facilitating Group Cognition at Scale.

And over to you.

All right.

Thanks, Ian.


SPEAKER_02:
um again my name is john boyk i'm a fellow at the activist institute active inference institute um and i will be talking about a the cognar ecosystem to to facilitate cognition at scale as ian said uh i do want to say that the links for this there's a bunch of links on the institute project page

Uh, I think, I think these slides will eventually be made public, but in the meantime, if you're interested, you can just simply search on Cognar and CODA or Cognar in my last name, Boyk, and you'll find, uh, the Institute project page.

There's lots of links there.

All right.

So what is the Cognar ecosystem?

Uh, Cognar means cognitive narrative and in concept it's, uh, it's an open source online extensible ecosystem, uh, technologies, tools, libraries,

facilitate group cognition especially for large groups and although there are many many use cases uh the the use case that's that one of the prime use cases is deliberation strategizing collective problem solving and decision making in the large group setting

Cognar essentially helps, what I like to say is it helps users to tell their story.

That is, convey their beliefs to a group about how the world works relative to some situation.

And even more specifically, convey their belief model to a group.

Make the belief model explicit and transparent to the group.

So they might answer or address questions like, what's the problem or situation?

What happened?

How did it happen?

What might happen next?

Why did it happen?

Who does it affect?

Who is involved?

What does it mean?

What should be done?

What can be learned?

All of these kinds of questions.

Um, Cognar allows P allows users to tell a rich story and by rich, I mean, potentially long, complex, nuanced, dynamic, conditional, uh, uh, um, quite different.

quite in comparison quite different from some kind of online collaborative architecture that for example asks you to a yes or no question or asks you to give a thumbs up or thumbs down on some issue

Cognar will allow a user to convey very rich information.

And there's a backend computational system that assists the digestion of that information so that the group can better understand the many different stories.

So the computational system assists and guides users in construction stories, helps the group digest the information, make sense of it, assesses stories for their quality, you know, is the story on topic, is it comprehensible, that kind of thing.

And then the backend system also performs inference for queries that various group members might have about a story or for a storyteller.

It is important to say that the computational system does not predict the future.

That is, if the issue at hand, say, is garbage collection in a local community, the computational system is not going to assess stories and then predict which of them is most realistic.

That's not really its purpose.

What its purpose is, is to convey, to make transparent and explicit the beliefs of members.

And the members, when they create their story, when they tell their story, they include what they think will happen in the future.

The users make predictions.

And also the group assesses the realism of any of the stories that are submitted.

So what is a Cognar group?

A group is a set of people that sense their world, process information, anticipate outcomes, evaluate options, make decisions.

And in other words, we can think of a group as an organism that performs cognition.

Um, and then the question is how, what, what design of Cognar might actually facilitate functional cognition as opposed to dysfunctional cognition.

So examples of groups could be, you know, every, uh, group, uh, informal group who like polka dot shirts, uh, a social club, volunteer groups, civic organizations, professional groups, corporations, nonprofits, political entities, such as cities and more.

So groups can range from formal to informal, flexible to structured, temporary to permanent, small to large, autocratic to democratic.

The platform is really a tool that can be used for many use cases by many kinds of groups for many purposes.

There are, of course, some rules to keep it all functional and transparent.

And when I say large group, what does that mean?

Often in the literature, when they talk about large group deliberation and cognition, they might be thinking of dozens of people.

But here we're thinking about perhaps dozens, hundreds, thousands, millions.

This should scale up to cities, states, and perhaps even a nation.

Who knows?

I should say, if Cognar were ever built, if it works as advertised, this is all possible.

And maybe I should also say at the moment, I've posted two articles on Cognar so far, two research articles, and that's all that's been done.

So this is at the beginning.

This is a vision, really, of what this could be.

I'm presenting a vision.

Um, so the question is what kind of design for Cognar would allow some large groups, say a hundred thousand people to, to, to, um, gather online synchronously or asynchronously and share the potentially complex dynamic beliefs, belief models about some situation.

How could that be done?

That's the question here.

And obviously, I have some ideas on how that could be done.

But first, maybe I should say that the Cognar project is inspired by active inference.

And in particular, active inference, from my

from the vantage point of this project active inference provides a description of functional cognition that is as i think everyone probably knows by now is watching watching the seminar that that cognition we can idealize it as a maybe a four-part cyclic process of predict act sense and learn and and it involves many components for example memory recall attention

um and this the entire picture of that process can be um you know as it plays out in a human or an agent it could be either functional or dysfunctional for example uh an an agent that that that cannot predict the future with accuracy is going to make decisions that are sub-optimal in general you know typically

So that would be an example of dysfunctional cognition.

If you can't remember what happened or you can't predict accurately what's going to happen in the future, those would all be indicative of dysfunctional cognition.

So in active inference, an agent favors choices that ensure the greatest resolution of uncertainty under the constraints as preferred outcomes are realized.

And all of that provides a framework such that the components of cognition could be recognized.

And each component can be focused on as a design element, and the process of cognition in any group could be assessed, whether that is functional or dysfunctional or somewhere in between.

And of course, that would be a multivalued scale.

So what is Cognar really?

Cognar essentially is designed to be part of the cognitive architecture of the group that is using it.

Any organism that performs cognition has some kind of cognitive architecture

For an animal, that involves a nervous system.

For a human, it can involve external objects such as computers and tools.

And for a group, it includes a set of norms, rules, mechanisms, institutions, sensors, analytic processes, systems, and any other procedures that facilitate or guide cognition.

And then Cognar is obviously

designed to be a component of the cognitive architecture of the group that uses it.

And viewed differently, and I'll talk about this more in a moment,

Cognar technology provides a means to digitize and make explicit a person or an agent's belief model.

And in that sense, some of the technology behind Cognar could be used far beyond Cognar.

It could be used in medicine, psychology, and unlimited number of other applications of how you would take an agent or a person's belief model

make that explicit in a way that computation can occur and include that into some kind of inference models or generative models.

So Cognar stems from some past work that I've done

And Cognar and this past work are related in that all of it is about cognitive architectures.

In the past work, I was looking at social systems as cognitive architectures.

And by social systems, I mean economic systems, financial systems, governance systems.

i view those core societal systems as the as a means as a as a part of the cognitive architecture architecture of the society that is using them that is we we think through our governance systems we think through our economic systems we make decisions that that affect our world through our economic system for example

And the previous projects asked this question.

Out of all conceivable societal systems designs, and I don't mean conceivable in capitalism and socialism and the way it's been implemented in the past.

What I mean is like blank slate.

Out of all conceivable designs for economic financial governance systems, which ones might be most fit for purpose?

And that purpose is cognition in the active inference set.

So reduction of uncertainty, accurate prediction of the future, attaining those conditions that allow for thriving of the population, those things.

And I propose in this past work a path really of how such a project could be implemented, what it would do, how it would go, how would you test new systems,

um and so on so i refer to this earlier work and again the links are all on the cognar project page if you can find that all right so what is uh the maybe the core element of cognar is um what i call a story graph and essentially it's a meaning representation it's the it's the explicit representation of a user's belief model

And this, of course, is a very difficult problem to solve.

How do you take some belief model that is in, say, the mind of a person and put that down on paper, so to speak, such that computation can occur with it, inference can occur with it?

This is a very tough problem, but I think there's possible ways to move forward with it.

I think I mentioned, or I should mention, that there was two papers published on Cognar.

The first paper is more of an introduction overview.

The second paper is really all about, it focuses on the potential meaning representations.

So StoryGraph is the sort of the core innovation on which Cognar is based and its StoryGraphs are used to curate, understand, reason with, you know, conduct inference on high quality information about human experiences, beliefs, and expectations.

And essentially the way it works is a user might type in or say some passage, a few sentences perhaps, a thought, and that passage would be translated into what I call a story graph fragment, just a small little graph, a meaning graph.

And that little fragment would then, the system would merge that fragment into the growing story graph, the overall story graph.

And then eventually by inputting passages after passages after passages, the story graph gets built up, the meaning representation gets built up.

And then once it's complete or once it's almost complete, then it can be translated into alternative meaning representations that might be appropriate for various logical models or other kinds of models, probabilistic models.

and maybe be translated more directly into some types of probabilistic models and could also be translated into a natural language so in in time eventually you know if Cognar is successful over time it should be possible to have the system read back your story like tell me tell me you know read this back to me and let me make sure that it's what I think what I'm intending it to be

Uh, even, uh, you know, in the far future, it might be possible to make animations as an output of this, you know, this, a little movie of this is what I think happened.

And this is what I think will happen in the future.

So, what is a meaning representation?

I have a picture here of an abstract meaning representation.

That's a very common one used in the research world.

In natural language inference, in the research world, there's lots of different types of meaning representations.

This is just one of them I'm using as an example.

And this is for a story, excuse me, a sentence.

A similar technique is almost always impossible to apply to other crops such as cotton, soybeans, and rice.

And you can just, I won't go into detail about this, but you can kind of see that there's a graph and various words are connected to each other.

Ideas are connected to each other.

Concepts are connected to each other.

and this kind of meaning representation is used throughout research and the story graph you can think of the story graph as a much more complex version of this it consists of layers you know one layer might be predictions that the story is making about the future you know that could be one

uh layer um but a story graph is actually more like instead of it's sort of static picture like this static graph a story graph is really more like a movie it's a evolving graph path really and and it involves high dimensional vectors of word meaning so there's it's far more complicated than this but this gives you a really rough idea of what I'm after

Cognar has many use cases.

If Cognar were successful, it could be ubiquitous in social life.

So a group, again, could be all kinds of different groups, many different groups.

defines a group event, its topic, its purpose, how decisions were made for this event, what kind of methods and rules would be used.

The group then invites people to participate and communications for this group event could be many to many, many to one, one to many.

I have examples of all of these in the paper, but I'll go over a couple shortly.

Use cases could be decision-making, customer service, emergency reports, public polling, instructions on how to build a shelf or something, how to run a machine, system descriptions of how this system works, educational use cases, and more.

And the later versions of Cognar could include role-playing strategizing.

Um, you know, here's what I believe.

Here's what I think this, my, my competitor believes, and I'm gonna do this, you know, how, what would my competitor do if I did this or, you know, all kinds of various versions of stride.

How do I get the girl?

Should I, should I wear a suit and tie?

Should I wear jeans?

How should I act?

You know, like whatever the, whatever the, the, the issue is at hand.

So I, this is an example use case for decision-making that I've, I've written out a little text here, but obviously this, again, this would be passages that a user is inputting into the system and, um, and a graph is being created, you know, as passages are implemented.

So this person says, you know, whatever this issue X is, we better first address issue Y that caused X.

And issue Y started when blank and it has the effect of blank.

And if we don't solve Y, then we can't solve A. And this is likely to occur if that happens.

And, you know, just on and on and on about some kind of conditional story, complex conditional story.

And in this kind of setting where it's group decision-making, what could occur is that at the top of this graph here, story input and editing, there could be 10,000 users or something, 10,000 members of this group.

They each create their story.

And the system would be helping them create the story too to make it easy.

And then after, say, the first round of input, the system would perform a bunch of computations, assess what the variety of different stories are, report back on how stories cluster with each other and all kinds of other things, story quality and story components and all kinds of things so that the group can better understand what the picture of all these stories is.

And then there would be opportunity for group dialogue, feedback, story digestion, asking questions, users asking questions about different other people's stories.

And then after that is finished, then we can go back to the beginning and users see everyone's story and all the results of assessments.

And then maybe they want to change their story to reflect what has been said.

Maybe I'm involved in this group, and I put down my story, and then I eventually get to see what other people are saying, and I think, oh, that's a good idea.

I want to include that piece in mine.

I like that, or I don't like this, or I'm going to comment on this part of this guy's story.

So over a series of rounds, the idea is, hopefully,

that the belief of the group would start to coalesce around core models.

Maybe one person's story really captures the group sentiment, or maybe the group as a whole, the synthesis of their stories captures the group sentiment.

And over a series of rounds, the thinking of the group, the belief model of the group starts to coalesce around central themes.

And then there could be voting at the end, various kinds of voting would be possible.

Another use case is emergency reports.

Again, this is a text passage, but it would be formed into a story graph.

But somebody might call a utility and say, I just witnessed an accident near this intersection, a large truck began swerving.

It was wet, shouldn't have been going so fast.

There had been many accidents at the corner as kind of an aside.

The truck hit an electric pole, the wires start sparks in the grass, there's a school nearby.

There's all kinds of implications about this story.

The implication is that there's some kind of danger.

Maybe the operator should send a fire truck, ambulance, send the police, something like that.

There's implied dangers to the utility workers.

um the this is you know just a short little paragraph but it's actually quite rich and there's opportunity for many kinds of there's quite a lot of of of information that can be inferred from this little story that isn't said explicitly um in the second paper i listed desiderata of about 20

uh aspects of what a what a meaning representation should be like or should be capable of doing uh i just list a few here but it should be graph based to you know to be amenable to computation uh should be capable of handling handling document like stories uh you know the equivalent of say uh you know a few pages of text or maybe even a chapter of text in a book or something like that

and should be able to handle a wide variety of linguistic phenomena, should be reducible in the sense that similar stories should make similar graphs.

And there's more and more and more.

Components should be compositional.

uh and reusable and more I won't go into any more detail on that but there is a whole list of of uh requirements so the last couple of slides are just sort of you know fun to think about how how some of this might be done and what might happen in the future uh are there applications of category Theory here um

This last paper on group interactions, belief sharing via Schiff and Topos theory, I think is actually, might be quite appropriate because that's exactly what is happening in this group setting.

The group is sharing their belief models.

Those belief models are, you know, the being,

they evolve according to how the group thinking is going they're they're unifying or generally the group would be unifying around one or a few stories and i think all of that could be studied mathematically uh using some ideas from category theory

but also in category theory you know one of the ideas of category theory is to reduce the complexity of a of a project or you know system so that's important because this is obviously a complicated system c set property graphs might be a basis for story graphs functors might might be allow for graph to graph graph to text

and other kinds of transformations.

Some ideas from category theory might allow us to zoom in and zoom out.

If you can imagine some very complicated story graph, but the user just wants to focus in on just one little piece to verify that the system understood Emraher correctly.

And for that, you might want to do a kind of a zoom in or zoom out summarization of some more complicated components of a story graph.

So there's applications for category theory, um, and, uh, there's, uh, I think applications for, uh, first things, uh, uh, from pixels to planning paper on renormalizing generative models, uh, that I think there's potential there too, because, uh, a graph really represents a path, you know, evolving path of the, the graph itself is evolving, right?

There's a, it's like a movie, as I said earlier.

And so the renormalizing approach might be potentially useful there.

And there's many, many opportunities for agent-based agentic models.

For example, group members understanding each other's beliefs.

So that's about it.

Yeah.

And again, the project page has all kinds of information about this.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, John.

Ian, if you have a question, otherwise I can read one from the live chat.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh yes, maybe a quick one before the live chat.

So it's a lovely optimistic view that every member's story can be heard and understood and contribute to the collective.

And it's making me think about citizen involvement in cities and knowing what issues are important to a community.

Then is there a way that it can help with this perennial issue of top-down opinion and bottom-up?

needs and wishes.

So how would you wait?

How would you wait, let's say, the stories from, you know, opposing members of a group if there's

Right.


SPEAKER_02:
So there's the bigger issue around what you've just said, and that's how do you keep this whole thing to actually represent functional cognition?

And obviously, if one party has enormous power and another party has little power, the cognitive process is not going to be functional.

So quite clearly, a lot of work would have to go into the design of this to prevent one party from dominating the entire discussion, for example.

And work would have to go into preventing hijacking of the process for some dysfunctional means or purpose.

But some of that is quite addressable.

So it seems to me that it would be quite possible to create a system that is fair.

If everyone has only one voice, that's one way to prevent one person from dominating the discussion.

That is, on a very simple level, if there's not bots, if a person can't create imaginary bots

be broadcasting their version of what should happen then the person would only have one voice and and over time maybe a group would get to know its members a bit and some members would be more respected than others just naturally because they've contributed in the past they've had intelligent things to say they've you know they they are experts in this field or whatever

so um we only have a minute here so I can't I can't go into much further of how that would you know the ways that kind of fairness and transparency and all that kind of stuff would be addressed but I I would think that there's many opportunities to to do so thank you John awesome presentation and looking forward to continuing the collaboration so see you

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess09

SPEAKER_00:
Welcome William Gebhardt to the fourth Active Inference Symposium.

We're looking forward to your session titled An Introduction to NGC Learn, a Computational Neuroscience Library.

Over to you.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so today I'm here to talk about the NAC, the Neuro-Adaptive Computing Labs, Python NIMP tool called NGC Learn that is really focused on getting your ability to prototype your ideas and work with your ideas in the field of computational neuroscience quickly and efficiently in Python.

So before we're going to start off with all this first, we kind of want to briefly cover what we mean when we talk about computational neuroscience.

So this is just the study and investigation of brain function using mathematical computation and tools and theories.

We have a focus on biologically plausible and biologically grounded systems and neurons and neuronal systems.

And we pay very high attention to the constraints and dynamics that are found in the real world when we talk about these.

For instance, we model things like we have the resistance from membrane potentials, we have currents, we have a bunch of other various internal components to everything that make sure that we are modeling faithfully all of the neurons and components that we can find inside NGC Learn.

And we don't just take from humans.

In fact, there's a couple of various things that we have that are based on findings for things like rat hippocampal neurons and whatnot, for stuff like synaptic plasticity and transfers.

And so yeah, so we kind of look at this biological interpretation of the world.

And so one of the main things that we also like to look at is like, what is realistic when we talk about an interpretation of our world and how biology looks at it.

And so like, for instance, our human eyes, it's been studied that they process thing information at about 60 frames a second, we can certainly detect things that move through our visual field

faster than that.

But as far as visual updates and whatnot, once you pass 60 frames a second or 60 updates per second, we have a hard time distinguishing.

And then also processing for a lot of things in our brain is not just we see an image, we process the image once, and then we just sit around idle until a new image comes into our brain.

A lot of the time, what we'll end up with is we'll end up with a continuous stream of data coming into our brain, and then we have to do continuous updates and processing on that.

And it's that continuous update and processing that we really are trying to hone in on and identify here.

So we do all of this inside of a biological framing.

So we use neurons.

Now, these are not necessarily neurons like deep neural networks like to talk about neurons, where it's just an abstract point in space.

We actually model them as physical objects that have things like internal states and that also embody what they look like in brains and just other neural structures in the body.

We have the center of the cell where we store a lot of our values.

We have synapses that connect these to other neurons later down.

And one of the key things that our library very much highlights is the use of spikes in spiking neural networks in order to actually achieve all of this happening.

What this means is that instead of working in continuous values where you have a real valued image coming into your network and then it

passes through your entire network as a bunch of other real valued numbers.

Images as they enter into our networks tend to be converted into what are known as spike trends, which are just a bunch of discrete either ones or zeros on whether or not there is signal.

And then from neurons to neurons in our systems, we tend to transmit these things only as spikes.

So everything is dealt with with discrete signals rather than continuous signals.

And then the other thing that we really heavily rely on in NGC Learn is stateful modeling.

So as we're dealing with these models that are constantly taking in signals over time, it's to be expected that we require many signals and many iterations over the signals before we will actually produce any given output.

What that means is that all of our neurons have internal states and are stateful.

And so we can, for instance, stop getting any input and we can actually still watch what happens to the neurons in our models as they basically return to their rest positions.

And so we have our biological components that have our internal states, and then these states do change over time.

And so we tend to think about all of the models that we build with NGC Learn and just computational neuroscience in general, somewhat akin to state machines, with the idea that we progress through time by changing the state of our own model.

And then there's certain actions that happen that can affect our model and transform it from one state to another.

And so that's kind of the basic framing behind what we're going for with this, right?

We're not trying to be the next TensorFlow.

We're not trying to be the next deep neural network library.

What we're trying to be is we're trying to be a library that is specifically catered to computational neuroscience and the biologically inspired and biomimetic systems.

So why do we need this?

So building these complex systems has a lot of overhead.

If we need to make a system that tracks all of the different internal states of all models and can communicate between different components easily,

uh that can run efficiently um so at the bottom here you can see here so in one of these models that we built early on uh we had a pretty standard d uh spiking neural network uh that was not big by neural network standards uh that took about eight hours to do an epoch of mnist

And that is due to the fact that when we are looking at an individual image in MNIST, we have to go over it.

I think this model was doing 200 forward passes effectively over it.

Basically, we take the image and we convert it into a spike train that's 200 time steps long and feed it through our model.

In addition to this, because in our brain, we don't have really the concept of mini batching, you don't perceive 18 different world views at a time, and then update off of them, or, you know, 8000 or 500 or however many big

batch sizes have gotten to these days, we do everything in a continuous online updated.

And so because of that, we can only look at one image at a time.

So if we're doing roughly 200 forward passes per image, one image at a time, this can get really, really, really slow and up to eight hours for us to do any POC over MNIST.

And so when we looked at some of the other existing libraries out there, like Brian2, Bindsnet, SNNTorch and whatnot, they all worked and they all have their strengths to be able to implement these systems.

But some of them very much operate like black boxes.

with the idea that you can modify parameters on the outside, but then you're entrusting that your various existing library is doing everything you expect it to mathematically inside.

And what this also does is this makes it hard sometimes to actually either dig in and see what those dynamics specifically are, or even just want to modify some of those dynamics.

And so what we wanted to focus on was building something that was incredibly modular, but still fast, right?

So you can usually you have this trade off between you can have a system that's incredibly fast, but incredibly limited in what you can do with it.

Or you can have a system that is incredibly modular and can do a bunch of things, but generates to trade off speed.

And so we were kind of aiming for the middle of that with error more while trying to expand it to make sure we didn't sacrifice too much speed to be able to do all of the modular stuff that we wanted to be able to do.

And so with that, we have some highlights of NGC Learn here.

So first off, this is an open source project.

It's available on PIP.

It's available on GitHub.

We are an active development base, which means that if you write us messages, like if you put errors or message notifications in GitHub, we'll see them.

If you email us, we will see them.

We will respond to them.

We can work with you on them.

So NGC Learn specifically is built using JAX, which is

basically built on the underlying library called the Accelerated Linear Algebra Library, or XLA, which is a bunch of C Python bindings wrapped around basically C functions for doing linear algebra.

And what that allows, and so those are really fast because we get to use C. And then so JAX is built on one step on top of that, which basically creates a bunch of NumPy bindings for said C Python functions.

And so JAX has this really, really cool component to it called just-in-time compilation.

And what this allows you to do is you can put a pure method into JAX's just-in-time compilation, and it will give you a pure method out

But when you run that method, it runs entirely in C. It does not actually do anything in Python.

And so the advantage of that is if we can take our giant model's state transition functions and make them be pure functions where you give it an initial state and it gives back to you the final state, we can pass that into JAXA's just-in-time compilation and basically take

the entire model and its entire state transformation, and we can do it really efficiently in C. And actually, as a matter of fact, we can take that and we can do state transitions hundreds of times before we ever return to Python.

And so this is kind of how we get that speed up.

And in our testing, that same model that took eight hours to do an epoch over MNIST, we got down to roughly 15 minutes, 12 to 15 running on the same hardware.

to do an epoch over MNIST, which is 40 times speed up there.

There have been other examples that we've had that have gotten up to a 50 times speed up.

This is not me promising that you will achieve a 40 or 50 times speed up in your work.

This is just me saying that sometimes you don't realize how fast it can be running.

Um, we also wrote this so that way, if you want to be writing your own new components, because we all know that, you know, ask models are great.

We can work with those.

Those are great.

But the fun part about science is actually getting to build new things and try out new ideas and new modules.

So we made it really easy to write new stuff, write new components, write new learning rules, write new neurons.

All of this stuff is really easy to write, and they wire directly into the compilers without any problems.

And then one of the other things, too, that we have is that it interfaces with Intel's Luigi 2's simulator.

Now, the Luigi 2 is a neuromorphic chip developed by Intel for doing neuromorphic computing.

This is basically taking spiking neural networks and putting them at purely a hardware level.

which is where all of the energy efficiency that you've heard people talk about with spiking neural networks comes from, is the fact that when you put it onto a neuromorphic chip, it's really efficient.

And having worked with physical Luigi's and whatnot, it can be somewhat of a struggle to actually get those chips running and get them working well.

And so what that kind of comes down to is when you want and you actually get access to

one of the physical pieces of hardware, you want to make sure that your model probably at least works in their simulator that they provide.

I will tell you that the simulator does not one-to-one match with reality, but that is something that Intel knows and is aware of and I presume working on.

But what we allow you to do is that we have a sub-project of NGC Learn called NGC Labo.

And what that gives you is a couple changed object classes and a couple more restrictions that you have to follow while building things.

And then after that, you can run NGC models directly in

the Luigi two simulator.

This means that you can take your model and you can run it on a GPU, you can run it on a CPU, and you can run it on the Luigi simulator, all without actually having to change any of your code base, you're basically just like changing a flag somewhere on where it's running.

And that's all you have to do for that.

So how do we actually build models in NGC Learn?

Because now that I've pitched it to you as this great tool, let's see if it holds up with how easy it is.

So overall, it's a modular system, right?

So the goal of NGC Learn was to be incredibly plug and play.

And also, it has to be effectively one giant state machine.

So we can see on the right here, we have this context block.

Now, for us, a context is generally our model, but sometimes you'll have multiple models that you define or some models that are defined inside of one giant overarching context.

It's just the container that holds everything.

Now, the parts that we're the most interested in, the things that actually do all of the updates and hold all of the fun bits of research are the components.

And so components tend to consist up of a couple of things.

So we have parameters, and we have compartments, and then there are the cables that connect them.

And we'll talk more in detail about what each one of those are in a little bit.

But the components are the new things, right?

If you build a new neuron, if you build a new weight matrix with a new learning rule or whatever, those are what you're building.

You're just building those little tiny parts.

And because of the way that they interface with one another, you don't have to worry about, oh, does this have the right number of outputs to line up with the right number of inputs and whatnot?

If you build the components in such a way that you follow just the standard practice that we've set out, all of the data will flow from component to component without any problems.

So if we want to actually talk about the components, these are the backbone of what you're doing.

So on the left here, I have the leaky integrate and fire neuron.

Now, this is one of the most common neurons to see when you're starting out in spiking neural networks.

It is the idea that you have an internal voltage that slowly builds up, passes over a threshold, and then depolarizes in the midst of spike.

And it does that by taking in current and V equals IR, and you do current times resistance, and you get a voltage, and it slowly builds up your voltage.

So inside of your LIF neuron, or our leaky integrate and fire neuron, we have a couple of fixed parameters.

Now, for us, fixed parameters are values that don't change during runtime.

These are the static parts of your model.

But they're not fixed across all of your components.

And what I mean by that is that I can have a leaky integrate and fire neuron with a voltage threshold of 1, and I can have another leaky integrate and fire neuron with a voltage threshold of 2.

And you can build both of those.

It works perfectly fine.

But the 1 and the 2 can't change while it's running because just of the way that it all works out internally with the compiling.

But for instance, here we have some fixed parameters.

We have neuronal units.

So when we talk about having a neuron or a component that is a neuron, it is more in reality a layer of neurons.

So for us, neuronal units is just the number of leaky integrate and fire neurons that exist inside this little component or cluster of neurons.

They all have a voltage threshold, and then we have tau m, rm, a vreset, and a vrest.

These are just all of the various parameters that you need to get a Leaky Integrated Fire Neuron running.

And then below all of these, we have the compartment values.

Now this is where you actually store the stateful part of your component.

These are the values that change over time.

These are the values that we are transmitting from component to component.

And so, for instance, here in our leaky integrate and fire neuron on the left, we can see that we have current coming in on the left.

We have this voltage value that kind of floats around in the middle because we're not expecting to have it as an output.

We have our output spike, which is just whether or not our voltage did spike.

And then we have time of last spike, which is just, well, the last time step that it spiked because there's multiple learning rules that require that.

And so what we can see here is that if you can kind of think about the various parts of your model that you like to build, the neurons, the weight matrices, any other auxiliary system that you have in your model, if you can kind of fit it to a component, it's incredibly straightforward to get these to be built.

And then once you have them in component form, you can then plug them into any part of any model.

So then what we're going to talk about here is we're going to talk about cables.

Now cables can be a little bit confusing at first.

So cables are what actually connect our components together.

So if we look at the top, we have component A and we have component B. And basically what this is, is that, and then they're connected with the cable.

And so we have our output compartment, which is the brown box that's on the right side of component A. And then we have our input compartment that's on the left side of the compartments box for component B. And then they're connected with this cable.

And so the idea is that data will flow from the output compartment of component A and get copied into the input compartment of component B.

And so this is basically how we get data to move from one to the other without necessarily having it know where it comes from.

So this was one of the main things that we wanted to make sure you was a founding principle of kind of what we were going for when we looked at the component and cables is that a component downstream.

So in this case, component B, it doesn't necessarily need to know and it shouldn't know where the incoming values are coming from.

So these cables are all one-way cables.

You cannot go backwards up the cable.

Basically, the components are just told, hey, this is the value that has been transmitted along this line.

And thus, this is the value that you have.

And you don't get to know where it comes from.

Now, what this does mean, though, is that sometimes what we'll have is InSight will have a component that knows that it's getting values from two places.

For instance, in the bottom explanation, we have component X and component Y. Each one of them have an output, but we're trying to put both of their outputs into the same compartment in component Z.

Now, if we were to do this without the summation that you can see, what would happen is the value from component X would come down, and it would get put into the compartment of component Z. And then the output of component Y would come down, and it would also get put into the compartment of component Z, effectively overriding component X.

And so, but what we do have is we have this concept of operators, which are just simple transformations that can be done to the data that are being transmitted along cables.

So in this case, summation.

This is, you just have two pieces of data that all flow into this little summation operation that just flows into your output compartment.

um it's important to note that the value like the intermediate values inside of things like summation are never stored anywhere they are purely just an inline operation that happens yeah so that's all you actually need to build a model right is you have components and you wire them together that pretty much talks about everything you need to know for the physical parts of your model and how they talk to one another

But that doesn't get us anywhere.

If I just hand you a model that has a bunch of wires around it and a bunch of values in it, but I don't tell you how to actually change any of the values, that's fairly useless.

um in addition to that it's not a particularly great you know just research project we all care about how do these models adapt over time we all care about that whole temporal and evolving nature of everything so with that in mind we want to talk now about how do we actually transition a model and uh what goes into that so

Four, transitioning of models across, so we have state transitions across just a component.

So if we just zoom in on what a component is, we have component A here, where we have our fixed parameters across the top here, you can see we have four fixed parameters.

And then we have two different state transitions that we're going to allow.

We have the reset transition,

and then we have the advanced transition.

And so in this example here, we can see that the reset transition takes two fixed parameters in and sets values via the dashed lines that we see, sets values into all four compartments.

Or we have the advanced transition that takes in, again, two fixed parameters, but different fixed parameters than reset.

And then it also uses three of the compartment values.

We can see the input compartment value on the far left and the two floating compartment values with their solid lines that go into advanced.

And basically, this is we have written an advance function.

So basically, this is just we're doing a state transition called advance that requires two fixed parameters and three dynamically changing compartment values.

Advance internally does some transformation of this data, and it outputs two values.

One of those values gets looped back into the floating compartment that we see on the right, and the other one gets sent to the output compartment that's also on the far right.

And that's really all these state transitions across components are.

When we write them internally, and we'll look at some of what this looks like in a little bit, what we'll notice is that each one of these

transitions is relatively simple, right?

It's just you just take values in, do try to do something to them and send values out.

And that is really, again, you'll see this throughout all of NGC learn, that is basically how it all works under the hood is that we just we take values in, we transform them, we send values out, and we don't necessarily need to know where those values are going, or where the input values came from, that we just know how to move them around.

And it's important to note here again that the parameter parts are fixed.

It's only the compartment values that we can change.

So you couldn't see advanced draw a dotted arrow up to one of the fixed parameters because they are once again fixed.

Now that we know how to do a transition across one component, what if we wanted to do a transition across two components?

And I'm aware that the parameter little circles are missing their arrows.

The images got significantly too cluttered when I tried to draw those arrows in as the diagrams get smaller.

But what we'll notice here is that we now can take a group of components and we can talk about taking the advanced action across a group of components.

And so what this basically does is we will do the advanced operation or transition on a long component day.

We will then transmit all of the data along all of the cables going between component A and component B. So whatever that outputted value of advanced state was would get sent into its output compartment and then sent to component B.

And then component B would once again also do its advanced transition in which it would take on all of its values and compute its own output value.

And you could chain these together at infinite.

There's no limit to how many of these you can chain together.

I will say that eventually it's probably, you know, might want to look at making your model a little bit smaller, but there's no actual limit to it.

There's also the limit to how complex you make these.

There's nothing that says that you can't have recurrent connections in your cables.

There's also nothing that says that outputs or inputs need to actually have values.

You can clamp values to them, which is basically the process of we just set the value and then just let it go.

But there is one thing to note, especially when talking about recurrent things and recurrent connections between neurons and groups of neurons.

And what that is, is that the order of operations in a state transition is deterministic.

And thus, it's also something that each one only goes once.

So if you have component A wire into component B and then component B wire into component A, it will still only execute a transition across A and then across B, or across B and then across A. It will never actually loop itself.

It will always do one and then the other.

And so now all of this really, really works itself down to compiling.

So the compiler of NGC Learn is not actually found in the main repo of NGC Learn.

So NGC Learn is built on top of what is known as NGC Stimulation Library, or NGC Simlib for short.

And that is where all of the, I don't want to say messy or ugly, but that is where all of this code behind the scenes that are making everything work exists.

And that is all of that library can be found in that little tiny compiling arrow that we see down here.

Now, for the way compiling works, though, is we have our state transition.

We have the state transition that we talked about in the previous slide, and we want to turn it into a pure operation.

And what we mean by that is that the same inputs will always produce the same outputs, and no value outside of the outputs of the method are ever modified.

And so how we can do that is with the way that the transitions all work is we can just pass in the entire state of our model.

And then based on the transitions inside each component, they know what compartments they have to be looking at.

And so they will look at those compartments and they will then update and modify the values in the model.

And then it'll move from that one into the next one and from the next one into the next one and so on and so forth until it's actually done.

And so these produce pure methods.

And if we think back to what I talked about with JAX all along at the beginning, that means that we can pass these compiled methods into JAX's just-in-time compilation.

And so what this gives us is this allows us to basically call, advance, or reset, or any transition function that's defined across all of our components effectively at once in one operation.

Here we have it as advanced the model.

And so this is truly where the speedup of NGC Learn comes from.

Even if you do not use JAX or if you don't use JAX's just-in-time compilation because you're debugging, it is still a fairly large speedup just to go from Python being written the way it is into compiling into just running the compiled operation.

um so if you really want to look into and care about how are we getting the speed that we're getting look into the compilers and once again the compilers are actually located in ngc learn ngc simlib which still can be found through all of the knack labs github pages it is also public

Now, what does this actually look like in code?

And so I wanted to take a brief look because pretty pictures are really a tool that helps us understand the thought process behind the models, and they understand how the models actually work.

But sometimes people will show us really pretty pictures.

And then when you go to actually implement it in code, it looks a whole lot different or things just don't quite or not quite as pretty of a picture.

So we do have a short section here where we're going to talk about all of the different code that we do have.

Here's an example of a component in NGC Learn.

Specifically, we are going to be looking at the dense synapse.

Now, all a dense synapse is, is it is a weight matrix that has both a resistance scale value on it, so just a constant multiplication scale factor being applied to everything, as well as a bias term that is added to everything.

Now, so here we have some compartment values on the left.

So as you can see, defining compartments is incredibly easy.

So now everything right here where you see self.

is all inside of the constructor of our object.

So here we have self.inputs is just compartment and then some values.

For us, that's the prevals.

So that's whatever we want.

It's a matrix of all zeros of the correct shape.

And then we have self.outputs, which is just, again, another compartment defined with postvals.

And then we have our weights.

Now, weights are just our weight matrix, which is defined previously in the function.

But it is just, again, simply compartment value.

and what this does a bunch of stuff under the hood but this basically actually associates so when you build one of these objects when you build a dense synapse and it construct it this will actually build a bunch of compart this will build three compartments under the hood and basically register them inside the dense synapse and link everything together correctly so that way we know that they exist and we can wire into them and it does a little bit more than just

Python knowing that the object has these fields in it, they exist, and they have their own set of properties.

And then we have our fixed parameters, which if you look, look exactly like just values that exist on a class, right, we have self dot shape, which and self dot our scale, which is just a resistance scaling.

And I'm sure everybody here who's worked with Python is very familiar with what that looks like.

And so finally we have defining our state transitions.

Now there's a couple things to note about this.

We'll notice that our state transition definitions are static methods.

And what they are really is they're just method.

These have to be pure methods to define our state transitions.

So here we have advanced state.

And we want to still be able to use our scale inputs, weights and biases inside of advanced state and have them all correlate to the values that exist inside of our component.

But due to the way that the compiler works is we still need this to all be a pure method.

So how do we combat that?

Well, we come by that by just doing effectively pattern matching, where as long as your names or

the various inputs, so our scale inputs, weights, biases, whatever, as long as those values are found inside of the component that this transition is acting on, it will automatically grab those values out of those components when it's doing the transition.

And so here we can see this is a pretty straightforward matrix multiplication with a scaling and a bias term to compute outputs.

And we'll notice that once again, outputs is something that is keyworded on the component.

And because when it's done resolving its transition, it needs to know where to put the output value, or in this case, outputs of the state transition, like what values are changed.

And so it knows how to put outputs back into self.outputs.

And so this is kind of the key to how all of NGC learns compilation and just plug and play models work with these state transitions is that you can define these methods that can pull in values from the components that they are being applied to without actually having to have an instance of the component itself.

Now there's one other aspect of these that's not actually shown in this example, and that is parameters at runtime.

So for instance, let's just say that we wanted to add the current time to our output.

I don't know why we would want to be doing that, but let's say we wanted to.

So if inside advanced state, inside the parameter list, we had another value, say time or t,

and t doesn't exist on the component that this transition is being applied to what we'll see with this then is that late it will and we'll see this a little bit later in an example what it will want to do is it will say hey

I can found all of these values, but this specific value T is not found in this component.

You need to give me T for whatever I need to do for this state transition.

And so this is how you can get runtime parameters to be passed into your state transitions and modify them that way.

So now that we have a component and we kind of figured out how to define a component, and I should note that we can define as many of these state transition as we want because they're not actually bound to any specific component.

We need to do something.

So how do we actually define these components in a model?

Because generally, we want multiple of them in a model.

A component as one piece of a model is not very useful.

So in order to do that, we use with blocks in Python.

For us, we call them contexts.

So we do a with a context, and then we give our context a name.

In this case, we've named it model.

And so what we have here is this is a width block.

And so what this does is this is just saying everywhere, every time we define a new NGC learn component or initialize a new NGC learn component inside of this width block, it will automatically be added to the model.

So there's no model.register various built things, no model.components list that you need to make sure is up to date, nothing like that.

If we call Hebbian synapse here inside of this width block, the Hebbian synapse exists on your model.

Now, what this does mean, though, is that the names of all of our synapses are required to be unique.

But I feel like that shouldn't be super challenging because in our models, just for clarity and human readability, we try not to name things the same.

For instance, it wouldn't really make sense if I have three different parts of my model that I've named Z1.

So with that, we can see that we can define components like this.

But what if we have complex models in which we have one overarching model

with sub models that run maybe at different times or at a different frequency.

And we want to be able to have those still be a part of this bigger model, the bigger scope of the model, but run on their own.

Well, luckily for you, we can do that.

So components are, sorry, contexts are fully nestable.

You can nest them as deep as you want.

And when you actually look at the structure internally, you'll notice that it follows very similar to a file structure where everything just ends up with

paths based on context name.

And so you can nest these as deep as you want.

Generally, in my own personal use, I've never found really a need to go more than an extra layer deep, but there's nothing that stops you from going three, four, or five layers deep.

And so as we can see here, though, it's incredibly straightforward to actually build the model.

This here is built a model with two Hevian synapses in it.

Now, I'll give you a brief note.

There's a bunch of other components that are defined below this to get the model to do something.

But those all look pretty much exactly the same as this, just with different objects and different components being built at every line.

So now we have our components.

We have our components defined inside of our context.

but they don't do anything.

They don't interact with one another.

If we think back to the way that we get components to interact with one another, we have to wire them between each other, right?

We have to get data to flow from a Hebbian synapse into an LIF cell.

We have to get it to flow from an input Poisson neuron into a weight matrix into an LIF cell.

We have to get all of this data to flow.

So we do that with cables.

And luckily, defining cables is incredibly straightforward.

So we have overridden the left-hand bit shift operator, basically, to say, hey, if we're going to read the top here, so unfortunately, we end up reading right to left with this, is we're going to take the z0's outputs, whatever's in the outputs of z0, and we want to wire it directly into w1, which is one of our weight matrices inputs, or INP.

And we just write that line, and that cable has been connected.

Everything under the hood is done.

And then I should mention, all of this is still inside the width block found that builds the context of our model.

Any time we're dealing with building parts of our model, it is all done inside of the width block.

And then on the next line, we can take Z1I's spikes and we can output, we can send that into W1IE's inputs.

And we'll notice that this pattern of just taking an output and wiring it into an input is pretty easy to follow.

And so if you build your component with the inputs that you're expecting and the outputs you're expecting, and you make it really clear to yourself what you need to do with that, when it comes to wiring up your model, it should be incredibly straightforward.

But if we think also back to the wiring example, there was a point where I put two outputs and wired them into one input.

So we can see that actually happening inside the second part of this, where we connect two compartments into a single destination.

So we can do this with, for us, the operation summation.

And so what this will do is this will add together any number of compartments that we put here.

So in here, we just have it as two.

But if we had four compartments that we wanted to wire into there, it would be easy.

Now, one of the advantages of doing this instead of just having two input compartments inside of Z1E is this allows for a variable number of connections.

So if inside of one model that you define, you need Z1E to have three inputs or three values being added together, or inside of a different model that you're defining, you have Z1E needing to have seven inputs going into it.

You don't have to build new components.

There's no additional logic that you have to do.

You just add them to this list of parameters that are being passed in and you're done.

And another thing to note is that these parameter chains are entirely nestable as well.

So for instance, if we wanted to invert or negate for W one IEs output value, so it would effectively be W one out minus W one IE outputs.

You just put in the gate around it and you can just nest them down.

So if you want it to sum a bunch of things together and then negate it, you can, if you want to negate two of them and add them, it all works.

And I should also again mention, it does not actually store these values anywhere.

So they are never actually inspectable outside of just looking at the value of the compartment.

So compiling.

So compiling an NGC learn, we didn't want it to be a painful process.

We didn't want it to be something that you had to make sure that everything was like touched the specific right way where you're holding it in with all your fingers and then it happens to work.

So for compiling, it's just a list of components and a key.

So if we think back to the example at the beginning where we had advanced state as the name of the transition method that we have,

That's all we need.

It's that name, advanced state.

And so what this one I'll do in this line of code here is we'll do model.compileByKey.

And so this is on your context model, the whole model.

We give it a bunch of components, w1, w1ie, and so on and so forth.

And then we tell it, compile advanced state.

And so what this will do is it will go through and this just, if we think back to the thing where like composition of functions of everything together, it will go W one goes through its advanced state and then W one IE goes through its advanced state and then W one EI goes through its advanced state and it goes down the list.

Now, obviously, if we reverse this whole list, that will change the output.

It won't change what it's really doing, but the order that the advances happen in does matter, and it is dependent on the order that we find here.

And the other advantage is that we can compile many of these.

So in this case, we can see that we go through all two layers of our model here and all of our neurons in our model.

Everything that's a Z is a neuron.

But let's just say we only wanted to go through the first chunk.

We only wanted to do z0, and then we just wanted w1, and then we just wanted z1e.

That's all we wanted to compute.

Well, all we would have to do is we would just have to put those three values in a compile argument, and it would just go.

We don't have to compile every component in our model.

And what this means is that we don't actually have to have every transition defined for every component.

For example, when we're updating weight matrices, we tend to call it evolving them, right?

They're changing in time, they're evolving.

We don't evolve neurons.

It's not something that we do.

It's not something that doesn't make sense in the context of most models.

So from that standpoint, we would only call evolve on the weights.

Or we might only call reset on the neurons if our weights never have anything static in them.

I mean, a variable in them.

There's a bunch of different things where we can pick and choose which components and the order of the components that these operations happen in.

And so in this, again, just to fully explain, we do have two different output values coming out of this compiled key, this model.compileByKey, as well as one hidden aspect that comes out of this model.compileByKey.

But first, the outputs.

We have this advance.

Now, advance here is the pure function returned by the compiler.

So this is the function that takes in the model state and all of the arguments it's expecting and will return to you the final model state.

ADV args, these are all the arguments it's expecting.

So as it goes through and it compiles down W1, W1 IE, W1 EI, and so on and so forth, it's slowly collecting a list of all of the keyword arguments that it needs to actually compute this transition.

So if W1 requires T and Z0 requires T and DT and Z2E requires a J,

what that means is that it would end up you would have a list that is we need T, D, T and J. If two things require the same parameter, it does assume that they're the same parameter aside, let's say yeah, like the same keyword argument.

So if you have T used across all of your components, you only have to pass in T once.

So that's everything that's visibly returned by this function.

In addition, what this function also does is we can now call model.advancedState whatever this compile key here or an optional name flag that's not currently being used.

We can take that advanced state and we can do model.advancedState and it's the same as calling model.advanced.

And this just has its benefits of you don't have to necessarily keep track of the actual advanced function.

If you have a bunch of them, you can just name them.

So that's everything on actually how we get the compilation to run.

What if we want to perform many of these state transitions in a row?

And what I mean by that is if we think about a spiking neural network, we have a forward pass where we take one look at an image.

But also in spiking neural networks, usually we have to do many forward passes up our image before we say we have an output.

And so when we look at that,

we're doing like 200 forward passes before we ever actually care what the output value is.

So because of that, we don't want to just do a state transition from T0 to T1, get T1, plug it back in over here to get T2.

What I want to do is I want to plug in T0 here and then do T1, T2 until I get to T200.

And so for that, we have scanners.

Now, the ngc learn scanner is built on top of Jax's scan function, which is effectively a method of doing a for loop inside of their compiled, inside of their just-in-time operations.

And the way this works is we have our scanner.

We have an observe function for us, but this is just whatever you want to name it.

There's no actual hard, fast rules on what this needs to be called.

We have compartment values or the model state.

And then we have args.

And so what the arguments are is these are the keyword arguments for that specific loop in time, so t0.

So at t0, we would have arg0, t is equal to 0, and dt is equal to, say, 1.

At t1, or the second loop through this, arg0 would be 1, and so on and so forth.

And we define that down here in loop args, and we'll talk about that in a moment.

But then we'll notice that inside of this, we're doing two actual transitions for every loop.

We go through and we advance all of our state forward, and then we do an evolve step over our model.

And this was done on an STDP, or spike timing dependent plasticity trained model, which means that we do an evolve step at every single forward pass.

We do one for every forward pass over an image, we do an evolve step over the image.

And we'll notice that this gets a compartment values because this is a pure function that takes in the component, the model state, and returns the new model state.

Evolve is another compiled method that takes in the current state and returns the final state.

And then we just return the final state at the end of that loop.

and it just loops, and this will loop over for however long you give it arguments for.

So if we give it 200 loops worth of arguments, it will loop 200 times.

And this part right here at the end is just how you can actually get an output out.

So this will return the compartment value located, the raw spike output of Z1E at every time step will be what underscore S is equal to.

And finally, to call it, we just call observe.

It's whatever the name of this function is.

So if you named this foo, it would just be model.foo.

We tried to use slightly more of that useful name.

So here we have observe and here we have observe.

And then the loop arguments is a 2D matrix.

where every row is just the list of arguments that are found here.

So this is a 200 by 2 matrix, basically.

And that gets us our state transitions.

And so this is how we can look at a model many, many... This is how we can transition over many, many, many steps without ever having to come back to Python.

And since this is fully... So scanners automatically put things inside of just-in-time compilation, just for the way that they work internally for JAX.

But what this means is that we can go from an incredibly slow forward pass over one image to a compiled forward pass over one image to a just-in-time compiled pass over just one pass over an image to a just-in-time compiled 200 passes over an image and just do that in a single function that we have defined.

This is where all the speed comes from.

Finally, I just wanna mention monitors.

So what a monitor is, is sometimes we have a desire to actually look at, well, the internal state of our model as it's running.

And when we're doing things with just-in-time compilation, we never get access to those internal states.

because they all exist in C and they never exist in Python, and we can't look at them very easily.

Again, due to the way that just-in-time compilation works, you can't put print statements in compiled code.

It does not work.

So what this means is that we have monitors.

And so the way this monitor works is it's just a component like any other component in NGC Learn.

Admittedly, it does work differently under the hood, but that's fine.

What we have is we have a monitor by name, and then we have this default window length.

What this is doing is this will keep a rolling window of the last n values that you define.

So in this case, 100.

So it will keep the last 100 values of whatever you tell it to.

Now, at some point, you might say, well, why don't we just make this really long and do it for every value?

Well, that gets really big, really fast.

If you're storing floating point numbers and you're storing millions of them, you can run out of memory in your computer.

So you do have to be slightly careful with that.

But generally, if you just keep the things that you're looking at to relatively small amounts, you'd be fine.

And the use case for this, we'll notice too, is slightly different with the way we wire things into it.

So we'll notice that there isn't a compartment value right here.

There's no m.compartment name.

We just wire directly into the monitor.

And this is why I was saying they work slightly differently.

But as far as the outside user is concerned, you just wire into them like any other compartment.

You can think of it as one giant compartment that stores everything.

So here we take the spike output of Z1E and the spike output of Z1I, and we wire them both into the monitor.

Now, somewhere in between this, we have run the observe function that has gone through and done a forward pass over an image.

Now we want to actually look at the states as we're running.

And so what we'll notice here is in view, the contents of it, we can just do m.view, and then we just give it the compartment that we want to look at.

And this will give us the concatenated matrix of all the spikes.

So if Z1e has 10 neurons in it, it will produce one by 10.

Like sets of neurons will basically just 10 by comma spikes, either zeros or ones.

And so as it goes through, the output of the monitor will be 100 by 10, because that'll be all of the all of the spikes for all hundred time steps.

And so that gets us the ability to look at models after they have run, but

the internal states of the models as they're running.

I will say there are a couple of future things coming with monitors about the ability to actually get them to print out and integrate with matplotlib and getting it so you don't even actually ever have to view.

You can just make lots of compartments and they will just plot nicely for you.

It is currently working mostly in our development branch.

Finally, how has this been used, right?

I've been marketing this to you as like, hey, this is the thing that we have made and it's really cool and it's really fast and it works really well, but let's see it actually work in action.

So the paper that started this all was this paper called Neurocoding Frameworks for Learning Generative Models by Dr. Aurobio and Kiefer.

And so this was kind of the founding idea for NGC Learn.

This was built in the original version of NGC Learn about two years ago.

And it built this incredibly complicated looking model here that has both excitatory and inhibitory connections, as well as a bunch of lateral connections.

Every line that we see here is part of the weight matrices.

And sometimes, depending on the way that the connections go, it's multiple sets of weight matrices.

This is a model that you can build in NGC Learn, and it will look no more complicated than a bunch of little brackets telling compartments where to wire to.

In addition to that, we have reproduced Dillon Cook's paper from 2015 called Unsupervised Learning of Digit Reconstruction Using Spike Timing-Dependent Plasticity.

This is another model that we had.

This is more of a historic model that we have built inside NGC Learn and gotten up and running without any problems at all.

We have one of my papers, actually, with my advisor, Dr. Arrobia, called Time-Integrated Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity, in which we built a patching model that basically is this whole structure, where we have a sensory input layer, an image, and it breaks up into a bunch of different subcomponents, or submodels, basically, that all learn small patches of our image.

And then we have one final part that aggregates them all together.

This sort of model is also very easy to build in NGC Learn.

There's no actual time difference between running some of these.

And so again, this is just something that we can build, and this is all able to be built with components that already exist in NGC Learn.

If you wanted to build some of these models, this one, the TISDDP synapse isn't quite in there yet, but this model is fully in there.

You can build this with every component that we have inside of NGC Learn, and it doesn't, without you having to write anything yourself,

But even if you wanted to rebuild this whole model inside NGC Learn, writing everything yourself, it still would not be that challenging.

In addition to that, we also have this contrastive signal dependent plasticity, which is a self-supervised learning in spike neural circuits, again, by my advisor.

uh dr arabia and this is again another model that like this whole thing gets expanded to this which does this and this model is actually inside ngc learn as well all of the components that are needed for it are inside ngc learn and you can build it and you can look at it and it's all linked to in his paper and what that kind of wraps me up to here is the ngc learn museum or just ngc museum

And so NGC Museum is a public repository for NGC Learn that houses the biomimetic, the brain-inspired computing, and the computational neuroscience models.

Basically everything that we've built for all of our models can be found here.

It makes a very convenient place for if you have code that you want to publish somewhere, you can publish it here.

As just a, Hey, here's your paper.

You can, it's all, it is organized and it's working on being more organized, um, into, uh, different groupings of stuff.

There's an whole exhibitors section for it.

So if you have multiple pieces of work that are all done using NGC learn, you can, you, you will have your own, you'll have your ability to have your own folder that you can all that you can organize however you want.

that will have all of your papers that you've built together which would mean that if somebody is looking for similar papers that you have done they can come here and they can see ah here is a spike timing dependent plasticity paper that you've done and here's four other spike timing dependent plasticity papers that you have also worked on as well as here's just other spike timing dependent plasticity works by other authors

that would allow you to cross-reference things and just have a good community-built platform for models.

Because as I'm sure we're all aware, it's really frustrating when you read a paper, it has a really interesting method, you go look to reproduce it yourself, and the code is not available, or it's in a Git repo that's been deleted.

I think we've all been there.

And so from that standpoint, our goal is to make it so that that doesn't happen again and that everything built with NGC Learn can be found all in one place so we can all see how much it can do.

And finally, some upcoming features, reinforcement learning.

So once again, this is actually currently in our development branch.

So we have grid based environments.

Technically, you don't need to make them grid based, it's just the easiest one to visualize.

So it's using components.

So with the way that components work, if you can basically chunk your environment into its own

individually run state machine um you can display it and run it in ngc learn uh currently we have rat water maze rat teammates another model that i'm currently using for a paper that's not published yet uh that are all navigation based tasks that have to perceive the world around them and uh

get updates.

I will say right now it is only limited to 2D.

I would not stop you from using it in 3D.

You just might have to see how to visualize it differently.

And since it is built up out of components, it is fully compilable.

And what that means is that we can compile the RAT T maze into a C function and integrate it directly with the compiled version of our agent, meaning that at the end of the day, you can do your entire training over your RL environment in C, never having to touch Python.

And I will say egocentric and worldviews are both available.

So obviously, these are rendering the worldview.

And then the little highlighted section is your egocentric view.

Both of them are very easily attainable.

Yeah.

And so with that, there's some links to all everything.

And if anybody has any questions, please don't hesitate to ask.

I'm slightly early on time, but that was kind of the goal.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, William.

Okay, just while I'm getting back into the game here, maybe just share a little bit of your journey to working on this.

Like, where are you at in grad school?

How did you come to be working on it?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I am a fourth-year graduate student working under Dr. Alexander Arrobia at the Rochester Institute of Technology.

um here in new york and so this kind of all started so my journey on spiking neural net started about two and a half years ago or so and very rapidly i found just like the speed problem to be incredibly annoying on like how do i actually get this to run in a way that's efficient

And as I started moving to bigger and bigger models, specifically RL and some other models, it started getting really, really slow.

And so around that time, so around like two years ago or three years ago or so, Dr. Raburbia had started working on the first iteration of NGC Learn, which is what his original paper was.

This one was written using and then I got a hold of it and it works.

It works beautifully.

But there, since that paper came out, there were some pretty large advancements in the just computational things.

Jackson really taken off a little bit since that had come out.

It was all originally built in TensorFlow, which works, but it really felt like we were hammering a square peg through a circular hole to get it to do what we wanted.

And so starting about a year and a half ago now, we kind of set out to make NGC learn what it is today.

And then probably eight months ago, it really kind of took off on where it is with its compiling and the speed.

And we've been using it and developing it ever since.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Epic.

Okay.

I'll start asking some questions from the live chat.

And if anybody wants to add more questions, they can go for it.

Okay.

Okay, I'm going to read a possibly unrelated comment, but if you have a thought, otherwise it's not necessarily a direct question.

Okay, Scott wrote, Lawyers say that contracts are a meeting of the minds.

Singers and choruses experience aesthetic amplification of group identity.

Here, the meeting of voices in storytelling equals a smart mirror for group identity.


SPEAKER_02:
That's... Okay.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
It's interesting.

I do kind of, thinking about it, it's like, just my initial gut reaction to that is that I think especially when we're doing science, sometimes we can get a little bit too bogged down in being scientists and not enough time in being like, rethinking and actually just coming up with like new ideas, right?

We get too ingrained in like ruts of how things have been done in the past.

And so I think that's something that we all do need to work towards more.

It's just being a little bit more embracing of just new ideas that might not work.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Okay.

First question.

Mobina wrote, does it only work with discrete value spiking?


SPEAKER_02:
No.

So I'm going to flip through a couple of slides here.

So when you go to these wires here, there's nothing that says that the wires actually move discrete values, but the advantage that we run into is that the fact that they can move discrete values.

So when we look at here, so the weight outputs, so like w, like the weight outputs are actual matrix multiplications of weight outputs.

We can see that here.

This is, this is not a discrete value, but for us, when we're dealing with spiking neural networks,

The input coming.

So the short answer to the question is no, it works fine with floating point values as well.

Um, it just also works with discrete values, which many other systems do not.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

To give you a breather, I'm going to read an interesting quote that your last comment reminded me of.

It's from Henry David Thoreau in Walden.

He wrote, "...I had not lived there a week before my feet wore a path from my door to the pondside, and though it is five or six years since I trod it, it is still quite distinct."

It is true, I fear that others may have fallen into it and so help to keep it open.

The surface of the earth is soft and impressible by the feet of men, and so with the paths which the mind travels.

How worn and dusty then must be the highways of the world, how deep the ruts of tradition and conformity."


SPEAKER_02:
It's a good quote, it's a good quote.

I've seen his cabin, I've been to that lake.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, like I had a sense that you would.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, yeah, it's a really cool place.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, reading down Viet, your colleague and previous presenter wrote two questions.

So first question, I saw that JAX also has a method dot lower to lower the pure function down to machine code, but not compiling.

Do you see any fruitful exploitation of this function in the context of NGC simulation library?


SPEAKER_02:
Um,

Possibly.

So that could get us definitely some of the beneficial parts.

So right now when you compile a function and then it throws an error, debugging that error is a nightmare because it's all compiled under the hood.

I would have to look more into it, but if we can just get to machine code, that would be really cool.

Like if it didn't end up

like if it ended up skipping over, like it's going into C, but I'm not sure if it does.

On top of that, something else that would be kind of interesting is, and I've actually spoken to my father who also does computer programming about this, is if we can get it all written into C or machine code, theoretically, you should be able to pre-compile this, which means that you could get your entire model and all of the state transitions

as a program basically that sits on your computer without actually ever having to touch Python, which I also think would be a really cool place and direction to go.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think the presentation and the package architecture reflects many octaves of computer science.

You're really getting down into the compilation details, but understanding those is critical because the point you mentioned sort of by the by that there's the possibility with only some constraints to run a model on CPU, GPU, and neuromorphic

That's an incredible cross deployment of potentially identical models.

So you could have certain models deployed across hardware to better understand the hardware, forget the model.

Yeah, for sure.


SPEAKER_02:
Inside...

Yeah, inside of the tutorial section of the documentation for NGC Learn, there's a part with NGC Lava, and it actually will walk you through how to run the same model both on the Loihi simulator and your computer in the same time.

And you can look, and it will get the same output.

It's got some randomness to it, so your filter might be in a different spot, but it will produce the same model.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, what is it even like to, or how is it similar and different

to be programming on a neuromorphic simulator.


SPEAKER_02:
So the simulator is relatively straightforward.

Actually going on to the physical Luigi itself, and this is why we have to stress simulator everywhere, is a challenge.

So first off, Intel's NeuroCore, which is like their proprietary code for running on their Luigi chips.

Well, it's proprietary code, which means that

I don't have easy access to it.

I have a couple working groups that I can have access to it through, but it's not something that I can just put on my own machine and test.

In addition to that, microcode is needed, which is basically what is usually used to patch CPUs and GPUs and whatnot.

But the microcode, it's the level between machine code, and it looks somewhat like assembly.

You need to write a lot of your models in that, which gets complicated.

So until we get a good translation layer between Python and either C and then C to that layer, or between just Python to that layer, the physically putting it onto hardware still is a hurdle.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, again, super interesting how this is really spanning the gamut with different layers of computer science and bringing in all these unconventional compute.

Okay, another question from Viet.

Have you also considered automatic operator, such as when we add two compartments A and B together, instead of summation of A comma B, it is A plus B and the library would wire them to the summation operation?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

So yeah, we definitely have considered that.

You run into

So it works.

So the long story short is that can work.

The problem that you can run into is it can become a little bit syntactically weird to look at when you have compartment plus compartment meaning one thing and compartment.value plus compartment.value being another thing.

Basically, the problem is that if we start overloading those operators, you now have to be careful

Like right now, if you try and add two compartments together, and you forget to do like compartment dot value, it'll just error because compartments don't have an addition with one another.

But if we produce an addition with one another, it starts to make it you have a lot more silent errors.

So until we find a good way to overcome that problem, it's currently on pause.


SPEAKER_01:
But this brings in a lot of interesting category theory type questions about concatenating nested systems and putting them in parallel in series.

And what are these operators?

What does it really mean when just to have a certain symbol and then what do you really want to do?

What are the operations supposed to do?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and that's kind of been why like we overrode the shifting operator just because I wanted something there that was not just like dot connect.

But beyond that, I've been a little bit hesitant to override them.


SPEAKER_01:
The nod from Will to the old, many years ago, NGC Learn was nice.

Wink.

The original NGC Learn was written in TensorFlow and started by offering generic customizable support for predictive coding.

First note.

And then second note, I posted a link to where we've curated many implementations of active inference.

And Alex wrote, we would love to have community contributions translating these active inference models to NGC Learn.

We would love to feature and maintain these in the NGC Museum.

I mean, that was an incredible...

insight to have a package centric repository


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Yeah.

The whole goal of this.

So all four of these models that are shown here are all in the museum already or on their way to being in the museum.

And yet the goal is just so that way, like if you guys have this repository of here's all the papers, well, what's better than here's all the papers that kills all the papers and the code to reproduce them all in one place.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Okay, you mentioned a few pieces of this, but Mobina wrote, what improvements are currently being explored to enhance NGC learning?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so again, one of the main ones is just getting reinforcement learning up there and available for people to use easily.

In addition to that, there's an overhaul of our visualization tools that I'd want to have.

So we already support

Things like the raster plots, all of the spike patterns.

We support, obviously, Matplotlib does all of its stuff, and since all of our NGC Learn stuff is built inside of NumPy, it all plugs and plays into that really easily.

But we do have a couple other additions to all of this that we're trying to get up and running.

Basically, there's an overhaul to the visualization library.

In addition to that, I'm sure there's other projects that I've been thinking about, but I don't have my notebook with my list of plans in front of me.

But those two are probably the first two on my list is the reinforcement learning and then visualizations.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And this is a question.


SPEAKER_02:
And the help section and the library built help section.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, the lobby of the museum.

Yeah.

And then the art outside.

Here's a question that we've discussed with each of the previous package developers today, ActiveInference.jl and the RxInfer.

What was the most challenging part of developing this out?


SPEAKER_02:
Definitely the compiler.

And more and it's not the funny thing is, it's not the compiler specifically, that was the most challenging part of developing this out.

It was how did I want the user to actually interface with it?

Because one of the most complicated things and I can go back to here, right, was getting this to all work in a way that didn't feel clunky.

And it still isn't perfect.

It's just the best we've figured out so far.

But the way to define your compartments and your fixed parameters and then write transition functions that can pull them into itself and do the operation, getting that workflow down in a way that made it so that way if you want to build a new component, it doesn't take very long was a challenge.

um that was probably the most challenging part um the next one's definitely just actually getting the simulator to plug and play everything together um i could give another like three hour talk on how the simulator act like the ngc sim lib actually works under the hood um because it's

It does a lot of metaprogramming and pattern matching and function generation.

Like your actual compiled method that you're running is like four step.

three steps of of, like dynamically created functions deep, basically.

And so getting that to all work without bugs was hard.

And it's been doing pretty well.

It's all we've only had two very, very minor bugs in the past, like five months.

So I'll call that a success.


SPEAKER_01:
In entomology, we love minor bugs.

Oh, yeah, of course.

Okay, I'll read another question.

Rorick wrote, is there an active outreach program to the museum as such treasure ought not to be buried?


SPEAKER_02:
So we're not actively going out and trying to see things, but it is open source and anybody can make pull requests into it.

Um, so, and we are, and whatever we, for, like, our lab or, like, for our own personal research, reproduce a model, um, or either a baseline or just as, like, as we're learning something new, that also ends up in there.

But, um, I think as the going out to people specifically and being like, hey, we're going to...

It's a lot of it is, is we're, we're trying to get the people that use our tool to just, when they've published the paper using the tool, put it also up there.


SPEAKER_01:
That's a very humble answer.

Also, you're doing the active part now, so that can't be discounted.

Okay, I'm going to read another, this is not a question from Scott, but just if you have any thoughts.

Okay, he just wrote, things get interesting as our new computational and information processing systems, computers, internet, AI, etc., etc., etc.,

more faithfully reflect human cognition active inference and biophysical models than our existing institutions and organizations the latter are historical artifacts not yet improved and socialized to loot new learnings about physics supported flows


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, I think, I think this is just, uh, my first thought of that is, uh, many, yeah, many, many modern AI systems and giant structures that are made, uh, do not reflect well on how odd, like are not faithful to biology.

Um, and we definitely have a, we should definitely have a goal on making them more faithful to biology and, uh, getting a.

Basically, there's a bunch of things that biological models can achieve for us, with one of the biggest ones just being the energy efficiency of neuromorphic computing, and the fact that we have things like chat GPT and whatnot that have

uh you know use power drives of small cities to train uh kind of goes against all of that and so i do think that like this is definitely a way of the future i don't think it will ever beat out everything but i do think it's definitely something that we do need to continue pursuit of okay


SPEAKER_01:
I have a question.

What is the putative or possible title or topic of your dissertation overall?

Like, is this one puzzle piece, or is this the major one?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I've done my dissertation proposal.

Off the top of my head, I do not remember what my proposal's name was.

So I do spiking representation learning.

So up until now, most of my focus has been specifically on the learning rules and credit assignment plasticity rules of spiking neural nets, specifically spike timing dependent plasticity.

This is my paper, Time Integrated Spike Time Independent Plasticity.

And then I wanted to do all of this with the direct goal of putting it into reinforcement learning, which is why one of the reinforcement learning parts of NGC Learn is on the way, is because I need it for my research.

And since other people have also expressed an interest in it for their research, I'm like, let's all put it in the library together.

And so, yeah, so I've got that and then the actual reinforced and then all of this basically played together to go with the representation learning of how do humans actually represent stuff?

Because I'm not a fan of directly going from like pixels to thought process.

I want to go pixels to representation to thought process.

And so that's kind of where I've been at right now in my career path.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, okay, another comment from Alex, he wrote,

We should also mention that NGC Learn is going to offer support for dynamical systems and even more detailed support for differential equations beyond the basics we have now.

Smiley face.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Yes, that is the thing too that we are on track for.

We've got currently a bunch of different integration methods that are in there, but they allow for some complex dynamical systems, but not every complex dynamical system that we want.

And so the goal is to be able to put all of those in there too.

Pretty much anything you think of that can be represented as a state machine is something that we would love to be able to support.

Just because at the core of it, it is just a giant state machine moving pieces around.

And so while it works really well for spiking neural nets, it works really well for so many other things that are a dynamical system, something that changes with time.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah from the active inference side when i see that well first the reinforcement learning and the ability to have the egocentric and the allocentric i think is very fascinating and it makes me wonder how do epistemic value inferences come into the picture

when we zoom out beyond utility or reward maximization and include these networks with structural fixity or with a dynamic structure doing learning, that's kind of just an interesting... Yeah, for sure, for sure.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't have any great insight on that right now other than it sounds really cool and I would love to be there working on it.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Well, I don't know if I should say that I do or don't hope your PhD ends before then.

Do you have any?


SPEAKER_02:
I hope to get to work on this.

I'm pretty sure even after my PhD ends, I'm still going to be working on this.

So it's all good.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Do you have any last comments or thoughts to add?


SPEAKER_02:
Not really, just that if you are ever trying to set up NGC Learn and you're struggling with anything, do not hesitate to reach out to either myself or my advisor, Dr. Arurbia.

Both of us are on the main dev team of NGC Learn, and we would be more than happy to help.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, I'll just read a closing comment from Dr. Robia.

We really hope the active inference community and audience considers community contributions to NGC Learn, especially if they want to go beyond using backprop slash standard deep learning.

Also consider using it in the classroom to teach computational neuroscience.

Cool.

All right.

Excellent.

Thank you, William.

Farewell.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess10

SPEAKER_01:
Hello, welcome back.

We're here with real Bradley Lycia and recorded Stefan Bohlmann.

There will be a pre-recorded talk with some discussion too.

So thanks all and looking forward to the talk.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Okay.

Is this coming through?

Yes.

Okay, wonderful.

Well then, yeah, welcome everyone to my presentation about NeuroDesk.

My name is Jeffen Bollmann.

I'm a senior research fellow at University of Queensland in Australia.

And sorry, I can't be there live, but the time zones are just too difficult.

I want to start with why we built NeuroDesk and then introduce what it is.

But we saw a couple of challenges in open science.

And one of them is really non-reproducible workflows.

So we have different great tools.

They run on lots of different data sets.

But the challenge is that if underlying dependencies change, they produce slightly different results.

And that's really not great if we want to infer anything on this data.

The other challenge that we saw is infrastructure disparities.

So lots of people have access to different computer resources.

So be it their own notebook, the HPC cluster, or their cloud provider to process their data.

And wherever they want to run data analysis, they need to come and install their software again.

And the software will be different across these installations and often costs a lot of time.

Again, it produces different results, but also costs a lot of time in maintaining these different installations.

other challenge that we see is data management so when you acquire experimental data then from an mri scanner for example or behavioral data then we have to organize in some sense and a lot of different tools but we wanted to see if we could make that a lot easier and then also data storage and privacy so where we store this data how we collaborate with others how can we make this data

openly available to others these are really questions that we had and thought well can we somehow make this nice and nicer for people and easier to use so why is it so difficult um in the end all the software that i use for neuroimaging analyses are are software pieces that depend on other software pieces and these we often call libraries and what they do is these libraries provide

functionality that you don't want to re-implement.

For example, you have your software here that does some brain imaging analysis, and then you don't want to reinvent how windows are drawn on a computer or how data is plotted or how images are processed.

So you want to use what other people have already built to do these functionalities.

And then what happens is your software starts depending on these because you're using functionality from these.

this usually works quite well and the reason is that we have in linux for example with package managers like apt yum or if you use python for your work we have conda and pip but pretty much all languages systems have some kind of package management system that keep dependencies compatible with each other and that's really how it looks like it's like a puzzle piece where if one thing upgrades another thing has to upgrade as well they have to have matching versions and then we're hoping that this all works

The challenge is with a lot of the scientific software that we work with, it's often built by scientists who don't have a lot of time.

They're not really software engineers a lot of the time.

So what happens is they have unpackaged scientific software.

So these

scientific software packages are not available in standard package systems.

And that means that if the operating system upgrades, the package manager doesn't know about this software because it's not registered there.

And then what happens is the package manager changes something.

And because it didn't know about the software, then it breaks.

And that's

happens, unfortunately, quite often with scientific software.

And it leads to two problems.

Again, here's our reproducibility problem, because if we're just dependent on a library and even if it doesn't break, let's say it just changes functionality, our results will be different.

And that's really bad for reproducibility.

And also, this means portability, because if our software is tightly integrated with the system, it means we can't install software on our notebook and then run exactly the same software on a high-performance computing system, because that will have slightly different dependencies.

So we need to install it again, often compile it from source code, which can be really a lot of work.

So just to show this reproducibility problem in a little bit more detail, this is a great article that looked at software that depends on glibc.

glibc is a very fundamental Linux library.

And what they did is they varied only that library version

um and they left the main piece of the software intact so they used free server and lots of other pieces but i'll focus here on free server um so it's the same software installation just a different operating system just in different linux versions in the end

and what happened is in glibc the exponential function for example was altered and was made more efficient but unfortunately this meant that the precision of this function changed so now you would think that this doesn't matter right it's like very uh a couple digits after um uh so yeah so it should be quite insignificant unfortunately it's not because free suffer in particular has a it's a long running pipeline where we segment the human brain

and this means that if you have small changes this accumulates over thousands of processing steps so this means in the end here they found differences in millimeter up to 0.2 millimeter in the cortex where

This is a change that's only based on a software version of this underlying glibc.

So FreeSoft was identical.

The only thing that changed was the operating system.

And the thing is, this was even statistically significant in some areas.

And that's really not what we want, because if you acquire patient data on one software version and then you have matched controls on another software version, then that would really lead to significant results that are actually meaningless because they're just based on computational noise.

So the organic solution that I've seen in my career is that we just have people set up different computers and don't touch them, don't try to update them because people are aware of these problems.

and this is not great because it's not a great use of resources and also it means we can't easily take our software and run it in different computers and this is this portability problem where let's say you want to run the same software on your notebook on your lab workstation in a secure environment on a cloud provider on a high performance computing cluster or even on the instrument where you're acquiring your data like your MRIs you can't just easily build an algorithm on your notebook and then run it on the MRI scanner it's currently not possible

But that would be cool, right?

For translational studies in patients, it would be fantastic if you had a model that you build on your notebook, you validate it on lots of data, and then you can actually deploy it in real clinical environments.

That would be fantastic.

So this is really the problems that we're trying to solve with this project.

And we adopted one solution for this, which is called software containers.

So I quickly want to introduce what software containers are and how they work, because our software is based on all of this.

So software containers, if you've never heard of them, a very simple thought pattern is they're just boxes.

They're boxes to put software in.

And I really like the stuff where you put food in and put it in your fridge.

It's fantastic because it keeps things separated and you can move them easily.

They're very portable and they don't depend on each other.

And that's really what software containers do.

They use specific Linux kernel features called namespaces and cgroups.

They isolate processes and dependencies from each other.

So this means we can put everything our software needs into a standardized box and we can move that across operating systems.

And what it basically changes from our mental model when I said earlier, we have this Lego piece where this piece depends tightly on the other things in the system.

This now changes to where we take these dependencies, we put them into the same box.

So now we actually don't have dependency on the system anymore.

The box got a bit bigger because we have these dependencies not included.

But in the end, storage is cheap.

but experiments scientific experiments are expensive so this is a very low price to pay for a lot of great features and the whole cloud world everything the internet depends on today is based on software containers so this is really a very mature standard that has been adopted everywhere in the computing industry so in science we're just we should just do it as well um

So what we can do, we can package all of our software in these boxes.

And then because we have these standardized interfaces now, we can run this on Windows, Linux, and Mac.

On Linux, this is a standard kernel feature.

So no performance penalties, very easy to run.

On Mac and Linux, we have some virtualization technology that we need, but that got really good over the last years.

So you will not feel that it's slow.

It still feels very native, but there is some virtualization, there is some overhead, but it's tiny compared to what we had a couple of years ago.

so then let's come to what we built um before i show what we've built in your desk is i want to acknowledge all the people working on this project because yes i'm giving a talk here today but i'm just one of many contributors um we started this project really during covert because we are all bored and sitting at home and we said well let's let's solve that problem why not right we have time um so we got together a couple people uh all highlighted in in

in bold here and said, okay, let's build this.

We built a prototype during a hackathon at the OHPM and we got funding from the AIDC to build a bigger version of this.

And then, yeah, we got lots of people involved.

Slide change, sorry.

We got lots of people involved from across the world and lots more supporters like the big cloud providers, AWS.

Google had supported us in the past as well.

And then also the

the university cloud providers like EGI, Jetstream, AIDC, Nectar Cloud.

So that helps a lot.

And yeah, we're currently funded by the Mark & Chan Zuckerberg Initiative and the Wellcome Trust to build that system out further over the next years.

So this is what we built.

So I'll start here at the container level.

So this is really the software containers that I introduced earlier, where we build a software container for every piece of software that people want in this.

So here we have a couple of neuroimaging pieces, so fMRI prep, FreeSurfer, FieldTrip, ENTS, and then we can control everything in there from the binaries, the libraries that we have in there, up to the actual software that people want in the end, like M&E, which then depends on Python, which then depends on Conva, and so on.

So we can control all of these dependencies.

And then if you've used the software container before, they are fantastic, but they're not always easy to use.

Like you have to run specific commands like Docker run, or if you're on an HPC, you need to run Singularity or AppTainer run.

And we didn't want that people have to think about this.

And we build an accessibility layer, we call it.

But in the end, it's just an abstraction across multiple container technologies that we use.

and it's also a way how we can stream containers to end users so people don't have to download these containers so this this little block here was actually the most of the work that we spend on how do we get these containers to end users and how do we make it easy for people to use that

But ultimately, what this allows us now to do is we can run these containers on any system.

So we can run this on Mac OS, on Linux, on the cloud, on Windows, on high performance computing clusters, in Jupyter notebooks like Google Colab, on the terminal.

pretty much anywhere and we try to indicate this here with this little script that goes between systems and that's not the thing that wasn't possible before we can code up an analysis on our notebook and we can move it across all these systems and will perform identically and behave identically across all of these systems so this really is fantastic for collaboration for translation of results and for reproducibility in general

And then the community uses that interacts with the system, but also finds problems, bugs, and then reports back and contributes new containers, new things that people want to use in the system.

And that's really the ecosystem that we've built.

So the best way to get started with NeuroDesk is go to our website, neurodesk.org, where you find two very quick ways to get started.

If you want to run a hosted version of this, which runs on the cloud, or if you want to run a local version, which runs on your computer.

And it depends on your use case.

If you have data, patient data, you definitely want to run this locally.

If you have open data, you can use a hosted version and you're fine.

And then we have a more fine grained table down here where you can select what your compute platform is, what your operating system is, what the interface is that you use.

And then you get guided to the documentation where we guide you through how to run this on your system.

in the end what you're getting is you're getting a virtual desktop which is just a linux desktop with all the tools installed and the cool thing is all the software is ready to go so you don't need to install anything everything is there we have no dependency issues so we can even have

the same software in different versions.

So, for example, FreeSurfer is almost impossible to install different versions of that software on your computer because it will replace dependencies that other pieces depend on.

But because we wrap all these dependencies in a software container, we can actually provide all versions of FreeSurfer, for example, going back over the last years without any problem.

because of this containerization analysis reproducible down to the software level we're not reproducing anything hardware effects i can show this later but yeah if there's like a cpu difference between intel and amd or arm we don't control that but down to the software level it's reproducible

then this whole uh system is only 1.5 gigabyte in size and the reason is we can stream all the software we need on demand in here so when you actually click on a software it is streamed live to this endpoint you can also choose to download it but then we realized that

We look at brain imaging data and check if things worked or didn't work.

Then also we wanted to support high performance computing systems.

So high performance computing systems, they don't often come with a desktop interface.

So you need to work from the command line.

So we build everything to integrate with these HPC systems so you can easily run NeuroDesk on there.

Often you can't install things on there.

So we took care of making that possible.

So you don't need any elevated privileges if you have Singularity or Optane already installed on your HPC.

And then we also support Jupyter and notebooks, computation notebooks in general, because we think this is a great way of documenting and analysis, experimenting, collaborating with other people and sharing results in the end.

So we really build it into JupyterLab as well and provide with this very nice interface to people that they are used to, that I know how to work with.

Then it's also very easy to contribute new software to it.

It's all automated on GitHub.

So we have GitHub actions where people can propose a recipe for a software that gets automatically built, tested and integrated into the whole system and made available.

And then we have a system which is called CDMFS, the streaming of software that I mentioned.

It's developed at CERN.

So CERN used CDMFS to stream software and instrument data across the world.

And we use exactly the same system and also collaborate with the people who run these servers.

So we have a primary server where we ingest all the software.

And then we distribute it worldwide.

So wherever you are in the world, you should get a quick access to the software.

And there's a client in there that localizes where you are and gives you the closest server.

And even if the server is down, it just goes to the next server.

So it should be a quite reliant system.

And we're using this as a couple of years and have never had any issues with that.

And then for the end user, it just appears magically there.

They just see the software there.

And when they started, it just magically works.

It's just on the first start, it's a little bit slower because it has to download certain things.

But then on the second start, it's cached locally and it behaves like it was installed locally.

So the uptake in the community is pretty impressive and we saw really big growth over the last years.

So we have more than a thousand monthly users on our systems that come from over 60 countries.

So really worldwide adoption.

We see that more than 16,000 people downloaded our main software container that provides a lot of these things.

It's used in university courses for teaching.

It's used in conference workshops because it's fantastic for

standardizing teaching material because you can't, you don't have the problem that students have different software requirements on their computers.

They all log in into either a cloud-based system or to install our software container, and then they can run all the same analysis, which is fantastic.

And we also have various collaboration models that we support with this because we realized that in some instances, it's nice to have a central compute instance where people all log in and they all work on the same data.

And this is fantastic for open data sets.

This is fantastic if people are actually all in the same institution and they all collaborate on an institutional server.

and that's really useful and used a lot also for teaching obviously that's a really great setup because teachers can then log into the other students notes and quickly have a look what's happening there if they if they struggle if they have a problem

But then we also have this federated model where every, let's say, researchers are collaborating from different institutions.

They just install it on their infrastructure, on their computer, and they run analysis on their data.

And then they can, for example, aggregate high level results in a publication without sharing actual any confidential data.

So let's say brain extraction or brain, let's say,

cortical thickness measurements, right?

So you could easily share those without actually exposing the patient data that's underlying this, and then that can be shared across different institutions.

So that's a really cool model as well that we see often used with our project.

And with this, I claim that we made maintaining and installing scientific software fun again.

So it's now very easy.

Basically, you install NeuroDesk on these different systems, and we make sure that the software runs on these systems.

So even very recently, we managed to get our containers running on an MRI scanner.

So this works particularly well for the Siemens ecosystem.

So Siemens has a software platform called Open Recon.

So we can actually build a software container

that can directly be integrated into a reconstruction running on the system.

And that is really closing the loop.

So now you could acquire data, build a core model, and then deploy it on an MRI scanner where patients can directly be scanned and the results end up in the PACS system for people to look at.

So that's really great progress over the last months that we've made there.

So I want to quickly show the open data workflow in NeuroDesk.

So this is something that we always focus on a lot.

We want to make consuming and producing open data a lot easier.

And what we've built there over the last years is that we support a lot of tools and databases that make that possible.

So I'll start with importing data.

So usually if you produce open data, you would start from, for example, an MRI scanner or an EEG system.

Or you would download data from, for example, Open Neuro or the Open Science framework.

And then we have a tool in there that's called DataLad that can handle a lot of these cases where we can download data from these systems.

Also, XNet we support, which is a tool commonly used in the neuroimaging space to archive data.

And then we, of course, support any cloud provider or any local connection.

So pretty much anything.

This is not a complete list.

This is just a couple of examples of what we support.

And then

Once the data is in the system, we can process the data using pretty much any software out there.

If the software is not yet there, it can easily be added.

We currently have more than 100 pieces of software in there that the community wanted.

And then we can organize the data and we can document our analysis.

We highly work with the BITS standard for the brain imaging data structure, but also BITS has been extended to the EEG world.

So we support this as well.

We support Jupyter, as I said, as a way of documenting this data.

But you can use also your own script system, whatever you're used to, you can install it.

And then we wanted to make it very easy to share data with the community.

So we support Google Colab, for example.

So you can write your analysis in Jupyter and then you can provide, for example, a Google Colab notebook with your paper where all the analysis run and we stream the software into Google Colab.

So with this, we can even run software that wouldn't be able to run in Google Colab.

So for example, because you couldn't install it because Google Colab doesn't have enough disk space, for example, to install a certain piece of software.

And we can actually run the software in Google Colabs for our streaming service.

But also, we made sure that we can easily upload data back to Open Neuro, again, through Data Lab, or we can share data out to OSF, or that we can share our analysis quickly on GitHub.

And then people can start again from this and can use our data that we produced or our derivatives that we produced, and then start the cycle again, and then really, yeah, enrich the open ecosystem out there.

So people often ask, what is our sustainability model will be around in the next couple of years?

And of course, that's a very good question, because if you start adopting a framework like this, you invest time learning it and you want to be sure that it's around.

So we try our best there.

So we, as I said, we have been funded

through an AITB platform grant in the past.

We're currently funded by the Mark and John Zuckerberg Foundation through Wellcome Trust.

And we're applying for grants left and right to keep the system growing and developing.

But of course, grant funding is very competitive.

And of course, grants always want to fund things that are new.

They don't want to fund things in maintenance mode.

So that is definitely something that we anticipate.

So that's why we really want to build the community.

So we already have 10 more than 10 active contributors.

We have a lot of the infrastructure hosted through the community, through the Open Science Grid, the EGI Foundation, where we don't have basically cloud builds for us, which keeps our costs very low, which is good.

Also, if we have helpers from the community, we can also lower our costs because we don't have to do certain work.

And then we provide NeuroDesk as a service as well.

So this goes through a non-for-profit foundation, which is called the Queensland Cyber Infrastructure Foundation.

And what they do is they provide NeuroDesk at a certain cost for, for example, a conference, for a workshop or for university.

So let's say you don't want to use the open source software and do everything yourself.

You can go to QServe and say, I want this professionally managed.

i want a service contract i want an sla i'm happy to pay money for that and i don't i want to use cloud resources for example and then qsif can can provision that and set it up in a way that it's uh really it's at scale and working really well with with certain guarantees as well

And then this money flows back to us to develop things further.

And then we also have a lot of support from cloud providers.

So as I said, we were heavily around cloud technologies.

So we had been supported by Oracle Cloud in the beginning, then Google Cloud, and now currently our main sponsor there is AWS and the research clouds like EGI, Jetstream, ARDC, which support us with cloud resources and make that all possible.

So I want to quickly show you some results from this reproducibility aspect, because I'm always claiming that NeuroDesk is reproducible, but isn't.

And how reproducible is it?

So this is something that we looked at.

So a PhD student in my group took that original paper that I showed earlier from Tristan Klattar, where they found these reproducibility issues with software.

So we took that paper and tested, can we reproduce the non-reproducibility of software?

So the analysis is the following.

We picked this part where we have data was scanned from an MRI scanner in anatomical space.

What we have to do is we have to register it to the MRI space.

So this means we align it to a template space with a tool called FSL Flirt.

then we take this data and we segment it so we segment subcortical areas and we measure for example the size of that so it's a very simple pipeline where you think that should be pretty easy to reproduce so what we did is we used a very similar setup than what klatar used in their paper where we have a local installation of fsl so fsl is the same

But then once we run on glibc versions 2.3.1, so on a Ubuntu 20.04, at the NeuroDesk, we chose a quite old version of Ubuntu with a quite old version of glibc.

But the cool thing is the glibc version is consistent, whereas here, the glibc version is 2.28, so something in the middle.

It's on an Alma Linux 8.5.

And then also what we varied is we varied the processors.

So here's an Intel i7, and here's an AMD EPYC processor.

so let's see what happens so we of course we compare these different systems now let's see what happens so the first thing is image intensity differences so the first thing is we were able to replicate the problems from the paper so if you have a local installation with two different glibc versions then you get different results and this is really intensity so we

We only focus on the intensity in the area where we will later do an analysis.

So it is actually intensity changes for brain, but just to show where the problems are.

So we basically see that the intensity of a voxel is like up to one

one integer value different and this is small because when you think about the images are usually like 0 to 1024 so a change of one doesn't matter much but still it's a change and it shouldn't be there so

the cool thing is when we run as a neural desk where we control glibc the glibc version this effect is not there there's nothing there and that's exactly how it should look like there shouldn't be a difference between this it's a fully deterministic analysis there shouldn't be any variance between that and that's cool

So then when we look at the classification differences, so this is now when we segment this data, we see again in the local installation with different glibc versions, we see quite high disagreements between labels.

And this is now a dice score.

So this is between 0 and 1.

and a 0.16 die score is quite a lot when you think about it um so this means we actually disagree in certain areas quite a lot between segmentations and again that shouldn't be the case now in neurodesk you still see something then however note that the scale is an order of magnitude

scaled down so we had to scale it down to make anything visible there but we wanted to show it and why is that why is neurodesk here showing some non-reproducibility because i just claim that we are reproducible right and why are we suddenly not

and we looked into this so we looked we traced the executions of this program and we found that as expected in the local installation the software diverges so we're doing different things on different computers with different glibc versions and that's why we're getting different results so that explains it it's great on neurodesk we're not diverging we're doing exactly the same thing on both computers

So this means on a software level, it's reproducible.

But why is there still a different result?

And the reason is that we use different processors.

So it was an Intel processor.

One was an AMD EPYC processor.

So different instruction sets, different floating point positions can still have an effect that we cannot control for, even if we do

everything the same we get still small differences they're tiny but they're still there so it's something to to note that 100 reproducibility will only be possible if you also control the hardware but then

In the end, you have to have a trade off there, right?

When is reproducibility enough and how much effort do you want to put into having reproducible results there?

So yeah, that's just our results there.

So a little bit of an outlook what we're working on next.

So there's a lot of things we do work on, but one thing that I really want to see

alive in the next years is interactive papers because that's what we can do now we can have an analysis in a jupiter notebook where we describe what we've done we can show all the results we can show all the analysis and we could run everything and everyone could rerun it as well and then base their analysis on it and fork papers and really say well my analysis based on that paper and have open data for pretty much everything and really

uh yeah make it easy to to contribute to this open science world and we already see some adoptions from this from from bigger journals like eLife they already have like some of these executable papers so we're seeing this coming through there's still a quite a bit of work required to make this easy and and very doable but our Neurodesk paper for example we already did that so the Neurodesk paper you can go and reproduce it and you can reproduce our reproducibility analysis for example which we thought was quite nice

with this i'm at the end uh of my talk so i just want to highlight that um it's an open community so if you uh we we need we need community we need community engagement so if you like what we've done if it's useful for you get in touch help us build new things find bugs and

um yeah we also have a little bit of time still left to show neurodesk connection if this is something you want to see go to our website um neurodesk.org click on hosted and then you see we have different services and i said we choose the place service with different regions australia us and europe so if you're roughly in one of these regions pick that one

So I said, I'll pick Australia.

I just want to quickly highlight here that all of these servers require some kind of a login.

Australia, you need to be an Australian researcher because that's how the service is funded.

In the US and Europe, you need to have a GitHub login at least.

um so i'll click australia then what happens is we'll authenticate you with an account in case of australia we use an australian access account in then you just say okay i want a default environment there shouldn't be anything else available for you this will start up a jupyter notebook on cloud resources that are in that country so you don't want to put patient data there of course but you can put

open data there and in terms of storage you have a home directory which has about two gigabytes of storage you will get a warning if it's full and then nothing will work anymore so we need to be care that this is not happening and then everything else you change in the system will be reset after after your session is done but that's basically how it looks like you go into the system and then it's just a very familiar Jupyter notebook system so I quickly want to show now

We have, for example, an example repository, which I quickly want to show.

So I'll just show it on the website first.

So what we've done is we build an example repository of lots of different workflows where we, for example, show how to use pipeline systems on here.

We show how to do diffusion analysis for MRI.

lots of lots of different things and we're currently building that out so if you have a tool that you want in there please go and contribute an example contribute a tool and what we can also do is i can i can easily take this and also run this on our website so for this uh we'll just check out this repository so i'll just show that um so just clone our example notebooks and then

we'll take a couple yep so here are example notebooks and then we can just pick an example here so i'll pick structural imaging and then i'll take the uh i'll take the functional imaging where is it intro to pre-processing i just wanted to have a very quick one to show

Yeah, okay, so night pipe short.

So that's a really quick one to show.

So what we do is we have a first cell where we set up NeuroDesk.

This is not needed if you run this in a NeuroDesk environment, but it's needed outside, for example, Google Colab.

And then we output which CPU you're running on just for review usability reasons.

And then you can import any software into this notebook.

So for example, here, I install

i import fsl and this is a software that we provide so this software will now get streamed into this notebook and then we can run any tool from the software you can also install any python libraries anything um you need but yeah that was uh really the streaming that you saw so that

This bad tool was now streamed into this notebook and now can be used in anything.

And just the same way we can load pretty much any software and have it also documented what software we're using, in which version we're using it.

And then I'll just download some test data and show that.

So I'll quickly run this notebook.

While this is running, I want to show something else because notebooks are great, but sometimes it just needs more.

It needs a desktop.

And this is what we can do.

So we can launch a full virtual desktop in the system, which should look familiar if you've used the Linux desktop before.

but ultimately it has a little start button down here where you go into NeuroDesk menu and you see we have lots of different categories right now for functional imaging, electrophysiology, diffusion imaging.

And then you can start pretty much anything from here.

with visualization software and you can just start a software it should start it should run and should behave exactly as what you're used to as i said the first startup will always be a little bit slower because it has to stream the software but then you can browse brain imaging data and access everything you want so now i want to show quickly as well um one more one more way of using that

So I said earlier, we have this Jupyter Notebook.

So I can also open this in Google Colab.

So when I open this in Google Colab, I'll just do the same thing here, run all.

This is now really cool because this is what I mentioned, like this you could attach to your paper where you have your whole analysis coded up in there and then run it on Google Colab.

And it will behave identically than what you just built on the NeuroDesk instance, for example.

While this is running,

see yeah i'll keep this running i just want to show one more way of doing it so uh oh yeah okay but that will not work currently just sharing the screen because i only shared a browser but yes so then there's a ways of how you can run it locally on your computer uh with a docker container so you only need docker installed it can run on high performance computing clusters pretty much anywhere where you should need it it should run um and when i just go back to our website quickly

Yeah, your high performance computing system.

We have instructions here how to do this.

Even if you don't want this whole setup around, we have ways of just installing a single container and you can use that in Docker and Singularity.

So it's really a very layered approach of this whole system.

So if you just want everything and no work, then just take the top hosted versions and then you can just go down the technology stack and use what you need for your work.

That's really what we've built.

And let's see if that now finished by now.

So this will still take some time.

Let's see.

I'll see if this one is finished by now.

Yeah, so basically now this random analysis, it downloaded data and then.

Maybe I can show that one.

We also have built-in visualizations, which is quite nice.

So we can, in a Jupyter notebook, this is using a library called WeView, where we can browse and visualize neuroimaging data.

So yeah, so the notebook is still running, so that's why it's not executing it yet.

But yeah, once it's getting there, it will.

So yeah, that's really...

That's really what we've built.

So yeah, while it's running, we can take some questions.

Bradley, if you have anything that people might want to ask, I can show that.

But otherwise, that's pretty much what I had prepared.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that sounds good.

Thank you.

I'm interested in the containerization aspect of this.

So this is something that you can run on any machine, on any kind of computing.

paradigm, like, you know, if you want to run it in the cloud or on your laptop.

So a lot of the people in the group, you know, they're interested in active inference, they're interested in sort of building their own tools, and then how maybe to do containerization as part of that strategy.

So can you speak to that a little bit?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, exactly.

Exactly.

So if you build your own tools, you can just basically build them in here, just get them to work first.

And then once they work, I'll quickly show how this would look like then when you want to containerize it.

So, for example, let's say it's a Python tool or a MATLAB tool.

MATLAB, we have to compile and then we download it.

I can show that quickly.

So for example, SPM is an example there.

So SPM is a brain imaging software as well.

And if you're ready to containerize it, you can send us this build.sh file where you basically build a container based on a certain Ubuntu version and you set everything up yourself.

And here's an example where we download a compiled zip file for MATLAB that then runs in the MATLAB runtime environment.

And we have lots of tricks to make this recipe quickly writeable.

So this is actually a higher level language, which is developed by NeuroDocker team.

And this higher level language makes it easy to build containers because if you

you want to build containers yourself there's actually a lot of optimization that has to go into it and with this higher level abstraction makes it easier to build these containers but then yeah once you have a software it's pretty easy to run it in here and even if you don't want to containerize it if you got it to work in here and you have the steps to do it it will run on any neurodesk system pretty much so that's the uh that's the cool thing so if you have a python library

and it's just three steps to install it you can do that as well you don't have to containerize it only if you really want to freeze it in time make it really robust across different systems then this is the way to go yeah so does this make sense yes yes and then i i would like to ask you know what does the future look like i mean do you have a road map where you're going out five years or so and if so what are the needs that you need to kind of address in that roadmap

Yeah, exactly.

So yes, we have lots of ideas how to go forward with this.

It always will depend on funding, what we can do in terms of new features.

One thing we do want is, and we're heavily working with this right now, is getting into the clinical space more to make it very easy to run the software anywhere.

So currently we're still needing some containerization like Docker, Podman, Singularity, AppTainer.

We want to, and we just have a prototype for that, where we actually bring everything we need, like we use a QEMU-based emulation or virtualization.

And if virtualization framework is enabled on a computer, it's not even emulated.

So it's really native speed.

And with this, we can run anywhere on any system, really.

And we have no limitations anymore.

Currently, you still need some privileges to start a container on a system.

And this is really needed for these clinical scenarios where we want to get into.

So this is one thing we're building out.

Running these containers on an MRI scanner, that will be a lot of work in the next months.

And then the other thing is lots of other communities have contacted us.

So this is now focused on brain imaging, but Active Inference might have lots of different tools there, and they might want to build their own flavor of this, like an Active Inference Neurodesk.

and we have communities like the genomics community microscopy dermatology they want to do this as well so what we will be doing is we will refactor everything that's not neural imaging and put that into a new project and then we have spin-off projects like neurodesk that uses underlying technology but then they build the software around it and then community maintains that one

um and builds their own flavor of this this is something we're going to do in the next years we still need some funding to accomplish that but I'm thinking that is yeah that is absolutely needed to support other communities there and there's also a whole underlying thing of what cloud technology we're using right so all of these things don't have to be reinvented if another community wants to use that so that's that's really our roadmap for the next years making that yeah more general and yeah

specific at the same time like more clinical as well yeah well thank you yeah it's good cool okay um yeah not sure i so i know some situations came through so i can quickly show that so this is something which is i think really valuable for a lot of brain imaging people so you can just quickly yeah look at the brain which is really cool in in a browser so you don't need any fancy software there and

yeah that's what for example in this case new view makes possible and i think this is really our our fundamental um philosophy with this right we want to just bring the right tools to the right people and make it easy to use them so they can do awesome work that's really what our project is about yeah thank you very much and yeah well if people have questions after this talk shoot me an email um and contact us through github or github discussion forums and we're happy to help

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Thank you.

Yeah.

All right.

That's all we have for that.

I don't know if we have any questions we want to ask.

I can try to answer them.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

If people have any questions in the live chat, they can add.

But thanks for sharing this and for bringing this important flavor into the mix.

where it took me was right where you asked at the end with stripping back to the desk and then allowing the spin-offs and thinking about how we could use that

and just how it's like the through line of the education the research the application that's kind of tracing back the community and information supply chain to applications of active inference

So when we come to a symposium like this, or think about planning a symposium like this, think about making a startup or something like that, using this in an application setting, and we trace it back, and then that's where these topics like reproducibility and research integrity are the foundations of the application.

And if there's ambiguity and all these different threads and loose ends, like from the availability of the papers, things that have been focused on in open science across fields, and then these really specific computational issues.

And then the example with a versioning of a library, having these cascading consequences to say nothing of like security issues is just completely

it's like an empirical open science point that was very well made.

And so now, where do we go from that observation?


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right.

Yeah, I mean, I've had experience with containerization, you know, in the open worm foundation, which I also work with, they've developed a container for demos, and they run their simulations in a series of demos.

And the idea is to be able to get people to

use the demo and get everything to run.

You don't need any dependencies on your machine.

You just worry about running the container and that's it.

And it's been successful.

I mean, it's a little tricky to use and get to work, but you know, the idea is to make things reproducible.

So if you see something in a paper or see something that I show you a demo of, you can reproduce it for yourself and everything's the same.

So you get the same answer.

And you can even maybe modify some of the variables or parameters in that model and work with it on your own and know that what you're seeing is an actual result, not just some noise or difference that comes from the computational environment.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah um like practically what are some interesting ways that as we digest all of this year and think about what projects like as a scientific advisory board or just as an institute or as part of coalitions what would be interesting how do you how do you see that popping up across these different research communities


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think well for one you could use some of the packages that we've seen in the symposium.

You could run them in a container and it would help people if you're running them in different locations.

Like if you're in a research group or if you're in a just a casual, you know, learner who's trying to run an analysis, it would equalize the ability to run those tools.

But also, you know, we can develop demos.

if people are interested, where you show, you demonstrate active inference and you put it in a container.

So someone might run a container, you know, someone who is learning about active inference could run a container and they could run these simulations and they'd be, you know, able to run them no matter where they are.

And it doesn't take them a lot of effort to sort of install dependencies because sometimes when you want to say demonstrate something in a simulation, you need to have people run like

you know, a bunch of things on top of one another.

And not everyone can either do that or can run them on their own machine successfully.

So that hinders what we can do in terms of demonstration and education and research.

So that just takes care of that layer.

And then everything else is like, you can worry about like doing the good stuff, doing the demos, doing the science.


SPEAKER_01:
as you've had many years of working in open source like what heuristics or intuitions do we have in our toolkit when again just because something could be open source doesn't mean it necessarily should so how do we add signal not noise or worse how do we

navigate between getting overwhelmed with the technical complexity of trying to take on all of these new research practices and and just like

We could spend all of our computer time making something reproducible.

I don't know exactly where I'm going with that, but just how do we guide and just put out, especially if we're putting out capacities related to cognitive modeling, perception, control, then is there any kinds of considerations that we should think about before just releasing really effective containers for that?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so I mean, I guess what's in a container is basically the software that you release as open source.

And of course there has to be a strategy for releasing open source software.

You just don't dump software out on the web or you just don't like kind of produce a bunch of files and then you know with limited documentation until people have at it.

Every group has their own strategy and a lot of that is, you know, to think about the utility of what you're releasing as an open source package.

So sometimes you're interested in

commercial value.

Sometimes their proprietary value in releasing something or not.

Sometimes you release you have code, but it's not well documented, so the utility there is limited in that people can't reuse it.

So that doesn't necessarily make it good to release.

You know, so you want to be able to have, I think, and I say this is being a full supporter of open source activity, but to release things that are very.

Polished.

in the sense that you know why you want to release it, and you have the right support in place.

And sometimes groups will have the resources to do that, and sometimes they won't.

So if you're a small academic lab, then you don't really, you can't spend a lot of time, you know, polishing the software.

In the talk I gave earlier, I think it was yesterday, I talked about like kind of these practices of software engineering and that sort of thing, and that's something that not every group can do.

That means that we maybe need either organizations to kind of have that layer of, you know, making things work well before we release them, or having meta organizations that can help scientific organizations do these kind of releases.

And I'm not against like making something open source for like a paper.

I'm just saying that like in tool building, you know, you have to have a deliberate strategy for it.

And it pays off if you do.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah that's very wise like your talk in part one and seeing this again and um the prior talk on ngc learn and the museum of examples and going beyond just curating links to to hosting more and more

And that is what will allow learners to have access to these tools, build their intuition about the topic, maybe continue on and kind of converge into the development attractor.

But even finding friction points and bugs and reporting it and just putting up a yellow flag or just asking a question, a lot of times it feels like people who are outside of the development

don't realize that those visibilities that and experiences that they have into the outcome can be in the blind spots or just forgotten by by bandwidth constrained developers and then that is like our research community with people who are at different stages and using tools differently

So it's like, how can we not have this?

Yet it's hard to hold that.

And it is a commons for computational science, which wasn't really part of the pre-internet, pre-computer research world.

And so there's all these forms and functions that

we're barely barely even able to describe let alone what has really been tried in different epistemic niches so it's it's super exciting because there's so much experimentation across multiple scales

people doing things on their own, being their own program manager on through just with friends, working with AI and the kinds of things people are asking, and the artifacts they're getting to and then even up to like the meta gov type coordinations of organizations who want to have

and be particular, but also find the interfaces that will help them do things together they can't do separately.

Yeah.

Do you have any sort of last thoughts or questions?

And what would be some exciting directions for you and or the Institute in the year to come?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so I mean,

Daniel asked me to contribute something on this topic and kind of in the abstract, because we do, we looks like we do a lot of open source and things and it's this kind of, you know, to develop a strategy there, to develop a vision there as the thing that we want to get to.

So, you know, I would say that like, you know, one thing might be, and I think this is very useful, is to have a sort of educational component where you can have

some you know tools for active inference and to teach people sort of how do you you know we usually use simulations as an educational tool and making simulations are you know a nice tool because you people can interact with them and so you know and it doesn't have to be like a very high level simulation it'd be a very simple thing that demonstrations of things demonstrations of concepts where we might package some sample data with a sample simulation and say

here, build your own sort of active inference model.

And, you know, you kind of walk people through how to do it.

And then eventually they'll start playing with it and they'll say, oh, this is great.

And I want to get in more into some of these topics.

And then that's, that's sort of a gateway into the Institute for people who may not feel comfortable with a lot of, you know, kind of diving right into the technical jargon.

They want to have like a, a nice sort of way to ease in and, and something that's intuitive.

And then that helps.

But other things, like as Stefan said, the thing that they're working on, NeuroDesk is for neuroimaging, but you can use different versions of this for different sorts of things.

And there are also different versions of Linux that you can build your own custom version of.

So in the talk that I gave earlier, there's NeuroDebian,

which has the ability to build these builds, where you build them as like a specialized operating system for a certain thing.

They have NeuroDebian, which is for neuroscience, but there can be other versions of Debian for like musicians or data scientists.

And maybe, I don't know if it's useful, but to have something for active inference with all the tools included, and you just download that distro,


SPEAKER_01:
and you get the tools and there they work thank you these are all great directions a closing note i think it'd be very appropriate in a history rhymes kind of way that the more generalized cybernetics arose out of neuroimaging and we saw spm package in one of the

presentations and then also neuroimaging and the special constraints like computational resources patient privacy those constraints in that community of neuroimaging also leading the way on the tooling which we can also learn from with more general systems yeah yeah okay thank you for this all right see you

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess11

SPEAKER_00:
all right welcome back we are here with john clippinger and we will be discussing active inference biofirm homeostatic agents for bioregional and regenerative finance so thank you john looking forward to this presentation and discussion and more daniel thank you so much for doing this and hosting this uh it's been a great set of sessions it really has it's been very informative


SPEAKER_01:
And this is a follow-up on a session that we had yesterday on basically active inference agents and why they're important and looking at them in an application.

And in this case, in this session, we were going to look at active inference agents in terms of a concept called BioFIRM.

as a homeostatic agents for bioregional and regenerative finance.

We're really looking at the thinking behind active inference agents and applying it to a new notion of the firm that's inherently biomimetic.

And what I wanted with these series of slides is to sort of set up the conversation and the discussion that we're going to have later with Andrew and Daniel

on providing an in-depth look at bio firms as a homeostatic agent that is capable of interacting with the environment in a way that preserves it and preserves itself in the environment.

So what I'd like to begin with is sort of

There's no premise.

I've been involved in looking at regenerative finance and issues around climate change for at least the last 10 years.

And I think there's a growing consensus that we need a new kind of science-based economy based on enhancing life and nature and equality.

We really need to think about one of the economic incentives to make a transition to an economy that values the preservation of life and nature

rather than the extraction or destruction of it.

What we don't need is what we're now feeling the consequences of, and that's the commodification of nature in people, turning them into objects and assets that can be bought and sold and trade without any discrimination between what kind of asset we're talking about.

Are we talking about something that is coal, is water, is life, the biosphere?

They're all assets.

They can all be priced and they all can be traded.

And so you just have problem of total fungibility when actually some things are essential for existence and they exist in relationship to other things to be preserved as living things.

And then the other problem we're seeing it experiencing in widespread just today.

So the unbounded sort of the concentration of wealth and power.

So we have a system that works towards monopolies and the concentration of wealth and privilege.

And this, of course, has created enormous pressures, not only sort of on the ecology, but on the whole society itself.

And you have this notion of maximizing individual utility.

So everything is about freedom of the individuals and atomic agent, independent of the context in which they live and their impact upon others, not just other people, but their other species, the whole environment.

And so we have extractive metrics with a negative externality.

So in other words, you can create, quote, economic returns, but what you're doing is creating a negative externality.

It would be pollution or it would be air pollution, destruction of species or habitat.

This is not reflected in the price.

And then it's left to some other party, to a public good party, to clean up the mess.

But they're not able to clean up the mess fast enough that it's being created.

So we have a sort of a zero-sum, winner-take-all incentive structure.

And we have a lack of transparency and accountability.

So there's no sense of collective purpose.

So this has really forced people to rethink what an economy should be and what it would be to have biomimetic firms in an economy, something that actually worked in concert with nature, not against nature.

So the first thing is important is not to have any negative externalities.

This idea that you can offset the cost of something that's going to be picked up by other parties.

So carbon credits and offsets are really an attempt, a failed attempt, to deal with negative externalities.

And we need to have non-zero-sum incentives.

In other words, incentivize the collaboration and cooperation of parties to take joint outcomes rather than maximizing utility for a single individual.

And we need to have a new way of recognizing that value is created in a really scientific, incredible sense, that value is recognized through a bio capacity and diversity and resilience.

Have that be a notion of value, not just as something that maximizes price arbitrage, but actually creates new kind of value.

The other important thing I think is coming into focus is this idea of agency.

And this is sort of a new concept that thinks that, ah, nature should have agency.

We should have an agency.

And we should have agency of thinking of nature as being given the capacity to be itself, and species to be itself, and people to be themselves, and not have that be restricted.

with that i think we come to the notion of what we call sort of homeostatic fungibility in other words how something is is the value of that realized is in relation to keeping other things alive if you look at the the human body it's like you can't maximize the utility of the heart against the brain or the lungs they all exist together so how you allocate resources

in the body is really maintaining the balances between those different kinds of organs and that's true of nature in those two organizations what we need to also is a sort of scale free and domain free metrics that's scientific and adaptable so we really need to have the scientific process be a fundamental organizing principle by how we recognize and and and and that and exchange values

And this means having something that really is transparent, explainable.

You can't have something that's a black box that's opaque, that you don't know where it comes from, you don't know how to trust it, you don't know how to derive it.

It really needs to be something that's transparent.

So we've seen people talk about the blockchain and things like that, but it's more than just the blockchain.

It's a whole set of methods, being able to see how something is derived and be able to replicate that.

And then the idea of scalable learning.

Systems should learn.

and they should improve over time.

Markets don't necessarily do that.

They actually clear a market around a price, and then they start again.

There's no memory.

There's no learning how to do something better.

For adaptation as a people and in the planet, we need to learn.

We need to improve upon ourselves, and that should be part of our whole economy, not something that's tangential to it.

And finally, the whole idea of governance.

Governance should not be something applied after the fact or top down.

It should really be embedded in the whole system of itself.

And so there's been a lot of talk about decentralized governance and decentralized systems, decentralized autonomous organizations.

But a lot of that is just talk.

They're not really fully autonomous and not fully decentralized.

But how do you really realize that vision?

And these ideas really sort of were first, I think, articulated and recognized by the economist, Eleanor Ostrom, who got a Nobel Prize for her work on the governance of the economists.

And she was the first woman economist to do that.

And I'd worked with Eleanor when I was at the Harvard, at the Berkman Center, and looking and trying to get thinking about a digital common sense.

It was too early.

But here's some of the central principles that she had.

And this is back then when the technology was not very developed, but she developed her thinking based upon how indigenous people manage their resources, their common resources.

And that would be their forestry, their fisheries, the things that they've done for thousands of years, and they're able to keep them in balance and keep their lifestyle in balance through that.

And here were some principles she extracted from that.

So it was clearly defined boundaries.

And you needed to have a common pool resource where people recognize as a common pool resources.

You had to have it congruent with local conditions.

And I think beyond that, in other words, you had to recognize each little bioregion had its own peculiar constraints and issues that you needed to recognize.

And you had to have ways that people could make collective choices among the commons, how to bring people together.

They couldn't be anonymously from one another.

They really had to be

They had to know each other and they'd be accountable to one another.

And you had monitoring process.

You had to monitor it and be able to see where you were.

And if something goes wrong, you have what she called graduated sanctions, which means the punishment was commensurate with the degree of the violation.

But you really didn't want to have a highly punitive system that has its own negative results.

And you had various mechanisms for resolving conflict.

and then i think the the the idea of one of the sheer her concerns with particularly with indigenous people is that the legitimacy of those organizations were recognized by the larger nation state that that they had some genuine sovereignty and integrity and finally this whole idea of nested enterprises so recognizing it wasn't a strict hierarchy there was things that dynamically interacted at different scales and these are ideas that were sort of more metaphors at the time they were aspirational metaphors was very hard to realize in any kind of

operational form.

And she went on to talk about later work in socio-ecological systems and recognize the biophysical and the social factors, how they all work together and how you look across different spatial temporal scales and different hierarchies, how they're linked.

And she was always trying to think about what were the dynamic complex systems that we can characterize by adaptation if you're going to have governance, but when there really wasn't a mechanism there for how to realize those ideas.

Now there's another more recent development, actually it's called Tehanu, that was started by a friend of mine, his name is Jonathan Lagarde, in Africa, and they're doing this in Rwanda, and they're doing it with all kinds of species.

They're starting out with the gorillas in Rwanda, but the idea is that animals, species, contribute to the environment, and they should be paid for the value that they created.

So how do you do that?

You're giving agency

not only to the animal, but to the habitat.

In this case, in Rwanda, they want to give not only agency to, say, gorillas, Rwandan gorillas, but also they want to give agency to rivers and certain bioregions.

And by agency, I mean the fact that they

These things, staying alive, can be valued for their capacity to stay alive and create a habitat that creates a successful and resilient environment.

And so this is a quote from their literature, their website, which I recommend you taking a look at.

It exists with the belief that for these species to live, they must actively participate in economy.

So how do you create a new economy that includes living things?

And how do you recognize that value?

Another approach is something that's come from region networks, which has been working on this for a number of years.

And I've worked with them and they're talking about creating ecological institutions.

And again, it's like, what is an institution?

An institution in the classic sense is separation of people from a set, a set of principles, like the rule of law.

You say, well, here's an institution and it's set up to do these things and people should perform certain roles in an institution.

But the problem with institutions is that they run by people, people get corrupted, and institutions don't work.

In this case, what they're trying to do is develop a constitution for what they call an ecological subject.

Again, it's giving agency and recognition to nature.

And then they have a number of methods by which to govern that and put in a ledger, create some token system.

Regions have been doing this kind of work for quite a while.

All part of a common effort.

Another effort is something called a bioregional hub.

And this will be my last example before making the transition.

But the idea of a bioregional hub is then to pull together different parties in a particular geospatial location

and be able to give them a set of finance and incentives by which they can act to actually create the biocapacity of that particular geo region.

And so it's really working with core communities that are committed to actually enhancing a, could be a river system.

It could be one of the layers they're looking at in Northeast

Bioregion is the Connecticut River.

How can you bring it back to where it was with abundance when they had full salmon, they had a very rich ecological system.

But there are other things in terms of landowners and being able to give them the incentives to rewild their property and actually make a living on that and create an economy and exchange of value in such a way that makes it robust and resilient.

And so they're working with different kinds of investors and social impact investors

in order to make this going to happen.

So this is part of a larger collection of people that are trying to do these things.

Now what we're going to say, and this is a very credit, I apologize for the verbiage here, but what you're going to hear in the subsequent discussion is this idea of a biofirm, which is a firm that is based upon homeostatic

principles and it really i think addresses many issues both operational and aspirational that you see in the whole biofinance movement and and and to to run through this fairly quickly but you're going to find andrew and daniel are going to talk about these things in detail with examples is that it's first principles based it's grinded in scientific method basing statistics and market blankets now in other words you drill down to it and you really understand it rigorously as a science you can understand where

what it's based upon and how things work in a principled way.

It's also computationally tractable as scales and free metrics for doing the whole kind of reporting and that you have this required environmental reporting called MRVs.

And so do you have a method by which you can make statements and claims about the state of the environment that scales and can be used for cross comparisons?

It's also going to be, it's open source.

So the bioform is like a kernel, think of it as a Linux kernel for a new kind of organizational structure can then generate a new kind of economy that's biometrically based.

Another key component is if we're going to scale our capacity to deal with nature, a lot is going to have to be automated.

There's so many tasks involved in different parts of the world and you have different skill sets.

How do you automate some very complex things in a way that can be trusted and generate metrics that other people are willing to accept?

This has been a big problem in climate change.

This is where the extraordinary automation of cognitive tasks through

large language models, transformers and agent architecture allows for an automation of many, many of the tasks of collecting and analyzing the data and learning from the data.

This is very significant.

And then you can create you have the capacity to have create networks of agents working together and create a system of exchange.

So that's a natural evolution that's happening into edge based computing.

that you can have computing on the edge, you can security an edge.

So that's another phenomena.

And then I think, you know, the idea of polycentric governments, this is made of that, but what does that really mean?

Well, it really means if you look at agents that are self-organizing agents and dynamically relating to one another on the basis of the free energy principle, these other principles, you have the effect of a polycentric governance.

And you also have the ability to formally give agency to nature, to different species, to different people, to different kind of competencies.

So that is the whole nature, as I say, of an agentic architecture.

And then I think you have a principal means of interfacing between a biometric economy and the current economy.

That's going to be really important.

So you can't just live in your own little world.

You're going to have to interchange the fiat economy of the world in such a way that actually protects and establishes the value of a biometric economy.

And finally, I think it provides a principle basis for valuing nature-based currencies and assets that we can discuss a little bit in the time to come.

So that's basically my comments.

I think that I always like to end and say, let's make it real.

That we're actually, I think you'll see in the following discussions, we're at a point

where I think the technology is getting sufficiently mature to actually engage in developing use cases of this and bring it to scale.

So with that, I'll hand it over to Andrew.

Thank you.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess12

SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Thanks, John.

Quick mention to Daniel.

John and I had a really nice conversation prior to this.

If it's possible, I might actually start my talk now.

uh and then yeah perfect i was hoping that would be the case and then that way john and i can also have a little bit of back and forth potentially during the course uh and obviously daniel you've had so such a big hand in the development so anytime you know yeah would like to chime in please feel free uh great um

right so my original plan talk for today was entitled uh let me get rid of this guy uh active inference is a framework for social science-based uh modeling and okay um something happened on the way to the symposium

Oh, exactly.

Huge updates.

I want to just give a little bit of context.

For some time now, I've, you know,

I personally gave a talk a couple of months ago, a three and a half hour workshop, basically at an international conference for computational social sciences held at University of Pennsylvania, July 17th this year.

And what I was trying to do was basically teach computational social scientists, that means economists, sociologists, political scientists, and so on, who are very savvy with

computers, essentially, how we might be able to employ active inference in agent based modeling, which is already, you know, a decades old at this point, method of designing basically simulations of agents inside of environments where agents might be, you know, human beings and an environment might be, you know, a market system or, or some other kind of environment that we

you know uh humans find themselves in where you can you know you can play out simulations and test things and so on i want to introduce that to computational social scientists and i think more broadly what's what's great is that this symposium now gives me the opportunity to kind of

flip it to where I can kind of bring some of what computational social science does to other active inference researchers.

But to stay on with the bio firm, I really wanted to again, as Daniel said, something happened on the way to the symposium.

I've had these conversations with John since I did that conference, and I have a lot of strong intuition that a lot of what he's been describing is a really wonderful direction for future work in both agent-based modeling, but also applications of that in the real world.

I mean, we're always operating under conditions of uncertainty and trying to figure out kind of what to do and very adaptive ways where our environment is constantly changing from implementation of computers, social networks.

We have climate change.

We have the typical booms and busts of our economic systems and so on.

So I'll start here, but I just want it to be known like there have been a lot of heavy revisions to this with a lot of development we've made on the BioFirm, thus featuring BioFirm.

So again, I'm Andrew Pache.

My day job, I work as a data analyst slash scientist slash engineer, always many roles to fill.

And so I bring a lot of those kind of skills with me.

to active inference and how I view things like developing applications for specific use cases and things like that.

There can be a lot of rich interdisciplinary dialogue between different fields and that includes the kinds of things I do on a day-to-day basis versus my interest in active inference, which has been going for the past few years now.

I've been an intern and I suppose I'm feeling much more like

like a full time kind of affiliate of

the Institute at this point.

I've been teaching the textbook group with Daniel, co-facilitating that.

I've been involved in various projects.

And then now this kind of partnership with First Principles First and what Dr. Klippinger is trying to accomplish in developing the bio firm.

So I just want to put on this title slide here, these are actually links to if you would like to get involved with the Active Inference Institute.

with uh check out all the kinds of things that are being put out by first principles first and also i just want it to be known like you can come back to these slides as needed as well as any of the other kind of learning materials i've been producing whether before the conference that i did a couple months ago including on the code

how to actually create active inference agents from scratch, moving up to multi-agent simulations and so on.

I also did a talk with the Institute recently that kind of walks through some of the code.

um the new outline for this talk we're going to touch again on agent-based modeling which we already talked about yesterday uh a little bit in the first workshop so i'm we're going to kind of skim through that a little bit but i want to i want to put some special attention upon the aspect that uh of agent-based modeling referring to what are called micro assumptions about behavior

point blank, if we're going to simulate humans, we have to include certain assumptions about how we think humans behave if we're going to simulate them in an environment, right?

Otherwise we just, we can create a list of humans.

They do nothing until we give them some kind of

rules or behavioral you know dynamics or something along those lines so those are essential uh for for setting up agent-based modeling and then uh and then we'll shift over into active inference we'll look at the pomdp as a kind of exemplar model talk about some agent multi-agent examples just to give a sense of what kind of work

can be done in this area many people watching this now who who are already involved with active inference there'll be some aspects of this that are you know might come off as a little repetitive but i just i don't want to i i want to stick to the textbook so to speak right i want to kind of keep this grounded

in a sense that you know folks who know about active inference don't know about active inference have some big interest in active inference in this in-between area like can catch on to the material here um

Next, we'll go into this question, are LLMs agents?

There's a lot of exciting work being done with LLMs.

They're showing incredibly exciting and surprising sophisticated reasoning skills and capacities for dealing with natural language.

That said,

And it's already been said so many times in the other talks given during the symposium, but it's worth repeating.

They have limits.

There are issues.

And I've been doing some work on thinking through how

do LLMs relate to things like cognitive theories?

How does an LLM think or how does that work really?

So that we can really grasp if we want to incorporate LLMs into say agent-based modeling, software applications or otherwise, let's come to terms with like the reality of what they are before assuming too much about what they

are or what they're capable of and furthermore how we might be able to integrate them into kind of more grounded means doing agent-based modeling such as working with actual agents the quick answer to our lms agents agents uh are they agents no that that's the quick answer they're they're not uh that's what i will claim and then we'll move on to the bio firm which frankly will take up the majority of the rest of the talk uh from there

So what is agent-based modeling?

As already stated, we have agents.

More specifically, it's a programmed entity.

It could be a person, a living organism.

It could be representative of an entire institution or otherwise.

And basically, programmatically, it receives observations from its environment.

And then it returns actions back into its environment.

For example, an agent could be a person, an investor.

And then with the environment, the environment could be an artificial or real system that elicits observations for agents and then receives the agent's actions.

those actions then impact the environment itself in turn.

For example, the environment could be a stock market.

So we see that there's a reciprocal relationship between the two things.

An agent or environment's action is an environment or agent's observation.

So the agent sees a price signal from the environment,

they make a purchase uh next morning prices have adjusted given that agent maybe other agents purchases you see so there's this kind of back and forth in a loop uh you know at a certain time intervals such as in time steps or we could imagine them in days like on day one this happened day two this happened

In active inference, the agent environments respected Markov blankets, which kind of define what it is to be that entity, whether it be the agent or what it means to be that environment, including all the structure, the characteristics.

You know, if it's a person, then maybe it includes things like their goals or their

What it means to maintain homeostasis.

So an individual has blood and oxygen flows in their body.

What does it mean to be that entity?

So from there, we simulate them.

We play out the agent environment dynamics over time.

Again, as I said, in time steps, some other kind of interval.

and uh and then in active inference we often use the phrase action perception you know it's like a you do something then you perceive the outcome you elicit your next action you know receive the outcome and then you know arguably this happens at a very rapid pace in actual human beings right it's this is goes beyond just time step one or two or looking you could measure this in in nanoseconds or otherwise

so core guidelines for setting up agent-based models we want to make realistic yet simple as possible agents and environments that has to do with you know generalizability if you make something that's so unique to a particular situation it might not generalize well uh you know so if you want to make an agent agent-based model of say uh you know agents taking care of a natural environment if you make the agents way too specific to that environment to where they

If you want to set up a decision-based model and get insights into what you can do in reality, you want to make sure that what you test in the model can actually be carried out in reality.

It can't be too specific.

It can't be off course.

robustness simply small changes don't dramatically change results uh so you know if you fine-tune something too much such that you know the the results of the um experiment end up being dramatically different and suddenly once again we have that generalizability problem reproducibility everyone knows reproducibility problems exist in modern science we need to document and publish you know our code make it available

to other people so they can understand it, recreate the results, et cetera.

And finally, usefulness, which is simply, why do this?

If we can't get any kind of additional useful insights out of setting up these rather complex computer models and programs, why do it?

And so it's worth having that in mind.

Not all models are right, but some models can be useful, right, in the statistician George Box's words.

Then purpose.

So we do agent-based modeling in order to predict outcomes.

We could try and extrapolate from the present.

We can entertain different kinds of hypothetical scenarios, design new policies, and have them play out over the course of the simulation, see what the outcome is.

And then we can also look at collective outcomes of aggregated individual behaviors, if all

uh you know stock investors in my simulation all began investing in this particular stock like what happens by the next day do we end up with some kind of bubble and then bust kind of situation like what what occurs you know that that kind of thinking and then over the past couple decades and this is really what I wanted to highlight a couple months ago and what I would like to highlight now again and I think it's especially relevant for anyone wanting to do agent-based modeling

and especially folks who are interested in active inference there's been a cognitive turn uh you know a lot of these traditional agent-based models you know they're very you know very interesting a lot of thought has has been put into them but their agents tend to be very simplistic um in part because you know 40 years ago we were working with uh you know

much more at this point archaic computers and computer architectures and devices that simply could not run simulations that involve many interacting agents who all have highly sophisticated behaviors.

Furthermore,

it's called a cognitive turn not a complexity term but a cognitive turn in the sense that we're looking at actually more closely approximating human behavior so that means actually looking at other fields ranging from you know neuroscience cognition psychology social sciences that means looking at uh you know cybernetics uh biology you know trying to open up the the discourse and the dialogues over how can we

or better approximate human behavior so there's some common characteristics for these calls to cognitive agents that includes like having inter you know agents have beliefs um they update their beliefs based upon what they see they have to infer what to do in a sense that they're more autonomous they kind of make their own decisions traditional agent-based modeling it's like well if if

if the agent sees x then they do y otherwise they do z and these highly simplistic you know programmatic rules that you know the program you know i programmed in that way so i already know that they're going to do that uh whenever it comes to agent-based modeling with cognitive agents i don't necessarily know exactly what they're going to do they kind of make their own decisions right they have the architecture for that and then also reinforcement learning which is kind of a you know

adjacent or subfield in some ways of like machine learning, data science, you know, a lot of these kind of state of the art, but still rather standardized at this point ways of doing modern data, you know, processing and analytics and predictions and forecasting.

Reinforcement learning is a way of doing that where you actually have an agent, right?

So that's been kind of one of the main ways people are trying to to continue this cognitive turning agent based modeling.

Now, micro assumptions is a lot of information for a single slide, so it'll be over soon.

But I really just wanted to give, you know, kind of a picture of there.

There's so much research that's been done, so many more kind of dialogs between fields that that can occur here now.

like when thinking about how to make cognitive agents what makes sense you know what what's realistic but what also balances complexity and accuracy keeps things simple enough to where the agent-based model can actually be useful so there's been a lot of criticism at this point centuries of criticism of this kind of neoclassical tradition classical then neoclassical tradition adam smithian kind of tradition

that tends to paint humans as utility maximizers.

It's often criticized because it's too simplistic.

It reduces people to being greedy or immoral, as if they're just going after profit without any concern for any other condition or needs or wants.

So it's kind of selfishness, right, without any form of altruism or sense of community.

Some people point to economist Lionel Robbins, you know, kind of a classic in the field, who claimed that unlimited wants, scarce resources, that is the fundamental economic problem.

Yet this assumption, I think this gets overlooked.

I also criticize the utility maximizer assumption, but I want people to be aware that this leads to a...

a really useful tool, which is for agent-based modeling, you can severely reduce computational costs for putting together agent-based models if you just have a bunch of agents who are trying to act to maximize a singular value.

There's not a lot of complexity there.

You can run those equations quite quickly, right?

And then that also assumes that the main thing in your environment is the singular value that is utility or

a stand-in might be uh you know money or some general notion of liquidity and so since then we've had so many other ways of looking at human behavior uh behavioral economics and finance psychology cognitive science social theory you know humans aren't just trying to maximize utility they're they're they're speculative they don't have fixed preferences they actually look at one another's decision makings you know this is

It goes back to John Maynard Keynes.

We had Hyman P. Minsky, who looked at market crashes.

We have Robert J. Schiller, who's still alive today and writing on narrative economics, the idea that ideas have an impact on how we interact with our economy and how we behave.

There's Kahneman's thinking fast and slow.

Like sometimes we just rely upon heuristics or maybe we do it a lot of the time.

You know, it's quicker.

It mitigates having to put a lot of thought into things where we just kind of want to get something done, even though it's not necessarily maximizing utility.

um there's dollar and sunstein's nudge it's like sometimes yeah you do just go with the default option some people whenever a website asks them like do you accept all the cookies they will click yes quickly just because they want the thing off their screen right um so

And then we have social emulation, mimesis, convergence, ideology, all these theories.

What is money?

It brings up the question of what is utility?

What is money?

Currency actually isn't just a means of exchange.

It can also be a store of value as its own value changes to try and do kind of economic transfers to make sure that you get higher value out of whatever form of currency you're holding.

It's also a social institution, though.

is much broader right so be having access to money as many of us know allows you to be uh first you have access to a variety of commodities assuming you're in a market economy where many things are fungible and tradable in that way and then we also have social belonging it's very difficult to maintain yourself in a society where you have no money right so that's a it's a whole dimension that is lost we just look at something like maximizing utility

I've put a mention of Louis Althusser, which is a much more kind of critical theory approach, but it looks at the impact of state law, different forms of coercion upon people to act and behave in particular ways that go beyond just their ability to try and maximize their own profit.

The pragmatism, people update their beliefs, they're forward-looking.

they don't maintain the same preferences and ideas and rules uh you know throughout history you know they change they have their own circumstances and so there's a kind of pragmatic uh approach to life carl pilani

economic activity is embedded in society uh meaning that a lot of that economic activities that we have you know they themselves are predicated upon our ability to trust one another work with one another and all these other kind of things where whenever that trust is harmed it can dramatically change how that economic

activity plays out and then we have neuroscience biology physics and that you can see how we're moving more in the active inference direction now but you know that we have these are predominant theories now in neuroscience the idea of predictive processing that you know that one comes to a situation with their prior beliefs and they they can be updated in the sense of the the bayesian brain ops is the kind of way of mathematizing uh that process um we also have and this is quite old now but it's still

it still stands as a role like heavy in learning or associative learning.

So someone who associates money with being something bad very well might not have such a drive for money relative to other things.

And then homeostasis, allostasis, allostasis being planning for homeostasis or homeostasis in the future.

These are obvious things for us that we deal with on the day to day.

We need to fulfill our needs, physiological needs, neurobiological needs, unconscious processes in the brain.

You know, that goes beyond being able to say that every single thing that we do is necessarily conscious or deliberate.

I'm not actively trying to think about how to regulate my blood or oxygen flow right now.

We also take preventative actions.

We do things that might be a cost right now, but they change the impact of whatever happens in the future for us.

We are forward looking.

in various ways and we do often rely upon habits as needed to fulfill our needs habits allow us to do things without having to put in too much expenditure mental expenditure you know metabolic expenditure to ensure that our needs are going to continuously be fulfilled in cybernetics embedded cognition

This is the idea that behavior and even intelligence arise from interactions between brain, body, and environment, which kind of overcomes some of these ideas, classical ideas of cognition mainly being outside in, where you just kind of look at what's around you, and then you take that in as a passive observer.

Instead, we're actually always in communication with what's around us and mortal computation in the sense of we can move in the direction of, you know, if we want to do something like cognitive modeling, then we're looking more at, you know, actually trying to mirror these kinds of processes that are much more realistic.

collaboration imitation computational neuroscience psychiatry and modeling modeling internal dynamics in form of you know time series neuroimaging data uh you know applying different kinds of techniques like causal inference to see how one factor impacts another one variable impacts another actually trying to find correlations between internal neuronal dynamics with actual

uh behaviors that occur uh you know so so for example sticking you know a kind of a electrophysiological like electrodes on uh you know a mouse and a you know teammates to see like okay what kinds of neuronal dynamics correlate with you know the rat choosing to go left to find the reward uh you know find the cheese or otherwise and then and then taking that and trying to move in the direction of

you know creating an agent who who basically is fit to the behavior of that that mouse or rat in the team maze right and that's a classic kind of example that's looked at an active inference and we also have the hamiltonian principle of least action much more in the realm of physics um and it's it deserves a whole you know slide or 10

know on its own but the the main idea figuratively is you know the idea of something occurring uh based on uh following whatever the easiest path is from one state to to another so a lot of these things the idea of you know social homeostasis uh you know

relying upon heuristics versus planning and forward-looking versus dealing with whatever's going on in the moment, just because you need to figure out what to do now, even though it's not something you planned for.

All these kind of aspects start to come together, I argue, in active inference.

So it's kind of like, you know,

is this should we be considering something like como economic is revised you know again liquidity is the means for all commodities at least in a market economy at least assuming fungibility of things that liquidity can get you many many things in a certain way i almost want to dial it back on saying it's immoral to want liquidity uh it allows you to fulfill your needs

again in a market economy by seeking out necessities for your own homeostasis or allostasis you know physiological relief or otherwise even then even as your bank account increases that doesn't necessarily mean you're going to have your social needs met kinship or familial needs met physical health uh you know if if a doctor tells me after i've suffered some kind of injury that i actually need to do stretches now in order to make sure that my arm will move

going forward in the way that i need it to it doesn't matter how large my bank account is i'm still going to have to do those stretches right um so there is a simplistic example but all of this is to say uh you know for agent-based modeling rather than thinking of utility especially utility in some vague abstract sense of

You know, is it money?

Is it liquidity?

Is it something else?

There could be a shift to a kind of alternative, you know, what is essentially a virtually actually universal value computed by the brain, which can encompass not just to drive to liquidity, but other aspects of means of life.

Simple as possible, yet no simpler.

And then it itself becomes a simplified recordable rip metric for measuring one's capacity for current and future survival.

And so that enter the free energy principle, which is one of the central principles of active inference.

Here we're minimizing quantifiable uncertainty.

By minimizing this, it allows us to achieve our goals, fulfill our needs.

We learn, we actually change our minds.

uh you know we learn new information we are not fixed beings who you know are kind of one-dimensional we update our beliefs and uh free energy is a proxy for uncertainty or surprise

You know, it's computed quite easily, you know, because it's a it's a variational quantity.

There's a proximate computation, which, you know, in physical living beings that keeps our metabolic costs low.

And for agent based modeling, that also means keeping computational costs low.

And so it's still kind of fits, you know, the the the usefulness of what utility was for agent based modeling.

I think that free energy can instead be the new kind of metric that we're looking at.

And I included this kind of fun fact that there was a nice talk given not too long ago with the Active Inference Institute.

Some folks who do neuromorphic computing just reminded us, despite how many calories our bodies

used on the day-to-day the brain only requires roughly four bananas worth of calories despite the fact that it makes 10 to the 15th uh calculations per second it's just a reminder of like this this variational aspect rather than being able to do quicker approximations and then um you know we talk a lot about free energy but i just i really you know in the in the kind of funniest kind of way i just uh have always been fascinated by this equation uh this is you know textbook

equation from active inference but you know so G is our expected free energy related to deliberative planning goal attainment information seeking conditioned on our homeostatic preferences right so we plan for things to take care of ourselves to accomplish things we need to F is variational free energy another quantity where we balance the complexity and accuracy of how do we deal with the moment then we can think of this as like you know say you're camping in the woods and suddenly there's

bear it's like well you didn't plan for that uh and you didn't expect that and coming up against a potentially dangerous bear is probably very much against your preferences for maintaining your homeostasis in this case your sense of physical safety so you have to deal with that and then e uh you know those are your habits your heuristics so so what i'm saying is that i just i i particularly appreciate that we have a quantifiable way

know here of trying to decide what uh you know what it is that determines someone's actual behavior you know the posterior beliefs high meaning what policy or action should i take right uh all of that is kind of all these different considerations habits deliberative planning moment to moment planning uh all these things are are involved in that so it's just it's kind of it's it's an attempt at

from my perspective, we're actually combining many of these interdisciplinary perspectives into a single equation there.

And so active inference, I think, I appreciate this attempt to try and do this kind of mapping of neurobiological substrates to actually interpretable cognitive theory regarding what is a habit?

How does that, what composes that in the brain?

What are goals?

What is planning?

What is action?

and then from there moving on to uh you know these kind of exemplar uh initial active inference uh models which themselves are highly relatable to to reinforcement learning so it's all to make the case that active inference i think it draws connections and kind of builds bridges between all of these uh you know these other disciplines in a way that is very rich and it's not so uh exclusive right it doesn't it doesn't stop conversations it starts them

so and then i also wanted to show like here's just a quick list of some multi-agent simulations with active inference that i think you know it heavily relates it is agent-based modeling you can open the textbook from a couple years ago agent-based modeling is there you know it's this isn't foreign to to active inference but i just i hope those in the agent-based modeling community can start to see

how strong these relationships are with active inference so um epistemic communities under active inferences this uh paper was um

know recreating agents who hold their own opinions uh about things and they're they're in social networks and so you can study how they share beliefs with one another and yet given you know a lot of these uh kind of formal principles and active inference seeing how that plays out we can actually see what the kinds of dynamics that we start to see on twitter and other social networks where you know opinion polarization begins to happen depending on uh how you know how the network is set up in the first place

So, you know, it's just, it's very interesting.

We also have active inference.

This is much, much more kind of a biological or zoological example, you know, where there are ants in a colony who have to adjust to changing contexts, such as changing food locations, and then they leave one another pheromones so that they can actually follow one another's trails, so to speak, to find the food and come back.

And then this is very recent, but we had another talk earlier today, but this paper with Connor Hines, who's one of the developers of PyMDP, which we'll be seeing shortly, he and Friston and others are developing further tools for doing active inference.

This gets at the question of nestedness and looking at how whenever you have a bunch of individual agents, what are the cases where their collective behavior actually could fit that behavior back to the individual parameters that each of the individual agents hold.

then again with social science like looking at agents who have distinct roles uh such as leader and follower where or it could be you know you could apply this logic to many other situations the idea is just looking at how agents who have their own distinct uh you know uh available actions and beliefs nonetheless uh you know whatever their they can kind of synchronize in their capacity to fulfill

uh you know a goal that they collectively have um you know so it kind of speaks to the idea of having heterogeneous agents with heterogeneous you know concerns but nonetheless with an umbrella collective concern they're able to accomplish their goal um this next one

uh rather long title active inference framework for collective parallel problem solving on nk landscapes this is uh you know i gave this at the tutorial a couple months ago um i just recreated uh so this was the point i was trying to make you can recreate a lot of these old traditional agent-based models you know

using active inference agents.

That's what I'm claiming.

So I'm not trying to say, oh, all of these traditional models are obsolete.

Not at all.

I think there's so many fascinating design principles.

I would love one day to recreate the Santa Fe Institute's artificial stock market, but with active inference agents, right?

We can do that.

So here I just recreated one where you have agents who are collectively trying to solve a problem represented on an in-case

landscape meaning that they're trying to solve a very complex problem where there are a lot of interdependencies in different sub parts of the problem you know it's like trying to uh trying to design a car it's like well you can have a great car but if you remove the wheels it's no longer going to really be the kind of car that you need right or you can remove the steering wheel right it's

you you need to have a certain combination of pieces there to have a proper solution so agents collectively do that you can study like well how well do they do that do they get stuck you know with a sub-optimal solution uh and then furthermore you can look at metrics like oh if we run this in different ways uh what is the connectedness needed uh to for them to reach the optimal

solution or otherwise.

And then finally, this is not an active inference paper, but this is just a reinforcement learning

you know based problem but i i included it here because i just want to make the point that this is this is focused on industry right this is focused on multi-agent settings where you can have them kind of work in a manufacturing firm that involves like making a lot of kind of rapid decisions in order to manufacture particular products how you could have agents kind of synchronize in a way that they can accomplish you know that goal and uh again similarly with

with traditional agent-based modeling, where you could swap them out with active inference agents, so to speak.

You might be able to do this, take that same approach with looking at how people are using reinforcement learning today.

I think it leads to very interesting results.

So I just, again, I'm just trying to bridge these kind of dialogues between people.

So now we'll move to LLMs as agents.

This, I just think it really needs to be addressed.

So LLMs have been increasingly integrated into a wide array of potential use cases.

I included some resources here.

There are just dozens on dozens of research papers that are being published.

that try to use LLMs in these kind of agentic ways where it's as if an LLM is an agent who supposedly makes decisions autonomously and so on.

Again, they're showing more and more sophisticated reasoning capacities.

They're having kind of longer context windows and output windows, meaning you can feed them even more information at one time.

release even more or output even more information at one time.

You can also upload your own text files, documents, write your own prompts for them to respond to.

So in that case, if an LLM really is an agent, then why not just skip all of this stuff with reinforcement learning, with active inference?

Why not go straight to using LLMs as agents?

Of course, I'm going to argue like we should not do that.

I mean, it would be irresponsible at this current moment in time in terms of LLM development.

I would argue that that would be kind of irresponsible unless you're just kind of making some kind of entertaining or fun app that uses LLMs or something.

But for something that calls for much more discretion, I would not do that.

So what are the biases here?

LLMs are trained on large corpuses of existing texts.

We all know this.

What that does is it kind of sediments a series of cultural, scientific, explanatory, rhetorical,

prejudice information, figuratively, the snapshot of the retrievable web scrapable internet, other digitized human and AI produced texts to which the LLMs internal parameters, which are black box parameters.

Now we have LLMs being trained to where they have seven plus billion parameters on the inside.

And then consequently, their outputs are just kind of reflective of this.

So a lot of these prejudices have been addressed, very obvious, certainly very unfortunate things that we saw with initial LLMs were like racist or sexist or otherwise kind of outputs coming from them based upon the materials they were trained on.

People are trying to find different ways of training them differently.

to get them to elicit the responses that we want.

But that's the thing.

What's crucial when working with LLMs is the prompt itself.

So I want to think, just put yourself in the chair facing a computer and you're using an LLM.

What's really going on?

You as the user, you prompt the LLM after it's already been trained.

You have your own purpose or goal in mind that the LLM does not hold for itself.

Quick mention, I'm aware that I'm doing some slideshow karaoke for anyone who's like, ugh.

But there's a lot of information.

I want to make sure I cover it thoroughly.

So the user must provide the context for this goal or purpose in their prompts in the hope the LLM will catch on.

less figuratively they hope that the llm will be able to predict the series of words and sentences which correspond in the user's final opinion to the answer the user needs or wants right and so uh after training the lm it can't actually learn what the user needs it's always in the user's opinion and we'll get more into that again it's just making the point the prompt itself is incredibly important this is kind of a

uh simplified uh ever so slightly exaggerated uh you know illustration of the kinds of things i'm talking about so if i go to an llm and say hi my name is andrew it says hi andrew it now knows my name how can i help you today uh i ask it help me prepare you know i have a certain goal in mind to tell it help me prepare an initial draft for a pro forma business model you know for an idea i have

Here are the following details that should go into that business model.

Then it produces it for me.

And today it can even release it as a text file.

And so I could click on it, download it, great.

Now what happens whenever our conversation history is deleted?

What happens whenever we exceed the context window that is repeatedly being sent back to the LLM every time I prompt it?

We have context loss.

So whenever that happens, the LLM, I say, okay, now please help me revise the file.

Please provide the file you mentioned.

It does not recall anything that came prior, right?

What is my name?

Your name is me, which is a slightly exaggerated example, but it just really wanted to make the point like,

it will use its reasoning where it's capable, right?

And confabulation is a kind of a technical word.

Elelins hallucinate in the sense that they can kind of reason things in a way that they end up coming up with false information, you know?

We have to be careful about that, right?

We have to be very cautious about a lot of these characteristics of elelins.

They effectively, I mean, I would highly relate it to someone who has anterograde amnesia.

It is where someone cannot actually recall what has happened in the recent past and nothing you tell it actually gets committed to long-term memory.

And so I've kind of crudely used the phrase like the LLMs are kind of like talking heads.

You have to repeatedly tell it everything in every prompt.

And what's going on when you interact with ChatGPT is that a lot of this conversational history is being stored in the site in some kind of cache.

and being resent and you're not seeing that process because they want it to be a nice user interface where you can more easily use it so recent agentic frameworks and workflows abounded recent recent research if the issues presented by limited context windows confabulation etc

still about ellen's with these conversational histories have been considered to be agents in various cases yet in order to try and overcome some of the issues that i've pointed out there are a variety of frameworks that are being developed you know so one idea is an actor critic framework you could have two or more agents you give them different role prompts you tell one of them oh you're a creative

scientist and the other one, you say, oh, you're a harsh critic and expert in literature on this scientific topic.

And then you can have the first agent try and innovate and come up with something.

And then the second agent critiques the former agent.

So you have this kind of way of like, oh, in order to better ground the information that one of the so-called agents is creating, you can use another agent to kind of critique that and

make it more uh yeah grounded to reality another way of doing this is building up databases of retrieve documents that is you could you could

It's an attempt to overcome the limits of context windows.

So what you can do is you can repeatedly query an LLM and any true information, as well as any information you provide yourself through your own documents, your own prompts, any kind of formal documents you want to submit.

You can kind of collect these in some kind of organized database.

and then you could query that database in a way repeatedly send into the context window here's only the information that needs to be said right now based on everything i have and then that database kind of acts as your ground truth um that that's a means of doing it it's rather sophisticated there are different ways of doing that we'll get to that soon

and finally there's a thinking or reflecting framework i'm just spending a second on that it's where you have an llm come up with things but then have it revise its previous responses very similar to an actor critic framework it's just you're viewing it as one one so-called agent doing this as opposed to two in all cases the prompts are still incredibly important

so what's in a prompt well uh there are many people who have now you know uh coined the phrase prompt engineering which is at this point has kind of become a field or even art in and of itself uh this is a recent recent systematic survey of prompt engineering uh that covers literally dozens of techniques uh for anyone who's you know interested in that

There are many ways of doing this.

And furthermore, some other problems include difficulties handling numerical or symbolic problems.

So intuitively, if you read two plus two equals four as a string, as opposed to being able to recognize, oh, these are two numerical values,

that need to be added via an addition rule to compute a further value.

It might not be tokenized properly.

And so that the LLM doesn't actually know how to deal with that, despite the fact that to you, it's very obviously just a mathematical statement.

um so llms are getting better at dealing with math much better actually but they still risk this kind of imprecision so if we want to actually incorporate llms into software applications especially those that have states right those that have real world consequences where you're actually employing them in any kind of like in-depth industry related setting in relation to what john was saying in any kind of ecological setting

situation where you'd want to really carefully take care of things, verify the information and so on.

You need everything to be much more precise and trackable than whenever you use LLMs in your application.

You could have your applications such as

You know, if you're developing this in Python or Julia or otherwise, you could have that code actually handle the math, which is something we typically already do, as well as any kind of like if you're able to hard code any kind of rules that you can extract out of the text and actually consider those to be kind of, you know, programmable.

and then you can have them in your program and have that logic be carried out outside of the llm and you can just have the llm handle the natural language aspects so kind of my proposal in this i don't want to spend too much time on this because we'll see some diagrams that actually represent the ideas here but uh you know i argue that we should be thinking about things like pre-structured prompts with

what i'll call empty spaces for anyone who uses python it's very simple you just create a bunch of pre-constructed prompts that are structured in a way that you can basically supply uh the prompt here you're

don't have to do this word for word but you're effectively saying here is what i need here is how i need it how i need your output to be structured here are my current you know thoughts or beliefs of what's going on give me what i need uh but they make it an f string to where you can have

kind of these empty spaces in between the prompt uh to where at any given moment in time say in an agent-based model you can send the most recent updated information through the f-string literals so it's like you're you have a really nice prompt that really gets that what you want the lm to send back to you but if you want to have this run algorithmically uh you know in a way that you let it run autonomously it needs to be

that the information in that prompt needs to be repeatedly updated.

Again, like reminding the person with anterograde amnesia what's going on now.

Then an hour later, what's going on then?

And so on.

um bringing it back to active inference agents we know they change their minds through perception they act to change the world they actually have capacity for learning including online learning learning in real time you know updating their internal model parameters which might be likened to synaptic learning or modulation of the brain uh you know updating their beliefs about the relationships between observations and states the efficacy of their own actions you know a lot of these other kind of cognitive mechanisms

that LLMs lack.

So to bring it back, LLMs, if they were like agents, I would say that they're like agents who cannot act nor learn.

They only observe and infer.

There's been one argument that they do act.

It's just they don't quite...

know that because they don't learn anything it doesn't quite matter and they can't really observe the outcome of their their actions like their action is they output you know words and sentences and that doesn't actually come back and impact them necessarily in any kind of tangible long-term way they're typically trained once very expensive process some people have tried to specialize lms by only training them predominantly on medical text to make a kind of a medical llm or

legal texts for legal LLM, but still we're stuck in this lack of online learning or something like clear preferences.

From a neurobiological perspective, LLMs have very broad yet immutable long term memory, and they're trained on a lot of information.

And then they have a highly variable short term memory.

Their context window, which if anything happens to that and it's gone, then they've lost all context.

And so I argue that we should think of LLMs as a language processing tool.

I think they're very effective at that.

They absolutely outperform us in terms of being able to feed them many, many texts and then quizzing them on those texts.

plain as day, they exceed us in this part of life.

They're so popular now and being considered for software applications.

And from this vantage point, we can envision augmenting

agents who learn and act such as active inference agents with something like the capacity for natural language is how i'm currently phrasing it so this is kind of my diagrammatic uh diagrammatic you know attempt at formalizing this for for anyone um these are a lot of the design principles that are going into our bio firm that we're developing

right i started developing this whenever i considered how could i have an active inference agent write a scientific paper by prompting an llm like on its own right so so each action of the agent was you know uh prompt the llm to find more literature and citations uh another discrete action is uh you know write or revise your abstract

you know and these other aspects of writing a paper and saying if it can kind of you know choose for itself what to what to write rewrite update so on and how would that work and so a lot of that thinking has kind of gone into this project

In this case, what you would have is for a user of the bio firm, they would be able to submit their own documents, PDFs, texts.

This is the grounding truth representative of the user's own preferences, their goals, what it is they want to accomplish.

That gets input into structured prompts, F-string literals, like the empty spaces.

That way, it'll basically take your inputted information and restructure it in a way that's needed to get the kind of answer and the kind of response that you need.

So the documents are sent to the structured prompt, which is then itself sent to the LLM, which processes it and returns your structured response.

Structured responses allows encoding for agent observations, meaning you could

In a very simplistic example, you could ask an LLM, is this a good idea?

Yes or no.

And that can be encoded as a zero or a one.

And then the zero or one can then be read up as an observation for a particular observation modality that an agent, a POMDP is equipped with.

That's a very kind of elementary approach, but I hope it maybe explains the idea for programmers who are interested in these kinds of things.

And so that observation is then taken in, and then the agent can infer states per usual.

It takes the LLMs feedback into account in its decision making.

And then we have expected free energy, meaning

know um the free energy computes condition on its preferences right so it's like saying oh the agent can take in an lms you know natural language based feedback uh to the user's initial preferences as elicited in natural language and the agent can use that feedback to

make decisions in order to follow through on its own preferences or goals, right?

So you have this kind of reciprocal relationship between the user and via the LLM vicariously to the agent and then back again as you can take the agent's current internal beliefs

You know, it elicited this policy.

It now believes this.

It previously observed this.

This can be put back into a structured prompt, which could then be sent to an LLM for a new structured response, and that might

you know that might be something that involves like reporting like the agent is you know in natural language reporting its beliefs about what's going on and then that can be useful to the user and then be sent to uh what we'll for now call a a knowledge graph apologies i just now realized that this is being covered um yeah

And so then this knowledge graph, we'll get more into that.

I was very happy to hear some other people making references to knowledge graphs during the symposium.

You know, it can be done in different ways, but a general sense of a knowledge graphs that this is kind of like your database of knowledge that you're gathering over time in terms of, you know, natural language based knowledge.

So it's kind of like you're storing the context of the moment, you're kind of storing the truth, you're storing the history of what's going on in terms of these agent-LOM interactions, you know, and that way the user has the means of reviewing for themselves in everyday terms what has played out during the course of simulation.

So that's kind of the design principle.

And then the knowledge graph, this is a way of kind of overcoming the limited context window issue.

so in a general sense uh and i'll mention i'm you know a lot of my thinking about the knowledge graph comes out of this really like very recent exciting work uh being done by marcus j bueller uh who works at mit right now um you know he's been trying to find ways of using llms to to you know um

and basically go over many texts in order to find patterns in the text that can then be you know kind of put together almost in this like a schumpeterian like innovation way of like uh just recombining materials that already exist in text but maybe humans themselves have not

yet made those connection themselves.

Oh, we know all of these many different things.

If we look at it this way, that actually leads to a new innovation that we could come up with.

You know, we just didn't make that connection before, but we did now.

It's like, oh, we can have our lens or highly sophisticated whenever it comes to going over large amounts of tax, having them make those kinds of discoveries.

So anyway, that that's the kind of where this is coming out of.

And then sources for updating the knowledge in the graph may include user documents, up-to-date environment or resource reports and agent beliefs, domain knowledge regarding your use case, LLM responses to structured queries.

We kind of looked at that before.

Business model as a shared narrative.

It doesn't have to be a business model, but it could be you have many, in the context of the bio firm,

we'll get into shortly um you know the idea is agents are working for a firm and so they have this kind of they need to have this shared narrative between them that kind of captures all the crucial core elements uh describing what are the operations of the firm what are the guidelines what are things that they need to attend to uh you know regulatory or legal standards um what are what are the

their current financial statements, what resources do they currently have available?

What are the perspectives of all their different stakeholders?

Being able to synthesize that information into kind of a singular document that's short enough, but nonetheless rich enough that it can be repeatedly sent back to the LLM to remind the LLM, this is what we care about.

These are our constraints.

These are our central concerns right now or otherwise.

so anyway uh i'm getting a little ahead of myself but just that's how we can start to develop a knowledge graph overcoming the limited context window by having a graphical structure to the knowledge you can keep it nicely organized and uh as we know with graph structures with having nodes and edges you can have along the the edges can kind of be the descriptors that relate

you know multiple concepts as nodes right so you can kind of traverse this knowledge graph to make connections between all the entities within it uh these are the visuals here actually uh daniel created these based on some particular lm uh structured prompts that that he ran and kind of analyzed um and so these kind of principles are going into it so by using pre-structured prompts and querying our knowledge graph

you know, we can repeatedly kind of communicate what is the situational context of what's going on in the moment, as well as here's the knowledge that we've accumulated so far that can help with problem solving during the moment.

This allows us to filter down only to the needed information and synthesize it, reducing the final amount of information, in this case tokens, which also if you're using the OpenAI API,

to use the most recent like state-of-the-art models where we're usually spending at least a few pennies per LLM prompt or well, it depends, but the point is by reducing the amount of information flow needed, you can keep the costs significantly lower as well.

And then also kind of quickly overcome that issue of potentially exceeding the limit of the context window.

And I, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm interested in finding different ways of describing this.

I'm a particularly a large fan of Yuri Vysotsky, a neuroscientist at NYU who does a lot of work on neurobiology and, and has even worked with Friston at a point in the past.

But so I included him to try and give a metaphor.

This is, this conceptually can be likened to theories of episodic memory in the brain.

For example, this, this one theory

that that hippocampus in the brain is something like a pointer.

So whenever you try to recall, you know, an episode in your life, you know, that involves, you know, certain many episodes, like in order to tell a story of what happened yesterday, starting from the morning, and then what did you do, you know, at noon, and what you do in the afternoon, so on, like the hippocampus is the kind of pointer that kind of kind of

or almost like a librarian that goes through your long-term memory to kind of pull out sequentially what's needed in order for you to tell that story or narrative in the moment, or from a kind of more industrial

or a modern data analytics example, you could think of this as querying a database, SQL or MongoDB, meaning it could be a structured or unstructured database where a report is synthesized via joining and querying only the necessary tables or catalogs of logged information needed for the report.

So again, it's this graphical structure that allows us to kind of more quickly get information we need without having to pull too much more than what we need.

So,

Now, this is an example of, I'm just currently phrasing this as like agent foraging and knowledge updating.

So it could be starting from the top left, we have our homeostatic agents.

John made a reference to them earlier.

The sense is that these are agents who have their own preferences for maintaining their own homeostasis.

They might be trying to maintain the homeostasis of their environment in the case of an agent who is designed to take care of an environment, which is what we'll see in the biofirm.

They'll have their own current beliefs.

They're being updated over time.

We saw kind of an image of the inner dynamics of what that looks like for a PLMDP earlier.

They might have their own goals, which again, in this case, would probably align with the idea of maintaining homeostasis.

Based on all of those factors, that might lead to some pre-structured prompt leading to something more specific.

So in this case, this is an agent who

wants to take care of an environment.

And this is an agent who specifically is looking at how to take care of the soil on a natural farm, like a land preserver or farm.

And so they need more information about the soil structure.

So they query, they prompt the LLM, water causal determinants of soil structure in farms.

This is like an initial, this is whenever you're first making the knowledge graph, you would want to have this

uh this knowledge at the very beginning of a simulation right so this is kind of building up your knowledge graph to start so you could ask it this you could tell it to cite your sources or you could integrate some kind of api such as semantic scholar or other apis to try and check if it's actually pulling from real citations again we have that risk of confabulation making the

and so we want to just kind of keep a check on that so the llm tell you a lot of natural language based information about soil structure the determinants different kinds of managed prac management practices that could be used to take care of it different kinds of conditions and relationships between the soil structure and other aspects of soil what's around it

uh all these different things and then from there we could kind of go back to the knowledge graph store this deconstruct this information you know ideally this would be we'd ask the llm to structure its output in a particular way and then we could send those different aspects of its response into different areas of our

knowledge graph.

So soil structure, determinants, management conditions, and then also track the citations, the knowledge graph, again, it's almost like a three dimensional structure in that you could add the time dimension that is you could timestamp when all this information is collected, as well, you know, so it depends on how sophisticated you want to make your your knowledge graph.

This

is the last diagram I have related to this concept, but I just want to include it.

This is what I mean by a structured prompt with empty spaces, right?

So we have that same agent from before.

Now we're sending a structured prompt.

I believe that, so this is pre-structured, right?

These curly brackets kind of denote like these are what are the so-called empty spaces.

I believe the, whatever your current environment variables are,

are currently here's what the agent's beliefs are but our goal is here's our current business model and our current constraints are here our current constraints what solutions exist to address this this is incredibly short and simplistic just for the sake of illustration but the idea is you could input you could you could keep these environment variables stored

in your local environment.

Python is storing and processing them.

The agent beliefs are being extracted from the agent.

You could reencode those with natural language.

You could include information like, oh, this agent's belief is representative of the quality of its environment.

So then this gets read as a sentence.

That's something like the agent believes with a

0.2 probability or a very low probability that the current state of its environment is good.

You could re-encode that.

So this is really a conceptual move to try and find ways of bridging the gap between qualitative and quantitative information.

At no point am I saying that all of this is the absolute best way to do this.

What I am saying is that this feels a little bit like frontier work.

The LLMs are bringing up the question of

how can we properly integrate integrate them into software applications and i think these are the kind of next steps in terms of our thinking of how maybe we should be approaching this so and then you can see again uh for the rest of the diagram we still have this communication we can continue updating our knowledge graph you can also pull information back out of the knowledge graph to send into the structured prompt

This can all be sent to the LLM.

And so the LLM could do, you could request it to return your response in multiple ways.

One way is you could tell it, explain to me in natural language what solutions exist to address this.

And then also ask it in the same move, also,

give me these encodings of your answer.

So it could be that the LLM responds some kind of natural language explanation of how to handle this problem.

But additionally, here is structured encoding requested denoted as follows, positive one approved recommendation to carry out available action six might be the case that your agent has an observation modality

Meaning it has like a sensory receptor for the LLM where a one corresponds to like an observation level of like a yes or an approval or go for it basically.

And then six is kind of like a second observation modality where the LLM tells you which one of your available actions you should take.

So this is just an attempt.

and trying to find ways to modify an agent's architecture such that it has the kind of receptivity to LLM outputs in a way that can go from natural language to actual directives over what to do given the current context and all the information you've asked of that you've provided to the LLM in the structured prompt.

Now we move to the biofirm.

So the bio firm, like this is a lot of the principles I've described thus far kind of play into this.

Again, a lot of work has been done on this by Daniel Friedman here in the talk.

And then a lot of initial kind of coding work was done by myself.

And then we've, of course, been under guidance with partnership of John Klippinger as well as David Lovejoy with First Principles First.

I really like a lot of kind of the media and writing and podcasts that they've been doing.

And so I would strongly suggest checking them out.

And it's been a pleasure working with them so far.

And so with the bio firm,

We actually have a significant amount of code largely built out and kind of organized by Daniel under the Active Inference Institute's own GitHub repository currently in a subproject biofirm.

We also have a whole other library that we'll look at soon.

But for now, this is kind of the foundational, the starting point of the biofirm tool highlights.

Right now, we're building active inference agents

as uh you know using pi mdp which is you know essentially has been has already been referenced earlier in symposium a kind of port of uh of spm the the matlab library developed by you know friston and others um and so uh you know it's been a really good library to to kind of work with and quickly start trying to implement some of our ideas the open ai api um

many of you who have worked with LLMs and tried to integrate them into code, like they're already familiar with this.

But basically, it's a way of quickly being able to prompt within your coding environment, a wide array of LLMs, including the most recent ones, and you know, the new chat GPT, or Lama, or otherwise, models, Claude, Sonnet, and the cursor, which, you know, this is not necessarily essential,

to developing the bio firm but uh it's just uh daniel has kind of opened my eyes so to speak to to the wonders of kind of integrating four developers um being able to have uh an ide where you're editing code and then you can use an llm to help you write that code and obviously you always want to go back and look and make sure that it wrote the code that you actually intended but uh it can it can

you can dramatically reduce the number of times you need to hop into, say, Stack Overflow, for example, if that makes sense to programmers.

So it's great for productivity.

And then also some major things Daniel put out these these live streams that cover a lot of the development of the bio firm so far.

Both of them are huge.

I mean, we're looking at a couple of hours or so of material and we have close direct code walkthroughs today.

Originally, ideally, I might have gone through some kind of code walkthrough.

One, I don't think we're quite there yet in terms of being able to... We can demonstrate the principles, but in order to have something that's kind of like within the context of, okay, we're doing the Active Inference Symposium and we kind of need to keep things streamlined, we're not quite there yet.

But you can get a very big picture of what's going on in that code and get an actual code walkthrough by having a look at these live streams that Daniel put out.

So the bio firm.

Excuse me.

Essentially, in a bio firm, agents are working in a firm.

It's like setting the scene to maintain the homeostasis of an environment via farm, natural land, preserve.

And it could be many things.

But for now, I'm trying to kind of constrain to kind of an example.

agents prefer both in a colloquial sense they want this but also in a sort of bayesian priors computational sense to observe themselves maintaining their environment home stasis their own survival and health in this sense are directly linked with environmental

uh survival and health mapping internal states to inferred external states meaning their own internal beliefs are you know they're trying to model their own beliefs uh directly as you know kind of these these proxies for what's going on outside of the environment so they're very directly trying to map themselves to their environment all that being conditioned on preferences again what do they prefer homeostasis right so they they're trying to model their environment

internally for themselves while simultaneously trying to keep that environment within some kind of homeostatic range we'll get to a more concrete example what that means um but for now we can just think of it as like um you know that an agent's own homeostasis involves realizing his preferences relatable to how humans burn act to maintain their body temperature oxygen and blood flow since it's safety security whether it be physical or or economic um

So in this case, minimizing their own uncertainty, conditional preferences, maintaining homeostasis is equivalent to minimizing uncertainty about if the agent is successfully keeping the environment in a homeostatic state.

That's kind of a one sentence, concise way of looking at that.

They're minimizing their certainty about if they're able to successfully

maintain the environment homeostatic state uh from there we uh you know ideally what we would do is move on to building a knowledge base for example a kind of knowledge graph uh which itself would in an initial setup phase would involve uh users submitted documents uh so for our example case we actually did submit both a real

document uh that john supplied uh related to uh this this farmland uh kind of natural preserve that he himself has taken care of of course it's been redacted um but uh the the point is that where this gives us a kind of real world example that we are quite familiar with

contain in a document that we can use for an initial testing use case.

And then you can also do other things.

You can send in specific kinds of structured queries, asking for more domain knowledge or information about, say, how do we take care of a farm or otherwise.

and we have all of that and we follow that up by uh yeah structured prompting another idea we have that i won't go too much into right now but one idea is that you could actually extract out of natural language potentially like syllogistic reasoning based rules

uh that there's a you know a researcher axel constant who's done some work uh in the legal domain and looking at uh kind of bayesian uh probability and graphs and relating that to syllogistic reasoning i think that would be a really nice way of concisely extracting natural language rules turning them into something kind of like symbolic you know objects in python that can be used as formulae for

for doing different kinds of reasoning that increases precision and reduces the need to make so many LLM calls and having the LLM do that, but it's a thought.

Anyway, in any case, all of this, the whole development of the knowledge base and knowledge graph is motivated by agent preferences and beliefs.

so social science and i don't want to get too far away from that um you know i've been talking about a lot of design principles but i think the bio firm itself as currently it is an open source uh you know sort of resource it's still heavily under development i'll get back to you know the aspects of what's going on with that a little bit later

But currently there's a lot of development being made and is being written in a way that we ideally in the future would like this to be adapted to different circumstances.

It might be the case that this could be quite useful actually for continuing social scientific research, the form of an agent-based model.

You could consider that these might not necessarily be agents in a firm.

They might not have a business model.

They might have something else they might have.

know a constitution uh you know that that links all of them or otherwise um for now i'll continue working uh focusing on the bio firm but i just want that to be born in mind that i don't want to present this as if it's a highly specific use case that you know doesn't go that doesn't generalize you know allow for generalizing beyond itself um but for now we'll stick with with uh focusing on it

um so social science we have agents who are collaborating uh in coalitions of agents and networks of agents uh we have uh attempting to say that we can augment agents with natural language state belief reporting uh with the consequent development of a cultural uh and this is dr clippinger's view you know if we have agents who are motivated to take care of land and then they collect

uh knowledge that that corresponds to them and then they're using and communicating using this knowledge you know then this kind of becomes something like a culture so we're looking at something like a kind of cultural grammar or or set of scripts that are being developed

via these agents taking care of the land around them.

And we have shared narratives.

And then on top of that, we also, in a realistic scenario, we would have agents who are doing economic resource management and potentially trying to generate some kind of value in some kind of way, basically replenishing or regenerating

sources available to themselves or otherwise.

And then on value generation, and this comes back to the very start where I referred to utility as being kind of like what was previously the penultimate sort of incentive

for agents in traditional agent-based modeling.

Now, if we shift that to where now we're looking at expected free energy as the thing to be minimized, you know, and in correspondence with kind of the principles back then, then what we're doing is that we're looking at, you know, like the approximation of uncertainty condition on preferences.

Agents are trying to minimize that value

where there uh with value generation a whole nother thing we could do is look at each of the agents marginal contributions to the minimization of this quantifiable metric uh that is uh expected free energy uh

for the whole firm, like look at their marginal contributions to minimizing the uncertainty of the firm.

And then that itself becomes a kind of value, you know, as we can accumulate that view, that is kind of like uncertainty reduction is what generates value.

So that crucially this accumulation, it's not some arbitrary

floating value whose own value changes based upon market speculation dynamics or otherwise.

Instead, the moment-to-moment value generation that occurs during the course of a simulation of a biofirm, it reflects the agent's actual learning and capacity for taking care of their environment as proxied by expected free energy.

And then the kind of broader multi-agent setting and future vision for the bio firm, their cultural aspects, again, as I mentioned earlier, this kind of an ever evolving accumulation of shared knowledge.

Again, we could have timestamps.

That also means that we might need correction of that knowledge over time.

We'll talk about that more shortly.

uh anyway the the evolution of the knowledge graph it's motivated by mirrors agents motivated to accomplish collective goals for homeostasis from various perspectives um you know you might have agents who are specialized in one way agents in another you might have multiple stakeholder uh perspectives that are being fed into that initial knowledge graph or or along the way during the course of the simulation uh ethical uh ideally it would um

it would exhibit these kinds of principles, like by accumulating different perspectives between agents, between users, stakeholders, you know, in the case of bioregional modeling, where there can be very, very many people potentially involved in looking at or being affected by how an environment is being cared for, taken care of, or managed or governed.

know being able to actually submit these these potentially conflicting or at least different uh perspectives from various stakeholders those could be submitted to the program could also include financial regulatory or sustainability related knowledge um you know that can allow for comparing and synthesizing various perspectives again in some

some kind of after critic framework.

As I mentioned earlier, like a lot of methods have been used to try and overcome the issues of LLMs.

And so we'd be remiss not to employ those in various ways where appropriate.

And that way we can better ensure that the information that's being used and processed and being fed into agent decision-making and so on, taking care of an actual environment, we can make sure that it's much more accurate, coherent,

also identify faulty or contentious information if the agents come up with a very aggressive policy you know prior to its implementation could be critiqued and revised from an ethical regulatory or legal standpoint you know all this is collective

You know, we can kind of synthesize the information.

I already touched on this earlier, resynthesizing core information or primary information, the knowledge graph, and there being some kind of summary business model, constitution, set of protocols or missions that the agents have.

And then

sustainability, resource management, you know, making sure that agents are aware of available resources, combined with quantitative analysis.

So you could, you know, if you're looking at a real world setting, you'd be looking at things like price information, forecasting supplies needed for a particular policy might have qualitative reasoning involves why, like which supplies are needed for a task, what purposes within what guidelines.

um that's something i've been thinking about as well for a related institute project uh called farmworks uh we might talk about that later we'll see um and then heterogeneity agents agents might be pre-configured or

learn they necessarily will learn over time assuming we implement learning and their architecture more than likely well it depends on how and for what purpose and then they might even you know evolve so to speak to specialize in different skills and knowledge uses allowing for agents to collaborate under broad share goals while working on subtasks so there's some nice stuff

We were joined by Mal yesterday during the first workshop.

So Mal's been involved in a lot of this previous work.

And then, you know, another reference to kind of the, as well, the industrial example that I gave earlier as to how we might think about some of these things.

Basic form of a homeostatic agent.

This is, just take a second.

homeostatic agent.

This is the general just kind of quick natural language summary of its internal architecture.

It's incredibly simplistic.

This is sort of like a sort of a kernel of what is the initial formation of a homeostatic agent prior to any additional modification or changes in its architecture that you think might be required for the situation at hand.

For now,

Let's say there's a single environmental variable.

What we did, and I'll talk more about it later, but the idea is that we have an environment that we've, an artificial environment we generated.

We generated it based on the documents I mentioned earlier, including John's farmland document, as well as particular prompts submitted to the LLM to kind of compose what are the initial makings of our knowledge graph.

And it came up with

soil structure as being one of the essential uh variables that should be included included in our environment and then we have an agent here who's kind of mapping itself trying to map itself to

this quantitative value.

It is a question right now of, you know, I can imagine those who do active inference, like the question might be, why use the POMDP?

Why would you not use, you know, a continuous time, continuous state space model?

For now, we're going with POMDPs in part because we're assuming that we'll be using agents to model highly complex environments.

where it's not so simple as to kind of follow a simple up or down scale or say that the variable is necessarily being defined by some kind of Gaussian distribution and being sampled from it.

It might be the case that this is much more complex or might be changing conditions or otherwise.

And in case for initial testing environments, which is also a rather quick thing to do, I will

admit so um but for now uh the idea is that you'd have a few mdp who can view the data over time at each time step uh daniel ran this one for uh actually i don't remember firing that he probably did uh over ten thousand times steps um and so at each time step

uh the agent observes if the current value is above or below some homeostatic range which the agent prefers it fly in right and so it infers the hidden state of the variable is it actually if i observe low is it actually low uh if it's in its homeostatic range is it actually in its home homeostatic range or is it actually in reality is it really high or otherwise

uh you know and uh that another question as to whether this is necessarily a partially observable environment since this seemed to be reflective of real data but again this allows for the space that there might be very complex relationships between soil structure and let's say uh moisture levels in the soil or or micro bioactivity within the soil or other kinds of things that

that really matter here to where it's much more complex than just being able to say oh just because this went low that means i need to try and bring it back up as much as possible really fast right so there might be more nuance and having more sophisticated architectures might be able to to kind of parse through that problem including increasing uh inference from

horizons or or including more other variables that it tries to map and then actions that agent can increase maintain or decrease the variable uh right so again very simple a little more details later on on how that can how that can work but as just say straightforward it's kind of like the agent is trying to balance out this metric um given that a lot of it

all of its fluctuations, aside from the agent's actions impacting it, are coming from its relationship with all the other environmental variables in its ecosystem.

So it's kind of like the agent is trying to map its internal understanding of what's going on with the environment's behavior.

And then the agent, of course, prefers to see this within its homeostatic range.

And so it will choose actions that it believes will help

this variable to get back into its homeostatic range so from there we can view this like as a whole ecosystem of variables so this is this kind of defines our environment that we're looking at right in an agent-based modeling setting we have our homeostatic agents and then we have our entire environment composed of all these environmental variables

over in a real world setting whether you're running a firm a farm or otherwise you know each of these variables could be mapped to you know an iot device uh they could be mapped to you know some kind of uh logged uh observations you know that your team makes as to what's going on with the farm right now um

I guess I'll bring up FarmWorks again briefly.

We've been looking at a lot of farm data lately that's been collected by farmers and getting some inspiration on how they go about doing those things.

But I will say that this environment that we have here is entirely artificially generated based upon inspiration from text.

So if we think about this as something like agents are trying to solve a non-equilibrium steady state, what does that mean?

I'll try and summarize by saying that we're trying to maintain the structure and properties of the farm.

What is it that makes a farm a farm?

Well, if your soil moisture falls dramatically too low, and then suddenly all the organic matter in it dies, and then many of these other things start to fall apart,

well now we're not quite looking at at at homeostatic uh soil anymore right so we kind of have like this this natural decay or dilapidation of the system the ecosystem and so agents are having to repeat like continuously uh you know kind of actively maintain uh through control inputs meaning through their actions uh they're trying to keep these variables within homeostasis and these

it's worth noting these these target ranges homeostatic ranges might change themselves over time right due to uh you know we can imagine um the the target soil temperature range might change to adjust for you know seasonal crop change um it also might also account for certain kinds of like exogenous or external shocks to the system the impact of climate change there might be a natural disaster that occurs or otherwise that itself can really change the dynamics required

to attempt to maintain the ecosystem uh as it is or as it was or if it needs to kind of change in order to continue existing given uh what kind of shock occurred

So to maintain these desired homeostatic states, the agent must continuously work against these natural tendencies towards dilapidation.

I've already mentioned this many times.

These states, these variables may have complex interdependent relationships.

They call for agents before looking at inference horizons.

you know of course if we over maintain the soil uh you know put too many products in it or do other things that might still be okay for the crops it might harm local biodiversity uh you know local animals uh accidentally you know consuming different kinds of uh um

um you know materials that were that were used to take care of the soil and suddenly they die that harms local biodiversity and yet uh biodiversity might also include uh pests in the environment that themselves then harm the soil or crop growth so it's just being able to kind of adjust to all of these highly complex variables and crucially in reality we might only be able to impact some variables a second

some variables and not others.

Thus, agents might specialize in handling one particular controllable variable and study its relationship with the other variables leading to actionable, predictive planning.

Another kind of everyday explanation of this is like,

You know, I mentioned I'm a data analyst.

I work in education, and so I'm frequently looking at a lot of data regarding students and kind of our institution and so on.

I'm based in Chicago.

Some things that we can change are bus routes for our students to make sure that they can get to school safely.

Something we cannot control is the amount of crime in Chicago, which anyone in the US knows is

that would be very difficult to do right so so so we're looking at there are all kinds of factors in our environment that we cannot control and there's what we can and then trying to find how can we control what we can control in ways that kind of can balance out with all these things that we cannot control right so that it's very crucial to be able to identify and then measure and analyze these kinds of relationships whenever trying to design any kind of concrete actionable uh policy

right or intervention that you might want to make and then uh john referenced the commons earlier right eleanor ostrom's work um homeostatic agents solving non-equilibrium steady states the ever ever solving the commons so so i'm trying you know i was thinking about a lot of these principles and ostrom was required

reading for me as someone who's coming from a social sciences background.

And so it's part of why I find this project so interesting and why I find it fascinating to try to realize a lot of these things and principles involved.

So we have local rules, conditions, adaptation.

I mean, the agents necessarily have to adapt to the environment around them.

If you provide some kind of kernel agent and

and give it some space to figure out what it is it needs to do it's necessarily going to have to adapt right so so we have that attention towards the local um recognizing uncertainty and adaptation you know agents will have to take care of homeostasis manage resources through learning uh to to change conditions in broader unobserved uncontrollable environment in the sense of um you know there are many things going on that the agents cannot directly observe

um there are other things that will occur that were unexpected you know so and then also there might be relationships within the variables themselves that's for you know for example there might be some kind of critical threshold that's hit by one variable that then has some kind of domino or cascade effect on the others you know so that's why i include both the phrases endogenous or exogenous shots um you know being able to to watch out for those kinds of dynamics

then governing the commons.

That's sort of the benefit of if it can be done right, if it can be done successfully, integrating LLMs in a very thoroughly considered way that allows for accurate information accumulation and sharing and then using it for implementing policies.

You know, that's the aspect that kind of keeps things grounded and then gives this kind of natural language based way of dealing with an environment.

You know, this kind of just repeats many things I mentioned before, but we're synthesizing a lot of info from various stakeholders, various domains that are needed to handle the problem, repeatedly grounding agents and common goals from maintaining the environment against perturbation, capture, maintaining its Markov blanket.

and then nested collaboration potentially so just as users can practice oversight by running these models um agents themselves you know you might have agents who are at another layer so to speak who maintain their own oversight over other agents or coalitions of agents and

those kind of hierarchical agents might themselves act as something like an observer role.

They might recognize a broader issue going on in the firm that isn't being accounted for by specialized agents.

And so you can have those kinds of kind of hierarchical specialized structural roles

that allows for this kind of nestedness in how the environment is maintained.

And then a very interesting idea that I was gonna bring up later, but in the context of like looking at bioregional hubs or something along that line, I mean, if you were actually employing something like a biofirm to a real world scenario, then I don't see any reason why you couldn't have some way of interfacing between different bio firms, right?

Because if they're actually playing out,

in reality and building their own knowledge graphs you know say in real time in some kind of way then then you could very much have that kind of interfacing you could have you know structured prompts pulling from the knowledge graph of one bio firm you know sending that information to another bio firm and back uh you know so so that's you know i don't want to get ahead of ourselves but because the vast majority of the actual concrete work has been done on the bio firm

has only been over the course of frankly the past couple of weeks i mean longer than that for sure in terms of of john developing the ideas conversations we've had over the past couple months but whenever it comes to developing this stuff and actually realizing it it's still quite new so it's very exciting to report biofirm for users let me just do a wrap okay

um i'm gonna yeah yeah i'll speed this up a little bit um file from free users yeah uh one you know for for for a user's perspective first you'd submit your documents as i mentioned many times uh you know your own pdfs real world information uh you know if you want to submit textbooks you know regarding uh agricultural techniques and methods for taking care of farms you know including formulae that describe relationships or something

You have, from there, the direction is to have, there are two intended kind of potential paths you could take.

Right now, all the testing is being done with the first path, but the idea is to move it in the direction where you can have both available.

First one is for being able to explore counterfactuals.

So we generate synthetic data using domain knowledge or historical data.

That's what we're already doing.

And then second, direct application, that would be where you're actually able to send in data and have it be streamed and have this play out in real time.

This is very much, you know, kind of in the future, but that's sort of on the roadmap, so to speak.

And then once you followed one of those paths,

you could generate an environment for your agents.

And then also you could construct applicable agents, meaning agents to your design or ones that kind of fit the situation or be mapped to particular environmental variables, as we saw with the agent who takes care of the soil structure earlier, using AgentRanker, which is kind of an entire addition that Daniel kind of zoomed through, being able to incorporate, included, there's more information on that in the second live stream that was released.

From there, you would simulate your agent-based model, meaning there'd be an initial setup phase that takes in your initial documents and so on, constructs the agents, constructs the artificial environment, then runs your action perception loop.

It keeps things moving.

Data and LLM responses are encoded as observations for agents.

Agents take these observations, take care of their environment,

we already know homeostasis for the agent based on how it's set up is kind of hard-coded into its design and mapped to the homeostasis of its environment and finally there would be obviously we would want this analytics so having some kind of analytics suites that allows you to derive insights from different kinds of metrics that are being recorded over time there might be different kinds of like llm summary reports and recommendations that actually extracts the metrics and

you know, through a pre-structured prompt, as I've said a million times during the course of this, you know, using pre-structured prompts, you can input a lot of these results and then have an LLM kind of put it into a natural language, like just explain for you in everyday words, here's what happened, here's what's going on here, what the agents believe, and so on.

Bio-regional modeling, I want to look at this really quickly.

This is

a lot of Daniel's work on, I mean, this is just an initial step, but what's happened is that Daniel set particular kinds of structured prompts.

You can find more information on this in the first live stream, but basically asked about information in very particular ways.

to llns and and did it programmatically was able to extract incredible amount of information about these different regions different counties and uh he started with california and then moved to new england and then it's expanded from there and so we have like maine and massachusetts so for example uh massachusetts uh hampshire county

like you can uh he sent in like you know generate some kind of uh supply strategies statement um we have copies of these this is a json form meaning it's kind of uh set up in a way that can be read by the program

then here's just a more readable legible you know every day for a user reports like here is you know your supply chain strategist report on the ecosystem of that county uh references to what's going on in terms of its biodiversity how climate change is impacting it how land is used habitat fragmentation water quality so just a lot of the different things

that are going on specific to each of these counties.

You can do that from a market analyst's perspective as well to try and consider different kinds of opportunities.

What's the current economic landscape?

What kind of regulatory environment compliance requirements are there, state, federal, local?

Of course, these are currently very short descriptions.

Ideally, over time, you would build out your knowledge graph, your knowledge base, so you actually

you know kind of zoom into each of these send more follow-up prompts like tell me more about this you know cite your site the information you're pulling from um

then you could even consolidate that so this is the kind of a consolidated uh report you know very long for all these different market analyst perspective ecological perspective supply chain strategies and just kind of finding ways to to synthesize a lot of um information in one move this was a business case so i just wanted to show quickly like here are you know ideas of you know

you're defining out potential revenue streams, risk assessment mitigation strategies.

Five-year financial projections, of course, we could pull this kind of logic back into the program, have local computations done that actually comes up with much more

grounded realistic and precise information based on available resources that you have or that that at least artificially the agents have if you're doing more of an artificial setting um so yeah it's just it's making all these linkages so um you know that that becomes sort of the basis that the starting point for for our um for the bio firm so we

We then, again, we generated this artificial environment.

All we did was send in user documents, structured prompts through an LLM, give a structured response.

Let me quickly, yeah.

This allowed programming our environment, its dynamics, configuration, generating descriptions for each of the variables that get stored in this nice JSON structured file ecosystem config.

you you saw previously like i was looking at a github repository we like we're really building up the code in that in that base um and so anyway that sticking back to the artificial environment here this allows us to pull out yeah what are our variables or proxies for variables such as indices like it can be quite difficult to measure biodiversity so we make an index for that there might be other ways of doing that there might be more specific ways of doing that that fits your own use case

or otherwise we could, you know, tailor that.

Domain inspired quantitative relationships between the variables.

You can even, you know, with more manual control, you can set the noise levels for each of these.

Like if you assume that there might be some noisy process,

from a more mathematical or statistical perspective, which of these are actually controllable or not.

For those which are controllable, how much are they controllable?

Can you dramatically change biodiversity in one move?

Probably not.

you could and i don't want to follow that thought further biofirm development performance benchmarking uh this is another crucial part of the biofirm development being able to actually benchmark how our active inference agents uh perform relative to you know some kind of benchmark baseline such as having a more reactive or random sort of thermostat style like reactive um

control so basically on the left we don't have active inference agents it's just trying instead this is a more basic uh uh control strategy that kind of just reacts to the data it's seeing uh and of course the day is getting very out of hand i'm not saying it's not getting out of hand with the active inference agent but much more so that's what we're seeing from initial test case and

This active inference agent on the right is still that basic kernel homeostatic agent.

It is keeping its target within range 21% of the time relative to the random strategy, which is only seven.

The next steps would be to actually fine tune and modify the agents to better match the situation.

So far, it's very simplistic.

It's only looking at one variable.

tracking one variable has it's currently not taking in any information from an lm it's currently not taking in any information about the other environmental variables um this was really interesting to see though that already has this capacity for kind of outperforming the the reactive

model you know we've had some instances where the active inference agent doesn't uh you know it maybe matches the reactive model so it's just you know it's prime time to to step up the agent development game you know so that this was just step one it's like can we can we build it you know we yes we can so now let's improve it

um analytics suite we can look at you know the the variables themselves the correlations with one another we track the metrics about the environment over time and compare how the environment behaved in different simulation settings um you know that's what we want to do with agent-based modeling in the first place typically you want to be able to run simulations look at the outcomes based on different circumstances and then we can compare you know how this went using different agents um

And we could use LLM integration to translate this into a more readable report for users.

This is a whole other aspect I really wanted to emphasize.

I've made this kind of as an additional module so it can be edited

kind of after the fact, like outside of the main program, which also means that, you know, you could you can modify this bit as you want.

But basically, the idea is you try and measure the surprise or uncertainty or expected free energy or otherwise of the environment here.

um and and um basically look at how the actual variable diverges from where you want it to be you know the difference uh you know it's of course it's mathematical and it's drawing from active inference in other areas you know bayesian

statistics and mechanics but um the idea is you can measure how far away it is from where you wanted it to be in terms of surprisal uh you know actually capturing kind of this more rich or nuanced information about how that variable moves versus where you want it to be and then you can kind of flip that say oh well in a non-equilibrium steady state system where

more usually than not, the system is going to have a tendency towards generating more and more surprise.

That is, the complex relationships between the variables is going to lead to things typically going off course very quickly if you don't touch them.

Then in that case, any move at reducing surprise, meaning any move at combating that natural tendency towards kind of like chaos or entropy,

can be viewed as a form of generating value.

So this is the kind of additional metric we could add saying that there's a kind of value added to having agents minimizing surprise, meaning minimizing the free energy, meaning minimizing

the distance between homeostasis and where the data is now.

So we could see that kind of accumulation over time.

And again, it's modularized, meaning for a user that could potentially experiment as they like, they could change how this value added is computed.

I think that'd be very interesting for people who are interested in economic simulations or doing this differently or want to see how does this work.

and also shapley value analysis we have shapley values so um in the course of you know these simulations we have agents trying to solve or take care of their environment and so in the case of uh shapley value computation what it's doing is that we can compare how do certain coalitions of agents run through the simulation compared to one another uh in terms of uh

know these different metrics and so you can see like oh agent all five agents together uh you know did better at maintaining their environment in homeostasis uh they did better than only having um you know these this other particular coalition of agents but they actually did worse altogether versus when you only had these two agents working together right so it's a very kind of sophisticated way

at looking at how agents are actually solving the problems and actually carrying out actions that they need to carry out.

And we can do this for different metrics.

We can view that as that can be another way of saying this is how value is being generated by these agents.

Right.

So being able to make those kinds of analytics and then final

Yeah, these are the last couple slides.

GNN and AgentMaker.

This is very cool.

This kind of like, you know, we did so much rapid development at the bio firm over the past couple of weeks that this kind of like hit me.

I was like, oh, I don't, I didn't really think about that.

But Daniel has incorporated along with his co-authored work with Jack Smigel in the past.

They've worked on what's called general notation reputation.

And it's a way of translating active inference agents, meaning models or architectures, between different programming languages, including being able to compose them using natural language, and then also being able to visualize them graphically.

It's not quite there yet, the makings for being able to have this kind of translatability.

uh you know the ideal would be being able to write to an llm like hey make an agent for me that can do this and this and then by giving the ellen certain kinds of contacts that can fill in the matrices and and so on as you need it of course

we're still a distance from that, but it's kind of building the framework towards moving towards that.

And that way, you can make agents who are much more tailored to the situation.

And furthermore, ideally, you'd be able to translate them between programming, which is meaning, you know, being able to switch your applications and Python or Julia or otherwise, being able to have that done for you.

And then Daniel has basically forked the PI MDP repository, and then

built agent maker on top of it.

So right now it's kind of tailored to PI MDP.

But it could be used in other ways as well.

And so we already have some next steps on the kinds of agents we want to make.

For me, it's agents who should be able to observe the whole environment.

but only be able to control their own respective part.

To me, that's what would make the idea of having a shared common goal amongst heterogeneous specialized agents.

That's what would realize that.

So that's kind of the broader view of the bio firm.

You start with inputting your documents, your texts, your PDFs, data for fitting, not

excuse me, that's optional right now, it would be more ideal for a real world setting.

But for now, just generating an artificial environment, just the text is fine, we've been able to accomplish that so far.

And then from there, you could fit agents to the situation, or at least maybe customize them yourself using agent maker, you have the start of the your knowledge graph or base being developed.

And you have that ecosystem

all of its dynamics and configuration kind of spun up.

Then after that, you just run the simulation, looking at analytics.

We want to move towards having an interface in future, having dashboards.

We've already seen a lot of these graphs earlier.

And then we'd also want to have LLNs that could actually report the results.

And this is basically towards an adaptable kernel of a biofroom.

This is kind of the bigger picture.

have different kinds of design considerations a couple highlights we were we're looking at things like implementing potentially amortized inference we're kind of accelerating the inference process um using continuous state space uh predictions and models you know and then considering you know we we have an rx infer group that

at the Institute.

So we'd like to potentially move towards moving using a more reactive framework using Rx infer the Julia library as well as kind of complimentary library for environments.

The Rx environments library, plenty of different ways you might be able to use different kinds of API's or integrations with other tools, locally storing LLMs to mitigate the issue of having to necessarily like

uh use the open api open ai lm api

So, and then obviously integrating, you know, key aspects are like the resource management, right.

And that that's, that's actually, I would argue is going to be one of the easier parts of incorporating.

Cause it's like, just as we can currently read real data or generate, generate artificial data and have the agents manage that like soil structure.

We could do that similarly for different kinds of like, uh, you know, financial resource, uh, values or managing an account or something along those lines.


UNKNOWN:
Right.


SPEAKER_00:
So bringing it back, biofirm development testing is just a slide I showed earlier, but it's just to reinforce here some of the tools we use, some things we want to do in the future, some related institute projects related to, you know, we're working on projects that relate to mitigating future existential risk.

We've applied to a grant with Foresight.

There's the FLI grant project.

farmworks arts and fur group there's a new economic simulations related group some people are interested in looking at things like uh you know simulating currencies and and so on um in agent-based modeling and then those live stream updates um my computer is having uh repeatedly deciding to cover things up and that's it so uh

We, we went much further on time and send it.

There was a lot to, there was a lot to cover.

Um, really appreciate everyone's attention though.

Um, and you know, in these 11 minutes we have left, you know, if you guys want to give anything a shot, please go for it.

Oh, voice is going out.


SPEAKER_02:
Nope.


SPEAKER_01:
take some questions yeah anyone in the live chat can write a question John where where does this take you and or what will you plan to do tomorrow well I think what we tried to lay the foundation here in a very thorough way


SPEAKER_02:
is what is a biofirm and how is able to address many of the issues that you see in people trying to work out a bio

biofinancial to the bioregional economics and create the proper incentives.

And so I think what we're trying to do here is really show that there's a number of, when I started to say, here are some of the criteria that we're looking for in particular billing with Eleanor Osterman, the whole idea of how to govern a commons is a profound issue that,

They seem to be intractable to a lot of people.

I think this, in my view, this provides a framework for doing it, a scalable framework for doing it, a way involving people, a way of applying scientific methods and creating financial incentives and automating a lot of the data collection analysis task and how agents can build up their own competencies over a period of time.

So there's a lot here.

There's a lot to digest.

And it does provide a new metric of value that's based upon, you're not establishing value in the classic economics that our price arbitrage or information asymmetry arbitrage.

You're actually saying there's such a thing as a free energy principle, a scientific process, and we can show how the value is created and then how to allocate it to those people or those agents that are creating it.

So this is really sort of foundational.

So we want to take it to the next steps.

Um, and what we're going to be doing tomorrow is, is, um, actually there's a group of people who are experts in the sense that they work with, uh, how to take multi-agent architectures and apply them to, uh, in some cases to the, to the enterprise, uh, from Deloitte is doing that another group, uh, Simon

Uh, uh, Torrance is doing it in terms of looking at framework for agenda architectures.

Uh, there are others are looking at it and applying to the bio finance by regional finance issues.

Um, so we have that Susanna Troy.

We also have, uh.

uh we have matt maroney who's head of sustainable finance and metabolic and then there's uh john havens who's been involved with ieee establishing ethical frameworks for the application of geospatial models

So it's quite a combination of people.

But what we want them to look at is what's the impact of this when you're having fully autonomous biometric-based agents and what happens when you can apply them not just to the biometric, to the bioregional finance, but also the new notion of a firm.

And I think there's a real profound issue here.

What happens when you really have autonomous agents and you create institutions?

We have to create institutions that are supposed to be above people, but the problem is people populate institutions and they come captured.

But what happens if we start to put these agents and build institutions that are functioning this way, that are verifiable this way?

What does that happen to what we think about employment and jobs?

I mean, there's some really substantive issues here.

And how do you create this as a public resource, a public good that doesn't get captured by particularly small interests?

So it's a broad spectrum of questions we're putting out there.

I don't think that the public in general fully appreciates the capacity and the power of an active infants free energy principle as applied to economic and societal issues.

So we're going to try to tackle those issues and get people talking about it.

And this is a beginning, but we want to take it next steps and really get reference technologies out there that we can actually show and demonstrate and may be able to replicate.

that's that's the goal yeah and you're very helpful i gotta say you know yeah daniel kudos to you from all along i mean both you guys and daniel just you've done remarkable work and and and accelerating this process and we're very very grateful for that and what active inferences institute there's other things that the other sessions i saw here that seem to be very relevant to what we're doing so i'm really looking forward to collaborating

I'm quite fascinated with Thoughtforge, what Matt Brown is doing in doing homeostatic networks.

And it goes back to Ashby and the law of records of variety.

I think all of that's applicable to this too.

So there's this wonderful synthesis that you've enabled, you really have, and through a singular effort.

So again, extremely grateful for this.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

It's been awesome.

lot more i could say but what what what can we're gonna we're gonna ask more of you i'm not done yet yeah you're not done no no we're gonna no the part that resonated with me in the presentation over the last two days of biofirm and how andrew laid out all these pieces is like

on one hand we have that researcher lens again about similarities and differences and about treating it like it's an engineering problem and then i think john you've brought in the deeper history of commons and cybernetics and these more open-ended problems about how do we connect any technical capacity

to the embodiment and the co-enactment of systems that are livable and regenerative and that's a little bit of a different kind of topic that's one though that that uh mass convening and awareness can can fertilize and make real

in a way where the technical understanding, it's like, you can skim the textbook, you can read it for 20 years.

It's like, it is just going to be the textbook.

It's just going to be something to jump off of.

and take into another way it's not like some of these questions about how different regions will work it's not it's not in the 2022 textbook so that's applying active inferences taking the high road and the low road and variational free energy expected free energy like all of those formalisms

and then like surprise surprise applying them to what matters and figuring out that project and operational part and there's just like there's so many pieces i was just like thinking of the yarn connecting the the the needs to what we do and don't have at different levels of readiness that takes us back to the tech tree and all these other ways that we've discussed coordinating

around that balanced way to think about regional and what is federated what is transferable how do we deal with all of these aspects and it's um been a great journey over the last few months also


SPEAKER_02:
Well, thank you.

What I find so reassuring is that you see applying the method and then it starts to explain and you keep applying it and it doesn't fade out.

It doesn't become ad hoc.

And so I feel like we're doing something really principled that is extensible.

And when I come from the

biofinance community and see all the things that they've been trying to do in the commons community say actually there's a wonderful fit here and getting these two worlds together is is is really important it's a challenge too um but i i people want to do that and and they're looking for something like this and so i really hope that we can be able to create that marriage as it works


SPEAKER_01:
To add one comment on that, I think when you opened today and said, well, we could make things fungible, we can connect, but that is also part of replicating, if not elaborating the problem, which is the fungibility of drinking water here and this calorie here and this unique species here, facilitating that fungibility

is facilitating the capture of the underlying resource so even if it were somehow trivial to make like assertions about impact monetized and the whole hyper certs and impact certification even if that were trivial and we can just assume that that we have full observability or something like that it could even accelerate financial capital

based cascades and so what what can be an escape grounding to that and that's where seem like whoa the models on through the paradigm of incentives are maximalist and reward oriented

can they be homeostatic or allostatic oriented to satisfy and be on paths that bounce prize rather than try to maximize but then as soon as we look around the world there's things that don't make sense we're not trying to maximize or minimize like the reservoir but rather within a range and so there's so many things where we can just connect

first principles of intelligence and research questions to just like the calm subtle sometimes ways that that the technology because to to move too fast also would again replicate fallacies right okay well

Good luck with the session tomorrow.

And I hope many people come join and engage in these fun, open source, meaningful projects.


SPEAKER_02:
This is just the beginning.


SPEAKER_01:
It's just a checkpoint.


SPEAKER_02:
It's a strong one, and I'm very pleased with it.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

All right.

Thank you, fellas.


SPEAKER_00:
See you later.

Okay, guys.

## nCZZBuk_wmU_sess13

SPEAKER_01:
All right, welcome back everyone.


SPEAKER_00:
My name is Devon Bay.

I'll be presenting Accounting for Multiscalar and Conscious Psychobiological Phenomena in the Active Inference Paradigm.

So for an overview, I'm going to be going over the Markov blanket trick and then critiques of the Markov blanket and address how some of the previous work of Chris Fields and Friston partially addresses these critiques before finally going over problems of consciousness, new approaches and theories on consciousness and how these fit within the FEP and active inference, and then provide some ways to update the framework based on this information.

I'm also going to take an epistemological perspective on modeling and I'll focus on how both the conceptual mathematical formalizations of superposition and entanglement can maybe alleviate some of the problems that are identified in the critiques.

So

The Markov blanket, since we are on limited time here, I will assume that most of the people here are already familiar somewhat with the Markov blanket or active inference framework.

But I'll give a brief overview of the Markov blanket focusing on some of its mathematical frameworks as well as some of the assumptions implicit within the framework.

So for the mathematical overview, given a state S of a model, its Markov blanket is the set of sufficient states within the network needed to infer that state.

And it essentially partitions autonomous and external states.

and is helpful in identifying which variables are conditionally independent from each other and expresses the joint probability between external and internal states as mediated by blanket states.

So the assumptions here is that there's sparse coupling between the different states in the overall system and that there is somewhat of a delineation between external and internal states.

and that these external internal states can be properly partitioned via the Markov blanket.

So the implications here, the Markov blanket is metaphysically distinct from pearl blankets at least in the context of active inference or free energy principle.

I think this was raised by

by Buenberg and his colleagues in the Emperor's New Markov Blankets paper.

And so this essentially means that they are

they differentiate themselves from pearl blankets by nature of their application and the Friston blanket itself by nature takes on assumptions like the existence of external internal sensory and active states and so this is the main sort of differentiation also the Friston blanket is not providing a metaphysics at least at least in my interpretation and so

So we assume here the existence of distinct states which may be modeled.

And this means that there are distinct states which are properly separable and that there are either epistemological or ontological grounds for doing so.

And so the main problem here

I think is that there is not enough justification to argue that the Markov blanket partitioning is an epistemological, or in a more broader sense, an ontological boundary, and that is causally correct.

what it causally captures is able to capture causal relationships between variables because the existence of sensory active and internal states and external states is something which can be disputed and which I'll discuss later on in this talk.

And so another implication of the Markov blanket is that it allows the modeling of recursive structures and dynamics by use of the renormalization group, for example, which apparently allows the Markov blanket to capture multiscalar phenomenon.

And finally, the question of whether the Markov blanket adheres to the Bayesian Occupy Razor, it would simply depend on the choice of parameters for the specific model.

It does not inherently implicate the Markov blanket.

So critiques of the Markov blanket.

Like I mentioned earlier, the ontological critique of the Markov blanket is leveraged by both Brunberg and Raja in their respective papers.

Although, as we've seen in responses to these papers, frankly, it depends on the ontological interpretation of active inference and the free energy principle.

And if, as Kieferstein in his response to Bruinberg's paper claims, the Markov blanket should not be interpreted literally, then this problem partially goes away.

However, the epistemological status of the Markov blanket is still under question, as raised in a part of Raja's paper, insofar as the explanatory power of the model is under some pressure.

So chiefly there's a broader philosophical question about the purpose of models, and this is not necessarily unique to FEP or active inference or the Markov blanket, but nevertheless, since it affects all models, these issues are raised in the context of the Markov blanket as well.

Next, we also see that there is a mathematical problem with the selection of Markov blanket states because we see that the, for example, dynamic causal modeling in neuroscience does not demonstrate that models provide scientists with a plausible count of the behavior of real-world biological systems

since successful applications of causal modeling does not give us any reason to believe that neural systems plausibly, for example, minimize free energy or that they are ergodic active inference systems.

And so this means that even though the model may be applied successfully and may predict some behavior successfully, it doesn't necessarily mean that the model is, number one, an accurate representation of what's ongoing with the internal dynamics of the system, and number two, that it would therefore be able to capture accurately all of the internal workings of the system.

On this mathematical side as well, we also see that Yaron Ilan published in 2023 a paper on the constrained disorder principle and how that would possibly dictate neuronal function.

And so Ilan points out that despite the stochasticity exhibited by the nervous system's operation, there's not necessarily a high level of control since randomness at the lower levels never stops, and thus it dictates a paradigm of reaction, not action by organisms.

He uses the free energy principle but does not use it to justify a form of active inference, which would be minimizing uncertainty, but rather argues that the constrained disorder principle is more preferable where

a process of balancing disorder and order is more inherent to systems operation in highly dynamic random environments.

So whether all environments are highly dynamic and random and at what scales this randomness can be asymptotically ignored or becomes irrelevant is still for question.

However, the fact that these boundaries are not clear and in fact

that they arguably cannot be made clear, for example via the existence of Maxwell's demon, or limits on computability, etc.

should point us in the direction of choosing better models and better parameters for these models.

So what can this tell us about the free energy principle in the Markov blanket?

First, it points to broader problems with the free energy principle, but these still carry implications for the ways in which the free energy principle epistemologically treats the Markov blanket, mainly to delineate across and between scales and causal relationships.

In the later portion of this talk, I'll explain why entanglement and superposition are suitable replacements for the Markov blanket, where they actually offer a greater flexibility without constraining the mathematical and philosophical operations.

And notably, Chris Field's paper on the FEP for generic quantum systems makes implicit use of some of the same affordances offered by superposition and entanglement,

but takes a very specific interpretation of quantum systems and I think limits the flexibility of such modeling tools by adhering to the holographic principle.

So now on to the epistemological

a status of models, which I think is important to raise here because the question of whether the Markov blanket can accurately encompass multi-directional, what I'll call horizontal pathways, vertical and horizontal pathways, even without the presence of clear attractor states is still in the question, as is the more general assumption of ergodicity within the FEP framework.

And so as experimental evidence from physics shows, systems in general, not simply at macro or micro states, are afflicted by complex dynamics such as replica symmetry breaking, which fall into a sort of gray area between ergodicity and non-ergodicity.

and thus render the determination of ergodicity versus non-ergodicity much more complicated, even with suggestions such as local ergodicity, as outlined by Ramstad in the 2018 article.

So I think it's important to outline the epistemological status of models because it's important for clarifying whether the Markov blanket itself is problematic within the FEP framework and whether it can potentially be reworked.

So from a Bayesian perspective, models should want to minimize both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty, where epistemic uncertainty is the reducible part of the total uncertainty, and aleatoric uncertainty is basically the irreducible part.

Active inference models therefore should minimize both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty and represent possible model configurations and parameters via prior hypothesis space where the choice of model is informed both by where we believe the quote unquote truth is located or at least the most truthful model is located as well as the model constraints.

So here we see in green is the ideal situation where we have an ideal selection of model with an ideal convergence to some truth x. And then the purple shows an example here where our prior hypothesis space does not accurately encompass the true model.

And hence, by extension, the true model is not included in the posterior.

Finally, the pink shows where the posterior does not converge to the true model.

And so this is illustrating how problems can arise in these two areas.

First, the hypothesis space does not properly encompass the true model X, which is the purple or blue example.

And then second, the posterior space does not properly converge to the true model X, which is our pink example here.

And so constraints on X depend on if you're a realist or an anti-realist.

So for example, if you believe that there is some ground truth that is universal and unchanging and it's physically accessible, then of course the true model would be a real true model.

but if you're more of an anti-realist then it would depend on uh you know your your hypothesis space and you know of course whether you believe that truths can be can be accurately represented or even be accessed um and that they're universal or whatever so

Now the question is, is the Markov blanket the proper choice of parameter for the free energy principle and active inference?

So the purpose of the Markov blanket is to provide a statistical boundary which delineates a system from its environment.

It ensures that certain variables are conditionally independent of other variables in the network.

And it formalizes the belief or the prior that the system and its environment are separate.

either ontologically, epistemologically, physically, like literally, or even causally, right?

So, Colombo and Palacios actually indict the Markov blanket and FEP, Active Inference Model, by saying that it achieves the maximal generality for minimal biological plausibility because these boundaries

can be drawn sort of arbitrarily and even the existence of cellular membranes, for example, does not necessarily constrain causal relations between or across scales.

So notably, Noble argues that organisms are open systems that operate far from equilibrium.

And so again, drawing from Noble's arguments, Ilan in the 2023 paper argues that organisms develop numerous emergent boundaries between levels which are not present at the single cell level.

So even though they may have distinct functional purposes, boundaries like the skin, intestinal tract, or even vastus medialis depend on exchanging matter and energy through cellular membranes.

And so a boundary is thus dynamic, interactive, not passive, and cannot always be defined anatomically.

So for example, electrogradients and ion concentration gradients are actively generated across cell membranes where interactions across boundaries determine an organism's functions, not just the composition of the boundary or the genome.

So of course one way this has been explored in the Free Energy Principle and Active Inference is via this sort of recursive Markov blanket.

But we see that this sort of recursive modeling is not able to properly capture multi-scalar relationships and interactions

across and between boundaries where essentially we would have you know Markov blankets that are that are causally implicated in in more than one in more than one way that they can sorry then more than one way that can be described by simply the repertoire of active external internal states and sensory states

And so this is sort of where the case for entanglement comes into play, because entanglement has been argued for as a way of causally representing relationships between variables in biology.

So first of all, we see that organizational boundaries of living systems are open and flexible such that these boundaries need not be co-extensive with the organism's bodily boundaries, number one.

So again, I guess this is just to drive home the point that the Markov Blanket should not be taken literally.

But we also see that biology is inherently quantum, so these processes of cellular differentiation for example,

are fundamentally determined by or perhaps controlled by quantum processes that dictate what chemical bonds the cell is able to break, for example,

or how certain concentrations of ions, for example, flow across the cellular membrane.

And the permeability of the membrane as well can also exhibit quantum effects.

So as the field of quantum biology grows, I think we will increasingly see

that the quantum level is extremely important for dictating how organisms evolve, and especially if quantum consciousness theories continue to gain support, we could see that quantum processes may also be implicated in consciousness.

And so causal entanglement addresses the sort of asymmetry between what were previously considered linear processes and the sort of asymmetry across and between scales.

So I basically argued that causal entanglement is a counterintuitive form of Occam's razor because when we have entangled variables, we don't need to always explicitly represent the dependencies of these variables with each other.

So that means that we can, in an infinite dimensional Hilbert space or a finite dimensional Hilbert space, represent the variables in a way that does not necessarily dictate specific boundaries or constraints on these variables which may impede the causal modeling of certain phenomena.

So as the scale and complexity of the model increases, representing relationships via entanglement becomes much more appealing.

And of course, you know, quantum computing also offers ways to speed up the computation of machine learning models like an active inference.

So Vetchi actually puts forward a case for causal entanglement using DNA.

And essentially, we see that entanglement can serve as a form of

a form of sort of outlining the total, sorry, the different causal dependencies in a system without necessarily explicating them, without putting too much emphasis on the specific properties of the causal relationships.

If we know that certain things are causally implicated, then we can take the sort of rough approach

of assuming that they might be entangled to some degree.

Basically, entanglement can serve as a method for representing murky dependencies without necessarily misrepresenting causal relationships by conflating correlation with causation.

In the paper, Veggie uses chromatin structures during the interphase period of mitosis to basically show how it can be characterized in terms of interactions between entities at three different levels of biological organization.

So essentially the parts or angles between the linkers in the chromatin and

Then the chromatin structure or the topological invariant structure.

And then finally, the feedback loop between how the whole, which is the overall chromatin structure, depends on context properties in the feedback loop, for example, via histone deacetylation or histomethylation.

And so essentially, we see that they argue that DNA is both a total and direct cause when being manipulated, where it is a total cause because DNA is implicated in its own manipulation, and it's also a direct cause because

It's an intervention on DNA will change the functional or structural properties of the DNA without changing necessarily additional non-local properties of whatever substrate surrounds the DNA.

And so specificity still allows linear models to capture causal relationships in terms of, you know, isolating specific variables.

But when we increase the scale and complexity of these, of the model, for example, or of what we include in the model, it becomes increasingly more difficult to separate out and to sort of distinguish, okay, where exactly does the specificity lie?

And so this takes me to this differentiation between repertoire and connectedness when it comes to causal specificity.

So repertoire is basically how many possibilities exist on each side, the cause side and the effect side.

And we can essentially, in a modeling context, take this to mean the number of different values that an effect variable and a cause variable can take.

Meanwhile, the connectedness is how the possibilities on both sides are connected in particular and relevant ways.

So we can see again in the modeling contest that connectedness is a condition for a given function connecting the values of cause and effect variables.

So repertoire does not entail connectedness, and connectedness does not entail repertoire, which is important to note.

Because essentially, we see that

that repertoire and by splitting causal specificity into these two independent properties we may not be able to compare causal relations from a single point of view and therefore, you know, causal entanglement may allow for the comparison of both without necessarily giving up, you know, one for the other.

And of course, Ruiz notes that you need both repertoire and connectedness in order to come to a complete causal understanding of whatever processes are implicated or you're examining within the system.

And so the form of entanglement between repertoire and connectedness

would allow you to express both of them in the system simultaneously and potentially extract results from either of them.

And so what are the practical constraints and limitations on this approach?

Well, first of all, we might view it as a case similar to quantum versus classical computing, where as the complexity class of the problem increases, quantum computing becomes more appealing.

So utilizing entanglement may not be computationally feasible,

right now given hardware constraints, and modeling using the entanglement may obfuscate the extraction of direct causal relationships.

But as Noble has pointed out, and as previous researchers have pointed out, the extraction of direct causal relationships

is a very difficult task.

And epistemologically, it's not clear whether this is even possible once the system surpasses a given point of complexity where the dependencies between and across scales simply become too large to properly identify direct causal relationships.

And so essentially, this entanglement approach may also become computationally infeasible when we have lots of dense variables that are not sparsely coupled.

But I think because the Markov blanket also inherently relies on the sparse coupling, and sparse coupling in neuronal dynamics has been shown,

entanglement can be taken as a sort of replacement for the Markov blanket.

And so I'll just get into some previous work involving the free energy principle and quantum mechanics.

Chris Fields integrated quantum information theory with the free energy principle and proposed that physical interaction is a form of information exchange

where the holographic principle can essentially be used to formalize boundaries between systems.

Additionally, Worthier investigated the potential for tensor networks to represent generative active inference models.

So tensor networks of course can offer computational benefits when run on quantum computers.

And the tensor network itself was originally designed to be used in quantum mechanics.

So specifically for Fields' approach with the quantum reference frames, we see it's a different way of approaching the Markov blanket, which still formalizes boundaries

using the holographic principle.

So it's still assuming that we can properly distinguish the boundaries between organisms and their environments, and that these boundaries are both causally necessary, so that there's some causal impact at the boundary that cannot be ignored, and that the boundary itself is properly distinguishable.

So now I'll go into the overview of consciousness and how it's implicated in both FEP and active inference and how it fits into the proposed framework for utilizing entanglement.

So the minimal causal mechanisms of consciousness, we see that there are regions in the brain that are implicated in consciousness where if these regions of the brain are damaged or not functioning properly, this leads to changes in the overall phenomenal and conscious perception of individuals.

So we also see the non-equilibrium macroscopic brain dynamics are a robust signature of consciousness.

So at some level consciousness can statistically and physically be proven to be the sort of higher order process or dynamic that is going on in the brain.

And so consciousness and the Markov blanket.

So how does consciousness interact with the Markov blanket and the free energy principle?

Does the link between phenomenal perception, judgment, awareness, observation, et cetera, disrupt the epistemological application of the Markov blanket?

And do competing theories of consciousness pose problems for active inference?

So on the first question, I think that

when it comes to the Markov blanket and free energy principle, consciousness, you know, as I guess with all neuroscientific theories, is this sort of throws a wrench in things when we are trying to consider how, you know,

conscious states or differing levels of conscious states may not be easily or neatly put into boxes of either internal or sensory states because again you're assuming that the organism has either the organism itself has some capacity to differentiate between these states and that the states themselves can be placed

into this sort of uh into these these sort of categories for representation by the markov blanket so i think this is especially apparent when we are discussing phenomenal perception judgment awareness observation etc because these types of phenomena are very very broad ranging

in terms of their phenomenal activity and their corresponding correlation, sorry, their correspondence to underlying neuronal dynamics.

And of course the research there is still ongoing, but based on, you know,

whatever, what research there is into awareness, for example, attention or observation, there seems to be varying sort of degrees of complexity

and also degrees of causality when it comes to which areas of the brain are implicated in minimal self-awareness and to what extent these boundaries initially observed can be modified

Or, you know, modified either internally by the person, the observer, modified by some external causal force, for example, like anesthetics.

And so, the competing theories of consciousness, sorry, do competing theories of consciousness pose problems for active inference?

And I would say it depends on the mechanism of consciousness.

So it depends on how these theories lay out consciousness because they may or may not implicate active inference.

For example, theories which are more volitional on the more volitional side that attribute consciousness to volitional activity which in itself is maybe distinct from

you know, free energy minimizing or uncertainty minimizing activities, then we would see that yes, these competing theories of consciousness do or would pose problems for active inference.

And another dynamic that I want to explore here is the unconscious.

So experimental evidence supports a sort of minimal unconscious where we can broadly distinguish between type 1 and type 2 thinking.

So type 1 thinking is unconscious processing, and type 2 thinking is conscious processing.

And researchers have sort of found that there is a form of dynamic unconscious which sits between the sort of conscious processes that are directly under observation or awareness and then those perhaps autonomic processes, for example, where they're entirely unconscious.

And so the dynamic unconscious theory essentially posits that the observer or the conscious agent themselves has some capacity to guide their awareness to processes that were previously unconscious.

So you can essentially make previously unconscious processes conscious.

And again, the implications for the Markov blanket's neat delineation between sensory active and internal states, I would say this sort of frustrates the

the thinking behind trying to separate out these different states.

And so theories of the brain should incorporate a transition from unconscious to conscious awareness.

And of course, this is extremely difficult because we don't have really a solid understanding of what consciousness even is, what are the minimal phenomenal sort of requisites of consciousness, and how sort of expansive the operations of the unconscious are, and whether those unconscious operations are therefore implicated in conscious processing as well, for example, with underlying cognitive biases.

So what are the implications for the free energy principle?

So both conscious and unconscious processes should be modeled.

However, the distinction between sensory and internal states does not do this conscious and unconscious distinction.

I think it doesn't do it justice.

So why is that the case?

Well first, conscious processes are

sometimes unconscious processes are processes that may inherently be sort of semi-conscious.

For example, when someone is scratching their leg, for example, the distinction between conscious and unconscious processes is one that is fundamentally dynamic.

And therefore, we don't know whether there even is a boundary between the awareness of scratching leg and not scratching leg, and especially if that boundary is sort of...

is highly dynamic, for example, when someone is slipping in and out of consciousness post-anesthesia.

And so we see that unconscious and conscious processes could influence active inference in ways that are particularly unique to them.

So for example, unconscious processes could be represented

as priors within the model, but that doesn't always necessarily have to be the case because these unconscious processes could also be interacting as internal states, for example, or they could be present even as active states once they are made conscious.

And so the mechanisms of consciousness, various theories which have been proposed could provide a mathematical basis for expanding active inference and the free energy principle as well.

So I think this is very important to note because theories of consciousness, sorry, novel theories of consciousness that incorporate, you know, more quantum information side or that correspond to

the electrical correlates of consciousness, for example, may provide mathematical frameworks for updating active inference or potentially may provide useful mechanisms

for modeling specific conscious processes that could then be incorporated into the framework of active inference.

And so I think I'm missing a few slides here.

But basically, the overall theories and most promising theories of consciousness

um uh that that are that are upcoming are you know the sort of um the the electrophysiological and um electrical the electrical field uh sort of theories of consciousness which posit that consciousness is actually a result of the electrical dynamics in the brain which of course uh you know would need to be a case as for for any minimally causal um sort of uh

representation of consciousness, but the presence of electrical fields and the implication of these fields in consciousness is a particularly new avenue of research.

And we see that, for example, firing patterns in the brain have produced quasicrystal representations and can be represented as well in the torus, for example.

So these higher dimensional

dynamics within the brain correlating to consciousness or these sort of unconscious processes will be extremely important in determining what processes are relevant for consciousness and how these might be implicated in inference, for example, or thought patterns, traversing whatever sort of

dynamic landscape that exists in the brain which again may be determined by these higher order or these higher magnitude or dimensional structures.

So overall we see that investigating the mechanisms of consciousness I think is fundamentally necessary for for FEP and active inference because these structure

or have the potential to structure thought in the ways in which certain energy landscapes, for example in the brain, are traversed or fundamentally interact with each other.

And so the areas for future work here would be to unpack the philosophical dimensions of active inference, which would include implicit assumptions about intelligence, sapience, and sentience.

So for example, you could utilize Denizhan's conception of intelligence, which argues for a relationship between the model and the modeling.

Sorry, the model and the modeler as a direct form of intelligence there.

Or you could utilize Simon-Done's theory of individuation as a more productive method for explaining the boundaries and cellular differentiation, which I've critiqued previously.

You could also utilize quantum computing to take advantage of quantum-specific algorithms and to investigate quantum biology with increasing scrutiny, for example, and discover ways in which quantum biology is implicated in processes of consciousness, active inference, and in the brain.

And so essentially the overall theory here when it comes to active inference and

and multiscalar phenomena and consciousness is that we can essentially, if we take that the boundaries between the system and the systems are not actually ontological or physically causal, causally implicated, and we utilize the sort of causal entanglement to represent relationships between different parts of the system,

consciousness can be taken as a form of observation along specific causal trajectories within the system that would essentially collapse the superposition of these entangled states

which would produce specific outcomes.

And so that's a very broad sort of method for integrating consciousness with quantum phenomenon and entanglement.

But I think that there are many, many, many other, sorry, different, there are many, there are different methods of integrating quantum mechanics with

with the paradigm of active inference, for example, that are distinct from the holographic principle and do not rely on the explicit representation and encoding of information in the boundaries, for example.

And when it comes to, for example, these unconscious processes, as I've outlined in the abstract, these unconscious processes could be represented more so by the minimization of uncertainty

via the free energy principle as always ongoing processes, similar to Ilan's argument, whereas conscious and more volitional actions would be represented by observation on this quantum system where we are collapsing the superposition of specific entangled states.

And so I think that in that way, entanglement offers two sort of benefits to the active inference paradigm.

The first is that it allows for some flexibility when we are talking about different

variables and causal connections between and across scales because we can entangle two variables that are causally distinct sorry that are that are a scale that are that are distinct across scales for example but which may be implicated in some feedback loop for example

And this entanglement can then represent the causal dependencies between these variables.

On the other hand, if consciousness is a sort of quantum process, then it would allow for the integration of whatever quantum processes that are ongoing in whatever quantum consciousness

So if you believe that consciousness collapses the wave function, for example, then incorporating entanglement would be a mathematically feasible technique for incorporating this form of volition where essentially the conscious agent is collapsing a specific wave function and that leads to

allows them to perform active inference, for example, by minimizing specific probability densities.

So yeah, that's overall the scope of my talk today.

And yeah, I hope everyone enjoyed that.

And if you have any questions, please let me know.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Devin.

Great times.

So I'll ask one question.

You'll give the closing word for the live streams for the whole symposium.

So you're the only undergrad presenter.

What would you say excited you to get into the game?

And what do you say to younger learners to come?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm mainly interested in the mathematical and philosophical ideas behind active inference.

And I was particularly happy to see that the active inference ecosystem has a thriving philosophical and mathematical community.

So when it comes to younger

participants who may be interested in active inference, I would say, you know, keep pursuing what you're interested in.

And if you have any particular areas of research or ideas, you should always be looking to share them, I think, and be looking to expand your horizons.

So yeah.

cool well looking forward to hearing more from you and from others so thanks again devin for bringing so much together in this last capstone talk thank you so much for inviting me to give the talk and apologies uh i was a little bit short on time to uh to put together the slides so uh this was a lot uh messier than i would have liked unfortunately but uh yeah real life is like that all right thanks steven peace

Thank you so much.
