## 6gw6KEX10vo

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome it is april 29th 2024 we're an active guest stream 82.1 with robert warden discussing bayesian model-based cognition the requirement equation thank you robert to you for introduction and jumping into a presentation and discussion thanks for joining hi i'm robert warden and i work theoretical neurobiology group at ucl london


SPEAKER_01:
I'm going to talk in this live stream about an equation called the requirement equation, which has a lot to do with free energy principle and active inference, but it's not the same thing.

And I hope this is the first of a series of live streams talking about how we apply these ideas to 3D spatial cognition, particularly and eventually to consciousness.

But to get on with this presentation, here's a summary of the key ideas.

The main idea of this requirement equation is to ask, not ask what brains have to do, not ask how they do it.

And so this approach is different from the free energy principle and active inference, but I believe it complements it in a way I'll try to explain.

So as a statement of what brains have to do, there is this requirement equation, which is a mathematical equation.

Essentially, brains need to compute it.

or to give the same answer as if they'd computed it to give the greatest possible fitness to their owners.

So that's, it's a statement of what brains need to do.

And it's not a statement of how they need to do it.

It doesn't say anything about neurons or pre-energy minimization or anything like that.

It simply says to get as fit as possible, a brain has to do this.

And I'll describe what this is.

And it turns out this requirement equation is like Bayes' theorem.

It's very similar to Bayes' theorem,

but it has some extra terms in it.

And you'll see that.

And because it's the fittest possible brain, brains have to evolve towards the requirement equation, towards doing that thing.

And the trouble is the requirement equation itself is too expensive to compute and brains don't compute it.

So animals don't compute it, but they have to produce very similar results to that.

But we can compute the requirement equation.

We can compute it by brute force.

And this makes no assumptions about how brains do it.

And so that gives the best possible fitness.

That's a kind of yardstick against which you can calibrate any model of cognition.

And particularly, you can use it to calibrate and test free FEP and active inference models.

And I will put the viewpoint that they are really approximations to this equation.

And so we can test

active inference models by comparing their results with the requirement equation results so the first part of this talk is to derive this equation and show you how it works the second part of the talk is to show how it can be used to test and calibrate active inference models and the third part of in point six is just a few remarks about internal bayesian models okay so

To start, how do we characterize what a brain does without making assumptions about how it does it?

And the first characterization is a black box that takes sense data as an input and produces choices of actions as its output.

So that's all a brain does.

It takes a set of sense data, D, which can include vision, touch, all sorts of stuff, and then it chooses an action.

Now, we want to go a little beyond that black box model.

And we're going to what I call a grey box model, shown in the lower diagram.

And what happens is this, the brain examines, it has a set of possible actions, AI.

I is one, two, three, etc.

Now, for each of those possible actions, it calculates some real function, f of d and a. And that real function depends on both the sense data and the action it's going to choose.

So F is a kind of expected payoff for that action in these circumstances.

And then the brain compares all the possible Fs.

So here we are on the bottom left diagram.

It's computing a bunch of different Fs in parallel, and then it puts them all to a comparison, and it picks the biggest one.

It picks the best possible payoff from any action.

And so this is the gray box model.

It's assuming the brain looks at all the alternatives and chooses the best one, but it doesn't assume anything more than that.

It doesn't assume how it computes the Fs or what the Fs are.

It just assumes that it compares them all and picks the best one.

So that's kind of minimal set of assumptions about how a brain works.

Now we'll go on to put that set of assumptions inside

a real life situation where we've got probabilities and this comes in the next diagram this is a kind of meta model of how brains work life for an animal is divided with a number of different domains where it has different kinds of decisions to make and it has encounters in each domain and we're show here a picture of one encounter in one domain so we start on the left there is s which is state of affairs that's a state of the world

and it has a certain probability, a prior probability p of s. And the animal doesn't know what that state is, of course, but the state gives rise to sense data in the animal.

So these two arrows here show sense data about the external world and sense data about the animal's internal state.

So the animal has some sense state of d, which it receives with a conditional probability for any given state s, it gets sense data d with a conditional probability p of d given s.

Then it has a decision function f that I talked about in the previous slide, and it computes f of d and a for all the possible a's it might think of doing.

And then it chooses one of the actions a. And what happens when it chooses an action is the action a and the previous state s lead to a next state, which are called s prime.

And so that comes about with a certain conditional probability, again, P of S prime given S and A. And that next state has a certain value to the animal.

And that value relates in some way to its lifetime fitness.

And so that's, in principle, the computation.

And the assumption is that brains act as if they've computed F of DA to choose their actions.

And this as if will turn out to be very important.

so how do we use these probabilities in terms of an actual situation the mean payoff an animal has loads of different encounters in its life and the mean payoff is just given by this expression and so w is the average over all the states of affairs it's going to encounter weighted by their probabilities and then each state of affairs gives some sensitive d

with a certain probability, so it gets all the possible sense data that it might have.

Then it makes a decision, chooses an action A of D, and that produces a new state, S prime, with a probability P of S prime, given S and A of D. And there's a value for the new state, value for the animal of a new state.

For instance, if it's dead, the value is zero, and so on.

So this is just a straight application of probabilities to the previous diagram, and you get that formula.

And then you just rearrange the formula slightly.

What you do is you shove this first term, PS, inside the second term, and then you write it this way.

W is the sum of

functions j of d, and j of d is this thing.

And it's already beginning to look very like Bayes' theorem, you can see.

But it's got some extra stuff at the end.

It's got these values stuck in at the end.

So that is the first step towards this requirement equation.

And to understand how it's used, what I'm going to do is to choose a very simple example of an animal.

um a simple special case and the simple special case come out here is an animal that has only two actions and i think you can imagine something like a clam living in the sea it has two actions it can open up and try and eat consume food or it can shut down it can clam up and so those two actions are called action one and action two and this simple animal has very little sense stage it only has one

piece of sense data it can say detect the salinity of the water or the temperature of the water and that thing it can detect with its sense data has values between naught and one and now we consider various kinds of this simple animal firstly we consider two no-brainer animals a no-brainer is an animal that doesn't use its sense data and just makes the same choice of actions the whole time and so

The animal that is open all the time, it gets value H1 of D, and depending on D, it gets a payoff, positive, less positive, more positive, and so on.

An animal that stays closed all the time gets a payoff H2 of G. And so you can see that for each of these two no-brain animals, the average payoff is just the integral of P of D times H of D

over this interval 0 to 1.

So that's the payoff for a no-brainy animal is either W1 or W2.

But an animal can do better than that if it uses its sense data to choose which action to take.

So a brainy animal can choose the correct H that gives a bigger payoff in terms of any sense data D. So a brainy animal can ride the top of this curve.

It can go down here,

along the green curve, along the red curve, and finally along the green curve.

Now that gives the greatest possible payoff, the greatest possible average payoff in all situations.

So it's the greatest possible fitness.

So a brainy animal that can compute these two functions, H1 and H2, and can always choose the largest one,

is going to get the best possible fitness and if it gets it wrong if it's got some inaccuracy in the way it commutes h1 or h2 so these overlap points move around a little it gets less average fitness uh productly away from that best point so that's what happens in a very simple case where you've got two actions and one real piece of sense data now we're going to

generalize back again, and you can see what kind of decision function this simple animal's got to make.

The decision function it's got to calculate is basically the average fitness, and that gives it the greatest possible fitness over all situations.

So if we generalize away from this to the more general case, can you see all that slide?

I hope you can, yes.

So we generalize this case to when the animal's got more choices of action, say five actions or

more sense data, different dimensions of sense data.

And you can see when you generalize away from the simple case to the general case that the best possible decision function is given by this equation.

The decision function f is the sum over all states of the probability of the state weighted by the post theory of probability and the sum over all final states of the

probability of the final state weighted by the value of that final state.

And we could simplify that by this equation.

But that equation is basically a definition which doesn't say anything about what happens inside a brain, how it computes it.

It says if a brain chooses the same actions as if it had worked out these equations, it gets the best possible fitness.

So the requirement equation, which is here,

says what brains are required to do.

And any brain which chooses actions as if it had done all this has the best possible fitness.

So that means that brains will evolve to choose actions as if they computed this equation, which you can see is very like Bayes' theorem.

And so that's the first result that comes out of this work is that

The Bayesian cognition, the assumption that animals use Bayesian cognition is not really a hypothesis.

I believe Carl Friston has said and has been quoted as saying that it is a hypothesis.

This result implies it is not really a hypothesis.

It follows from a piece of analysis that makes no assumptions about how brains do what they do.

So I should say this derivation of the requirement equation has some similarities to

partially observable Markov decision processes and some differences, and you'll have to look at the paper to find out those.

So that, if you like, is the end of the first part of the talk, which is deriving this equation and saying that is a way of analysing what any brain is needed to do.

The second part of the talk is how you use this equation.

So all terms that you put in the requirement equation, all those probabilities,

depend on things happening outside the brain.

They depend on states of affairs in the environment.

They depend on sense data.

They depend on what's the payoff, what happens to the animal after it takes various actions.

So it's all external biology.

And you don't have to make assumptions about what's going on in the brain to compute it.

And that, I think, is a big advantage.

Now we can write down the requirement equation in lots of different domains.

And to do that, we have to model biology, which we can observe directly, rather than modeling brains, which we can't observe very well.

The trouble is, computing this requirement equation is very expensive.

It's expensive in four different ways.

Because to really compute it, you have to sum over all possible states S, you have to do the parallel computation over all possible actions A,

you have to sum over all possible subsequent states S prime.

And in some domains you have to compute the value.

You have to have branching look ahead to different future situations.

So it's very expensive and it's not tractable in animal brains.

It will be too slow to try, too expensive to compute.

So animal brains don't compute this equation.

They do much cheaper as if calculations.

Now, having said that, animals don't compute it.

We can compute it because we have digital computers and we can do the Monte Carlo integrations and we do the optimizations and so on to do all of this by brute force.

And that's what I will call brute force Bayesian computation.

And that we can compute it.

It acts as a kind of yardstick, which we can use to compare.

how well they compute their choices of action and any cognitive model, including models built in active inference.

So that I'll skip over this slide just to say you can apply this equation in all sorts of domains.

Skip.

Right.

So coming on to active inference,

FEP and AI models are not like the requirement equation in that they do make assumptions about what happens in brains.

They assume there's a generative model, which is a simplified version of the actual generative process, some simplification that the animal uses in its brain.

They use variational model fitting.

They minimize a variational free energy, minimize a KL divergence between that and minimizing a KL divergence is the process.

And they have a certain model of the fitness payoffs of actions, and they are represented as bias prior probabilities.

And the animal has a goal to minimize its .

And an active inference

It predicts how animals make the trade-off between exploration, trying to get sense data to help better future decisions, and exploitation here and now.

So there's a whole load of assumptions in there which are different from the requirement equation.

And so for any FEP or active inference model, we can test those assumptions against the requirement equation.

And this procedure to do that is here.

You first compute the FEP-AR model, which you've been doing already anyway, and you define the equivalent requirement equation.

And so you make biological assumptions about the states in the environment, about the sense data, about the

consequences of actions and so on.

And then you compute the requirement equation.

And that, as I said, you can do by brute force integration and optimization.

And then you compare the two sets of results, requirement equation and FEP results.

You compare them in terms of the lifetime fitness.

How many encounters of this kind does an animal have in its lifetime?

How much does the fitness vary between the two?

And you get a fitness gap between the requirement equation and the FEP result.

And the requirement equation is in some sense bound to come out fitter.

And so there'll be a gap.

And if that gap is significant, even a very small gap, 1%, natural selection will have improved on the FEP model.

In other words, if there's a 1% difference in fitness between two animals,

In a hundred generations, the fitter animal will come to dominate the population.

And based on that, you can use, you can refine the FEP model.

In other words, you can ask questions like, what's the sense data which makes the largest fitness gap?

What can we do to get the FEP model better for those kinds of sense data?

So I'll illustrate this process here.

Some animal has a lifetime fitness, which you measure percentages.

We compute what that is in the requirement equation.

So that's that point there.

We also compute what it is in the FEP, and those are different.

And we can also, by the way, look at no-brainer animals, which just make the same stupid decision every time, or real animals.

All four points on this graph can be computed.

And the interesting comparison is here between FEP active inference and the requirement equation.

So the question we're asking is how close is the FEP model to the optimum?

And what is the gap between the two and what difference is that going to make over, say, 100 generations of natural selection?

Now, I think this comparing with the requirement equation is

very useful thing to do for an FEP and AI models because it's a win-win test if the model comes very close to the optimum then you've confirmed it you can't do better than that but if it's not very close you can work out how to improve it you work out what sense data is not doing so well for how to make it do better for those sense data right um

Now we come on to the third part of the talk and the headline is that brains are not always Bayesian.

I know it has been stated as an assumption that brains are Bayesian.

The requirement equation tells you exactly what are the circumstances under which they are Bayesian and under what circumstances they don't need to be Bayesian.

And it turns out that in complex domains where there are complicated choices of actions,

the brain needs to build an internal model.

And the two most complex domains in that respect are two-dimensional navigation, finding a way around, and 3D spatial cognition.

And there's always been a kind of debate between in modeling people and in activist people who say the brain just reacts to events.

You can prove this way that in complex domains,

And an activist brain may do a job, but it doesn't do as good a job as a brain that makes an internal model.

And so you can prove in certain domains, mainly the complicated ones, that you need to build internal models.

You can't prove that in all domains.

In simple domains, models aren't needed.

And these are domains in which there are very few choices of action or very simple states or simple sense data.

And in these simple domains,

The as-if computation can be very simple.

It can just be a matter of some very simple neural relay and no internal model is needed.

And an example of that is the special case that I used to motivate the requirements equation where you've only got two possible actions.

You don't have to build a complete internal model of what's going on.

You simply have to know the thresholds at which you switch from one action to the other.

And this can be seen in terms of information capacity.

What comes into the brain is some Bayesian priors, which have made it evolve, and some sense data.

And it makes an internal model, or may or may not make an internal model, and then it chooses actions.

Now, if the choice of action is very small, it's a very small information content, then it doesn't need to make a big complicated internal model in order to make that simple choice.

So the information in the internal model

needs to be less than the information in the choice of actions.

And if the choice of actions is very simple, small information content, there is no point in constructing a very complicated internal model.

It's a waste of effort.

So if you regard the brain's internal models as an informational channel between sense state and actions, then you can see the information model is very necessary in complex domains, but not so necessary in simple domains.

Now, as a further comment on this, I say you should not trust the good regulator theorem.

Now, in FEP literature, the good regulator theorem is often cited as support for the idea that brains need internal models.

I'll just very briefly say I don't believe it does give them support.

When you compare it with the requirement metamodel and the good regulator theorem, which was a paper in 1970 by Conant and Ashby,

That has a couple of different metamodels of what cognition is about.

And it's based on Ashby's ideas of homeostasis.

But I think the argument they make, Conan and Ashby make from the good regulator theorem, I don't think it really holds up.

And I've just listed the reasons here.

There's the good regulator result that every good regulator of the system is a model of that system.

here's the requirement equation result in complex domains only the fittest brains computer model of the domain now the regular later model i'll assert is not a realistic model it lacks some key ingredient and it's less realistic it assumes a homeostatic picture of a brain whereas the requirement equation analysis is much more flexible and realistic

But mainly this fourth point, the regulator concept of a model is not a graduated, it's a yes, no, all or nothing concept.

And what it says is a model, how they define a model, you can have any function of the system variables can be a model of the system, even a very trivial function.

And so the concept of a model they use is a binary yes, no concept.

But the real meaning of model in everyday life and in science is a graduated.

In other words, the more complicated, the more detail there is in a model, the more it counts as a model.

So this is just my personal beef.

You should not be using the good regulator theorem to justify internal models.

Few remarks about how brains evolve because obviously this analysis depends totally on the idea that the requirement equation defines the fittest possible brain and brains evolve towards that optimum.

And as I said, even a small deficit in lifetime fitness, even a 1% deficit in lifetime fitness, over 100 generations, that gives enough selection pressure to make something start dominating the population.

But if the properties in the habitat change rapidly, brains can't catch up.

They only evolve very slowly by random mutations.

And therefore, if the properties in the habitat are changing, brains need to learn and they need to learn fast within a short animal lifetime.

And you can actually apply this requirement equation analysis to learning.

And animal learning, it turns out, is very close to the kind of learning you get out of the requirement equation.

On the other hand, if probabilities in the habitat stay constant for a very long time, brains can evolve to come very close to the optimum.

And the key place where this is the case is spatial cognition, 3D spatial cognition.

where the states of the world have to obey some very strong constraints.

They have to obey Euclidean geometry and they obey constraints of physics.

And these constraints have been true for all evolutionary time.

So animal brains have evolved to embody those constraints very precisely.

A final point is that animals we know have very precise and sensitive sense organs.

They would not have evolved if the brain couldn't make the very best use of the data from them.

So here's a plug for the next live stream.

The next live stream is applying these ideas to 3D spatial cognition.

Understanding three-dimensional local space is actually the most important thing a brain can do because it has very

huge impact on survival because it's a 3d model of local space is used to control physical movements at every moment in the day and if the model is has inaccurate mistakes in movement can cost the animal his life any time and they're also used for recognizing things in action so the selection pressure to get the internal model of 3d space good has been very strong and sustained

over 500 million years since the Cambrian explosion when animals first had limbs and precise sense data.

Even insects control their movements very well.

And consciousness shows that our own internal human internal model of space is a good precise model.

So the 3D model of space is a very good model.

And what this next live stream is going to talk about is how you build that.

how you build neural models of 3D local space.

Now, people have, there have been very few attempts to do this.

There are no working neural models of 3D spatial cognition that I know about.

One of the reasons is the architecture.

How do you, what's the neural architecture to represent three dimensions of space?

Neural sheets can represent two-dimensional space, but there's no equivalent architecture for 3D.

And the key problem is neural spatial memory.

If you represent spatial coordinates by neuron firing rates, it turns out that that memory is too imprecise and too slow.

Insects, for instance, have a tiny fraction of a second to work out what their surroundings are like.

And in that space of time, you can't get precise representation of 3D space using neuron firing.

So in the next live stream, I will introduce the proposal that 3D space is not represented by neuron firing at all, but it's represented by a wave in the brain.

And that wave is actually a projective transform of 3D space.

And that's the same transform was used in the projective consciousness model, PCM, which is an FEP-derived model of consciousness.

So that's the commercial for the next live stream.

Just to summarize on this live stream, gosh, I've been quick, 30 minutes.

There are two kinds of modeling you can do.

You can model biology or you can model the brain.

And modeling biology is a great deal easier because we can observe it.

We can observe easily what's happening to animals in their habitat.

Whereas modeling what happens inside the brain is more difficult.

There's much more hypothesis and guesswork about it.

And the requirement equation approach, which I've talked about in this talk, only requires modeling biology, only to model events outside the brain.

And you can compute this requirement equation in any domain you like.

And it defines the very best a brain can do.

So it's a kind of yardstick against which you compare actual brains and models of brains.

So you can compare the requirement equation with any active inference model.

And that I say is a win-win for the model, because if the model comes close to the optimum,

then you've confirmed it, but it doesn't come close.

You can use what you learn to work out how to improve it.

And I would offer to work with anybody who wants to make that kind of comparison with their active inference models.

Okay.

So I finished rather ahead of time.


SPEAKER_00:
Questions.

Thank you, Robert.

All right.

you for the presentation there's a lot to discuss and also people can write questions in live chat while i'm just like re-cropping everything um do you want to give any like context how did you come to study this question and how did you get to this equation and why um i got this equation about 25 years ago actually


SPEAKER_01:
um and i came back to it when i joined carl's group and got interested in the requirement in fep and so on and i realized there was a link between it and and fep and active inference and i've just been working recently to work out what the link is and this is what i think the link is um but i think it's a very basic foundation for studying the brain is to not

make hypotheses about what is how brains do what they do but to just analyze what they have to do and i think this is quite a powerful approach in all sorts of domains hope to convert one to other people to it


SPEAKER_00:
yeah okay well questions are kind of coming in i'll go over a few of my notes just to go over some of these core pieces because i think there's a lot lot to say and it's really exciting um in quantitative evolutionary population biology fitness is conceived of as like a top-down force

whereas the generative model is built up as like an agent level view from the inside like agent-based modeling with kind of a top-down pressure and that's one way to look at that kind of setting and I got the sense that I want to explore and learn more about that the requirements equation sits basically between those two

and sets the high bar that gives a requirements for the agent-based model because you can always just build an agent-based model and have a constraining force we know from simulations that that all does give um improvement of algorithms uh in simulations but it's kind of an open-ended search and there isn't necessarily a calibration


SPEAKER_01:
do you think about this is a calibration if if you are prepared to analyze an animal's lifetime in terms of a number of different encounters like each time it goes out to get food or each time it meets a potential mate or each time it comes across a predator and say what's its probability of surviving all those encounters then you can start doing the requirement equation analysis and you can find

In principle, you can find the very best it can do.

And that is an endpoint.

If you've got your FEP model and you're improving it, improving it, this is a kind of endpoint beyond which you don't expect to get, but you know when you're getting near.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And here's one other kind of angle that I was noting.

So the standalone Bayes equation.

Bayes with no additional terms is like this unified imperative for sensemaking.

It can cover discrete or continuous state spaces, single dimension, multiple dimensions.

There's even considerations for like how many parameters should be Bayes optimal, but it's all framed in terms of this unified sensemaking imperative.

requirements equation and and so then one of the key steps in active inference is to expand that unified bayesian imperative to not just the sense making but include action like a variational autoencoder with action the requirements equation says well it's a little bit more over the lifespan than just optimal sense making about sense and action

action but not sense making has fitness or survival consequences so then there's another term that applies to only actions because there's a direct fitness consequence of actions and phenotypes whereas the internal sense making is actually shielded from direct selection because it has no consequence except through the actions in the black or the gray box


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, I think active inference is a particular way of making the trade-off between, I mean, the way I understand it, it's a bit simple, the trade-off between exploration and exploitation.

In other words, do I fly higher so I can see more prey or do I go down and actually catch that bit of prey?

And the requirement equation can encompass that because the value that an animal gets from an action

It can be direct exploitation that gets a piece of food, or it can be exploration that it learns something that it can use downstream.

So that kind of trade-off is made in active inference.

There is also the apparatus in the requirement equation of making the same trade-off and seeing if you get the same answers.


SPEAKER_00:
just one last framing and then i'll go to the live chat questions just at the purely empirical even just putting aside the evolutionary setting it's a common theme to make a model and then do a variance partitioning on the residual and find if it's loaded or associated with anything so when we're studying

bird migration and empirically 80% survive some stage, and then we're making an agent-based model.

Well, we don't want a model where 100% of them survive because we've kind of overshot how successful.

So then the empirical path could be like, okay, we just made a simple version and 50% of the simulated birds make the migration.

How is that correlated with the actual?

And then how is what's left in the residual?

Oh, it's associated with age.

Okay, now we include age as a factor in the agent-based model.

That eats up some of that variance.

How is the remaining variance associated with known or unknown factors?

And so there's an iterative process where you can discover potentially associated variables

and have that in feedback with the agent-based constructions like the agent responds to the requirements as modeled and then it looks like they're doing something else that's required that you don't have in your requirements equation so then but it sets a kind of local calibrator again to what kind of performance envelope could even be expected or relevant so that you don't have

in silico experiments where like bacteria are trying to read a book and a person is trying to do a metabolic thing that they can't do it doesn't make sense we all have a feeling like well that's not the niche it's not what they are being selected on for and so this again helps put an adapter in between the kind of bulk properties of the niche and then the specific performance


SPEAKER_01:
that gets all the way down to thinking like you mentioned about like the survival through time as being like the joint distribution of many many many many many encounters yeah I mean I I agree with all that I I think the requirement equation can be used to do those kinds of analysis when when you when you formulate it you're really looking at lifetime Fitness

And so you should be looking at all the things that influence lifetime fitness, including things that are nothing to do with brains at all, as you say, old age or whatever.

But nevertheless, the requirement equation, it gives you, I think, starting just from FEP models and AI models, you have the model on the one hand and practical observation of animals on the other hand.

And you've got nothing in between.

But requirement equation is somehow in between them that you can say, here's this requirement for what a brain needs to do.

And if a brain does it absolutely as well as that, then here's the survival.

So you've got a midpoint in the calibration between your brain model and your real life.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

okay i'm gonna go to read some questions in the chat if whatever you want to say or answer or we'll just however you see okay bert asks is inactivism exclusive to internal representations i always think of it that way and activism is generally the idea that you don't need internal representations you can just sort of do something um and


SPEAKER_01:
In simple cases, you can.

In that simple clam case, the clam case only has to know what are the three thresholds at which it has to switch over from open to closed.

That's an activist.

I think an activist is usually hostile to internal representations, and they are in opposition.

And what I'm saying is the requirement equation tells you which circumstances one is right and which circumstances the other is right.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome one other free energy principle paper that this reminded me of it and I'll go back to the live chats was by yellow Brunberg in and others in 2018 the anticipating brain is not a scientist the free energy principle from an ecological inactive perspective which discusses it's kind of like the good scientist and the good engineer like it's not just the pure sense making imperative

when action is considered.

It's not just about accuracy and action because actions have consequences in a way that the sense-making component doesn't because the black or the gray box is set up so that the sense-making doesn't have consequences except through action.

That's that partitioning.

If you explored a model with telepathy, where there was direct consequence for internal states, then it would be basically as if that was an external or an action state, because it would just make those representations external facing.

So it's like, whichever states aren't external facing are the internal ones.

Whichever ones are external facing, and then those can be under, quote, no selective pressure,

they're all that's like a novelty type or just an open diffusion space or it can be under strong selection pressure which just means that there are higher consequences for a certain distribution but that's a distribution that you're actually having the agent's model converge towards and maybe maybe the populations convert maybe the optimal height would be like 15 feet and it just there's so many other trade-offs that that actually the population just continues to push up against five

but at least there was a way to say, well, it only got to a third of the value, but that's the highest score is 30%.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
And that sort of approach sounds very congenial to what I'm doing.

I have to read the paper.

I'm afraid I haven't read it yet, but I certainly will do.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

All right.

Benjamin asks,

How does the amalgamation of Markovian dynamics and Bayesian theory reflect the necessity for brains in complex domains to construct internal models for better adaptation and decision-making?


SPEAKER_01:
How does the combination of... Markovian dynamics?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

How does how you brought together... Well, I think this equation... Okay, sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
um this equation certainly builds in markovian dynamics i mean the probabilistic model of the state is a markovian model if there are certain state transitions in the world then those are modeled so i um i believe that that's encompassing this approach i don't know the word markovian changes things particularly okay


SPEAKER_00:
benjamin asked another question as the brain has evolved do we know which of these definitions of brain functions are inherent versus emergent and how does this potentially impact their functioning as they evolve collaboratively or independently um there seem to be two questions there can you read it again yes oh we have many amazing um conjugate question askers um

How do we know which of the definitions of brain functions are inherent versus emergent?

I think that's the first part.


SPEAKER_01:
Inherent versus emergent, right.


SPEAKER_00:
And then how does that impact their functioning as they evolve potentially collaboratively or independently?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, the requirement, I've tried to state the requirement in other words, what brains are required to do as

in the abstract and making no mention of how they've actually evolved to do it.

And that applies to brains at the very beginning of their evolution when they were totally unfit and they gradually got fitter by natural selection.

So inherent versus emergent.

I mean, what is emergent is brains getting closer and closer to an optimum given by that equation.

The equation

doesn't describe how brains are described where brains are evolving towards so that's the first part of the question now the second part of the question was a different contrast which was how does that potentially impact their functioning as they evolve collaboratively or independently now collaboratively or independently there's a huge amount of questions there I mean obviously um

social insects, for instance, their brains work collaboratively.

Is that the distinction we're talking about?

I mean, again, I think the requirement equation is applicable to social insects that don't have, they're not so concerned about individual survival, they're concerned about survival of the genotype of the hive, if you like.

But I think the equation still applies to that.

But collaboration and competition,


SPEAKER_00:
are very complicated areas to analyze well definitely especially next time i look forward to going very deep into the insect questions um i'll give some thoughts though i mean to the first half in inherent versus emergence without just saying it depends on how you define it it can be emergent through development that certain functions arise so that

That can be both.

That was the sense of the question.

Was it emergent in a lifetime?

I don't know what the sense of the question is.


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe I didn't get that right.

Certainly, emergent in a lifetime, yeah.

Because it's optimizing a lifetime fitness, you have to consider different periods in the lifetime and whether the brain gets fit in adulthood by having learnt

along the way or having inherent innate traits is a choice that brains have but as I said the requirement equation can be applied to learning and that's a very interesting application I haven't done talked about it at all here but it can be and there's a result a book from Anderson in 1990

which shows that data on animal conditioning, the sort of rats and pigeons in cages and so on, agrees very well with the Bayesian model, the requirements equation model of what the best possible learning is.

So that's another domain in which the Bayesian assumptions are confirmed.


SPEAKER_00:
interesting this is making me wonder about abiotic constraints and biotic constraints for the requirements equation so maybe one setting is that the external environment of the organism is very harsh like it's a desert ant colony

and so a lot of the selective pressure and the differences amongst colonies like in their persistence or their survival is related to their performance against the environment and there's another setting where maybe the environment is materially abundant but then there's a lot of

dynamics like game theory and sexual selection and like these internal so how does the requirements equation I mean if we have to change that as often as the weather changes then what are we really getting by just setting this local requirement which itself could be changing all the time or variable across settings that's a great question I mean in principle the requirement equation


SPEAKER_01:
takes as its starting point natural selection, not sexual selection.

But sexual selection, as you know, doesn't always make animals fitter, and sometimes makes them less fit, as in the peacock's tail.

And I've got a whole separate interest in how sexual selection is acted on the human brain, particularly, and in terms of social and sexual competition.

And that, I think,

The requirement equation is not a result of that.

The requirement equation is what you get after natural selection.


SPEAKER_00:
What do you mean after natural selection?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, natural selection, you have to have the fittest possible animal.

is one that survives to adulthood with the greatest probability and gets a mate with the greatest probability getting a mate with the greatest probability is not as simple as surviving the greatest probability because it's a competitive activity and you get positive feedback effects for instance as in classic peacock case where female peacocks prefer males with long tails and

And so that gets baked into the genotype by a kind of conspiracy between female genes preferring long tails and male genes having long tails.

But it's not good for the peacock species in terms of fitness.

Male peacocks are less fit because they've got big tails.

And you could have similar things like that happening inside the brain.

And I have a whole separate set of ideas which I would love to give a talk about sometime.

that natural that human language is actually a consequence of sexual selection um perhaps we could live stream that sometime but human language hasn't made us more fit in natural habitats there's some controversy for you wow to return to one other potentially interesting um aspect of of benjamin's question there with the second half


SPEAKER_00:
collaborative or independent uh challenges so this made me think about how the factorization of the problem to be solved like the sparsity of what depends on what in the problem may be very disjoint from what is connected to what in the organism so that's kind of widely been recognized by like evolutionary constraints or just evolutionary or tray architectures like if there's

yeah if there's a covariance in the niche um between two factors and then that is not the case in the organism then there can be like separated movement of those traits or you can have the opposite setting where two things are i mean there's also pieces that are correlated just like having length and volume like having a long body these other things change


SPEAKER_01:
I would guess that in terms of physical evolution of bodies, you can get two traits that have to be correlated, like long legs inevitably correlated with something else.

But in terms of evolution of the brain, it's not so constrained and you can have different cognitive functions that evolve independent of each other, much more freedom there.

That's just a guess.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah that's very interesting and the kind of there's a lot to say about that and also with um very fruitful to consider the differences with the mammal nervous system and with the insect nervous system and the ways in which the insect nervous system helps clarify certain sensory mappings that get very lost in the large mammal brain yeah


SPEAKER_01:
I agree insects are very worth looking at.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so anyone else can write questions in the live chat.

But I mean, what other directions would you like to explore?

How do you think this moves forward given where it is now?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, as I say, I'd be very interested if anybody's interested in taking an active inference model.

and trying to calibrate it this way, I'd be very happy to work with them too.

I would do the requirement equation side of things, and that would be a very interesting comparison for me to make.

But, say we're going to make the next live stream in a month's time, and that'd be about spatial cognition.

That's the main direction I want to take this.


SPEAKER_00:
yes moving things animals with spatialized nervous systems and then also nervous systems that enable movement but don't necessarily need to be spatialized like a worm may just have a topological or a tactile mapping but it may not need to have the kinds of echolocation or center place foraging components of a bat or a bee

i agree i agree um am i allowed to play with robert's equation is that okay of course you are of course you are okay um all right so this is very cool it sounds like in around one month we will have a session on insect brain and foraging spatial cognition and then there's probably many other

things we can continue to talk about.

And also, it would be awesome if somebody has a active inference model or some other kind of model that they could reach out to you and try to get some more empirical and specific.

Have you applied this to any specific like empirical or published cases yet so people could see like what the kind of analysis is?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, the main analysis is coming in the second live stream.

Can I just move to the slide that shows where you can get out of the paper?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
So there is the link to get hold of the papers.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And there's an application, which we'll look at next time as well.

But there's a very interesting video game slash

executable simulation baselanguage.org baselanguage.org cool all right thank you very much robert thanks everyone for the comments the questions and chat all right okay great thanks farewell bye bye

## gMPa_xoOctU

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome.

It is June 3rd, 2024.

We're in Active Inference Guest Stream 82.2 with Robert Warden.

Today we're going to be discussing three-dimensional spatial cognition, bees and bats.

So thank you, Robert, for joining again.

To you for the presentation and looking forward to it.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dan.

Okay, well, as Dan said, I'm talking about three-dimensional spatial cognition in small animals, particularly like bees and bats, for example.

And what I'm going to be doing is showing you a demonstration program that does this.

So you can find the demonstration program at this link at the bottom of the picture, and you can download it and try it yourself.

Or you can read a couple of papers about this work, which are there on archive at that address.

So that is the introduction.

To get straight into it, what this work represents, I think, is a challenge for classical neuroscience.

And by classical neuroscience, I mean the assumption that all that happens in the brain, all cognition is done by neurons connecting to each other by synapses and so on.

And the challenge, which I think comes out of this work,

is that the main result is that neurons are actually not capable of that.

They cannot represent three-dimensional space because they're too imprecise and too slow.

So the resulting challenge for neuroscience is to show that this idea is wrong.

Everybody thinks it's wrong.

Everybody thinks neurons do everything.

So you have to show it's wrong by building a working model of neural computation model of 3D space and checking that it really scales and can perform

somewhat like animals perform.

I think just writing papers and talking about it is not enough.

You've actually got to build a model and show it works.

And for building that model, the FEP neural process model is the best starting point, I believe.

So that's where this talk is going.

It gets there by 3D spatial cognition.

So what is that?

Spatial cognition, I should first say, is a very important problem.

The primary task of any animal brain is to control its movements, physical movements, its limbs, in 3D.

And that's a 3D problem.

And it has to do that at all times of the day.

And for most animals, most of their brain is devoted to this problem.

And we believe, being Bayesians, that they do this by building and using Bayesian maximum likelihood model of three-dimensional space

And my previous live stream was about the subject, how animals build models in general.

But the particular 3D model of space, that's been important since the Cambrian era, when animals first started having precise sense data, like good eyes and capable limbs.

And there's been huge and sustained selection pressure on all animal species since then to do it well.

And what we believe is that animals do do it rather well.

For instance, our own conscious awareness of 3D space must come from something going on in our brains.

And that is a rather precise model in our conscious awareness of 3D space around us.

So that must be quite a good model of space in our heads.

And going from us to small insects, even a small insect can land very skillfully on the room of a coffee cup or any other surface.

So that's why I say modeling 3D spatial cognition is the top priority for neuroscience.

And we may look at all sorts of problems in neuroscience.

This is the one, this is the heart of the problem, the thing we really need to get right.

So how do you do it?

How do animals build a 3D model of local space around them?

And the immediate problem is that most of their sense data and their vision

is two-dimensional.

So how do you get from two-dimensional vision to three-dimensional model of space?

There are some constraints, and people obviously think of stereopsis, where two eyes where you can tell the depth of things, or proprioception and touch.

But those constraints only apply to restricted regions of the space around an animal.

So for the rest of it,

What I believe animals do is they build a model of space around them by moving in space.

And this is a form of active inference, if you like, that you have to move in space to find out about space.

And this is based on a very strong Bayesian probability that as an animal's move, most of the things around it do not move.

So the world is like a big rigid moving body around the animal.

So the animal can compute object locations by what is called structure from motion, SFM.

And when you build a computational model of this, it's actually a fairly simple computation to do.

What you can do is fairly simple 3D matrix operations to maximize the likelihood of an object being in a certain position.

And that's what this program does.

But if you're doing that, shape from motion, structure from motion,

It requires a short-term spatial memory, a working memory, positions of things.

And that's what this demonstration program does.

So the demonstration program, bees on without vision, with some limited, not very bad resolution, bats have echo location instead.

That gives them both the echo delay,

And it gives them a Doppler shift.

And we'll talk about that later.

So both of those animals move fast among static objects.

So this 3D shape from motion is an applicable way of working out where the objects are.

So the program I'm going to show you builds a 3D model of space in three different ways.

Firstly, it can build an optimal Bayesian shape from model to model.

And that is what I call a brute force calculation.

I've discussed this in my previous live stream, and it's very hard for animals to do.

It's not the way we think animals do it, but the interesting thing about it is it gives you the very best possible Bayesian model based on the sense data.

So that's the first way.

The second way is by dynamical object tracking, where an animal makes an estimate of where each object is in three dimensions, and then it keeps updating that estimate every time from every

step along the track it takes, it updates that estimate from its sense data.

And the third model is doing that same object tracking, but doing it in the presence of neural memory noise.

I should say this computational model is built at Mars level, David Mars level two.

That is, it's not a neural implementation, but I have made it so that you can add simulated neural noise to it.

So if you want to see this program after you've seen it demonstrated, download it from this web address, and you can quite simply unzip it and start it running.

So I will now switch to demonstrating this program.

So I end the show.

And there is the program.

That's what it looks like.

And what you see is three different windows, left, center, and right.

the left-hand window is going to be a three-dimensional view of some space in which a bee or a bat is moving.

The center view is always just healthy information, and it tries to tell you how to use all these sliders and buttons and controls.

And the right-hand view is just various graphs, and we'll see some of those as we go along.

So what happens when you press the Start button is you see some three-dimensional space, and inside it,

There on the left-hand side is an animal, this time a bee, and the colored circles are objects randomly spaced in that space.

And so the lines going from the bee to the objects are lines of sight.

And this is a three-dimensional view, so you can rotate it, see the three dimensions, and that's what happens when you rotate it.

The objects rotate.

And so there, at the moment, we've got nothing about the bee's internal model of space.

We've only got actual space itself shown in the view.

In order to show the bee's internal model of space, we press the Run button.

And I'll do this, and you can see what happens.

So as you press Run, the bee starts moving.

That's the green line.

It gets new lines of sight.

And from the new lines of sight, it estimates the positions of all those objects.

So I'll restart and do that again.

And what you'll see this time is that the estimates of the positions appear as small circles with error bars.

So the error bars are the gray lines.

The small circles are where the bee thinks the object is.

So you can see the bee is building rather an accurate model of where the objects are from its sense data.

I'll restart again, and this time we'll step through it one step at a time to see

how the bee's model of space evolves with time.

So one step, and you can see in the very early steps, we'll rotate it a bit to show what's going on, the bee starts making really quite good estimates of where the objects are.

Each little white circle is quite close to the blue circle, but the estimates have error bars, and the error bars are in three dimensions, showing the uncertainty of the location estimate in all those dimensions.

So it's those estimates of position that enable the bee to move where it wants to do.

Suppose these are flowers.

It can go to the flowers and get pollen or whatever it wants to do.

Now, I said the program computes three different kinds of model.

And these three is always doing this as you go through the steps on the track.

And these three models are a full Bayesian model.

And that's what we're showing at the moment, full Bayesian.

We can switch to a tracking model.

That's the object dynamic tracking.

And there, if I switch that, you can see the error bars and the objects hardly move at all.

They do move a little bit.

But this is one result of the program, that doing that tracking model, which is simpler to do than the full Bayesian model, gives you nearly the same estimates and same error bars.

And the third model it computes is a tracking model with noise.

And I switch to this one.

And again, it's not moving very much actually.

But I'll move it on a bit and you'll see that noisy tracking often is very different from tracking without noise.

So we're on tracking without any noise at the moment.

We step forward a bit.

And the bee keeps updating its estimates of these positions as they go.

And I now switch from tracking to noisy tracking.

And you can see the noisy tracking is significantly worse than tracking.

The noisy estimates have drifted away from the true positions of the object.

That is really the second.

By the way, I'm running this with a fairly small level of neural noise.

You can adjust the level of neural noise.

You can adjust the bee's visual acuity.

You can adjust all sorts of things using these sliders and try running the program again.

This is running with a fairly small level of noise.

So I keep stepping, and a noisy tracking estimate keeps getting worse, but I go back to the tracking estimate.

The tracking estimate without neural noise is pretty much dead on.

So I'll restart again, and I'll run again, because then we can show the graph at the end of the run, which shows what's happened to these errors.

So if I run again, now you look at the graph on the right.

And what that is doing is comparing tracking, which is the black curve, versus noisy tracking, which is the red curve.

And these are steps along the bee's track.

Those are the same steps we saw there.

But this vertical axis is the level of error in the depth of the B estimates.

And you can see that tracking is rather small errors.

It homes in on the true position of the object, whereas with memory noise, you get much bigger errors.

And in fact, the errors are very unpredictable.

If you rerun, we'll just rerun it again, you find that the errors coming from noisy tracking

they do seem to vary quite a lot from one run to the next.

Noisy tracking is pretty unpredictable, basically.

So there the errors have gone right up and they've come down again, whereas ordinary tracking without noise is nice convergence towards the true positions.

So that is really the second key result of the simulation.

That is that a tracking model is a realistic model of how animals estimate positions of things around them.

But if you add noise to it, even adding a small amount of noise completely messes up the tracking model.

Now, there are more things you can show with this model.

You can show, for instance, how animals use their model to detect what is moving around them.

Because obviously, when an animal is moving, it is quite hard for it to detect motion from inside.

its visual field, because when it's moving, everything is moving in this visual field.

So it has to use the three-dimensional model to work out what is actually moving.

And if you also plot the efficiency of motion detection, you find that too is very much poorer when you add memory noise.

So I think I'll stop at this point.

The program also does a simulation of bats, but I won't step straight into that.

Perhaps we could come back to that at the end of the talk if somebody wants to hear about it.

But for the moment, let's just step back and find what we have concluded from the bees model now.

Where is my presentation?


SPEAKER_02:
Uh-oh.

Now I've got to resume the presentation.

How do I do that?

Yeah, we get back to the presentation.


SPEAKER_01:
So the key points that I think I may have shown you is that in the 3D view, you can see the track of the animal.

You can see its lines of sight.

You can see, sorry, my phone is ringing.

I better go and shut it up.

I've shown you where the real objects are.

Those are the circles, the colored circles.

I've shown you the objects as located in the internal model.

I've shown you shape from motion.

I've shown you what the error bars are.

And you can rotate the 3D view.

I've shown you the three different models of 3D space, the full Bayesian model, the dynamic object tracking model, and the tracking model with memory errors.

As I say, when you run this program, you can change all sorts of parameters to see how it's sensitive to the parameters.

And I've shown you the B spatial model.

I've shown you how the error bars are particularly the depth dimension.

And I've shown you how memory noise degrades the model.

So here are the key results.

The best possible model any animal could build from its sense data is a very good model.

In fact, it's more precise than the sense data, because if the animal can assume that objects don't move, then over time an animal can build up a very good understanding of where objects are, better than its raw sense data.

Animals can't do any better than that.

But dynamical object tracking works pretty well.

It's almost as good as the full Bayesian model.

And it only works if spatial memory has very high precision.

And I didn't say the levels of precision that I put into the program, which start to spoil the tracking model, they're about one part in 100.

And that, I believe, is much more precise than most neural representations of space can give.

So that's the next part of this talk.

How do we do that modeling with a neural model of the brain, the classical neural model?

So how do you build a neural spatial memory?

And this is a changed quote from Animal Farm where they said two legs bad, four legs good.

Two dimensions is easy.

Three dimensions is hard.

Because two dimensions, you can easily do a sheet of neurons representing two dimensions.

Whereas in three dimensions, you don't have that option.

And there are several possible memory designs.

You can have a two-dimensional sheet of neurons and you can represent the third dimension by depth.

depth by the third, yeah, you can have some other variable representing depth, or you can have a three-dimensional clump of neurons where position in the clump represents a 3D position, or you can represent all three dimensions of an object position by neural firing rates.

None of these work well for object tracking.

I think we can quite simply eliminate the 3D clump model, but the other two models have a problem with neural error rates.

And if neural information is encoded as firing rates of neurons, typically you have a neuron firing n times in some time interval t, and then the precision with which it can represent some real quantity is of the order of one part in square root of n.

Now, N over T is typically between 5 and 50 pulses per second on most animal brains.

But for insects and small mammals, the time they've got to have to update their internal model of space is very small, typically less than a tenth of a second.

So if the time is a tenth of a second, you get N less than 10.

And that gives you errors of the order of 30%, which are much bigger than the 1% errors, which I said are needed for tracking structured motion.

So the conclusion of this is that neurons, when they represent space, there's a trade-off between speed and precision.

The faster you have, the less precise it is.

And this trade-off is just too hard.

So I believe there is no working neural model of 3D spatial cognition.

Now the three points in blue I've said before, they say spatial cognition is very important and animals do it well.

And we've had this problem for a long time.

In his book Vision 40 years ago, David Meyer identified the challenge and he started work on it.

He defined what he called a two and a half D sketch and various other models.

Now,

I believe that in terms of building neural models of how spatial cognition works, people have really not moved beyond this.

Why?

I think the main reason is that the memory problem is just too hard.

The memory gives them too big errors and is too slow.

And I suspect that over the years there have been many people who look at this problem and they decide to move on and do something else instead.

But the result is that

Spatial cognition is the central problem of neuroscience.

We don't have a model of it.

And so this is rather like theory of planetary motion without a sun or a theory of the atom with no nucleus.

So how does this relate to active vision?

I think active vision is one way to explore this problem.

Active vision describes how a 3D spatial model can be inferred from vision.

And there are

quite a few papers on it.

They focused on various aspects of it.

They focused on 2D scene classification.

They focused on the trade-offs between various objectives like the choice of visual saccades.

They focused on 3D robotics.

As far as I know, none of them have really focused on how animal brains practically build a 3D model.

And I believe that existing active vision models do not address the issue of neural error rates.

One reason for this is that the standard active inference toolkit in MATLAB, I believe it doesn't model neural error rates.

It assumes, I believe, an abstract perfect neuron with very precise representation of quantities.

And error rates are actually not an issue for many of these applications.

They're not an issue for robotics, and they're not an issue really for making discrete choices.

But as I've said,

in this talk so far, the accuracy of the 3D model really matters.

And neural error rates are the big problem.

If we set that problem on one side for a moment, there is the issue of active inference trade-offs.

And there are many interesting trade-offs you can examine in active vision.

And the key trade-off, I believe, is one between freezing and moving.

As I've shown in the demonstration, the animal has to move in order to infer the 3D positions of things around it by shape from motion.

It also, of course, has to move to achieve practical goals like feeding and fleeing and mating and so on.

On the other hand, it can freeze.

And freezing, it may conserve energy.

It may be able to detect what's moving simply directly from its visual field, which is much easier.

And it may itself avoid detection.

So these are very key trade-offs.

They're absolutely essential for lifetime fitness for many animals.

Animals have to make this trade-off or these trade-offs any moment of the day.

And so we've got plenty of empirical data about it.

And I think it'll be a very useful area to explore.

Now, I'm going to switch to something completely different.

Having said that neural storage of spatial positions is a very hard problem,

I'm going to talk about an alternative, possible alternative way of storing spatial data.

And so if you assume there's some round region inside the brain of a fairly large diameter D, and this holds waves with a minimum wavelength, which I call lambda, and the neurons can couple to the waves, both as transmitters and receivers, and the wave can persist

at least for fractions of a second, so the wave can act as a working memory for positions.

And the number of object positions you can store in the wave can be up to d over lambda cubed, and that can be a very large number.

The spatial precision, which one object position is stored, can be one part in d over lambda, and I think

that D over lambda can be very large.

So you can easily get precision better than one part in 100, which is what you need to build the spatial model.

So in summary, wave storage of 3D positions may have a lot of computational benefits.

It can give a natural fit to the problem.

It can give high precision and high capability.

It can give you very fast response times, low spatial distortion, and some other benefits which are described in the papers.

So apart from its computational benefits, is there any evidence for wave storage in the brain?

I believe there are two quite powerful lines of evidence, one of which comes from the insect central body.

The central body of the insect brain is a very small part of the brain in the middle of it, and it consists of a fan-shaped body and the elliptical body.

And it has this shape, which is remarkably well conserved,

across all insect species.

And there's an insect brain database, and I've gone to the insect brain database and pulled from it the shapes of the central body from a few typical insect species.

And here you can see the fan-shaped body and the elliptical body, and it's very constant across all kinds of insects.

And you can see it's approximately a round shape, so it's well-suited to hold a three-dimensional wave.

and it does multi-sensory integration.

And so it's quite likely, quite probable that it holds spatial positions and insects have very few neurons in their brain to do it in any other way.

And what I think is significant is how constant and round the insect central body is compared with all the other parts of the insect brain.

So that's one piece of evidence from the insect central body.

The other piece of evidence

comes from the mammalian thalamus.

As you may know, the thalamus of most mammals, all mammals, is approximately spherical and is connected to all sense data and all cortical regions.

But the important thing is that the shape of the thalamus is highly conserved across all species.

And there's an important aspect of the thalamus anatomy

that unless you assume a wave, really it doesn't make sense.

Because the thalamus consists of a number of independent nuclei like the polvinar and the LGN and so on and so forth.

And the connections across within the thalamus between these nuclei are very weak or even non-existent.

So you could have this picture here that the thal... Where's my pointer?

Here's my pointer.

The thalamic nuclei, which are the white circles here, they all connect in two ways to the cortex, but they don't connect to each other.

So one thalamic nucleus here could easily start moving out towards the cortex, and the length of its axons could decrease, and its other connections, it doesn't need other connections.

So all the nuclei could migrate outwards towards the cortex,

And you could still have the same neural synaptic connectivity and the same computational capability if neurons only compute by synaptic computation.

So this way, you could save a lot of energy in shorter axon lengths.

So in summary, a compact thalamus only makes sense if all the nuclei need to be immersed in the same wave.

We now have three pieces of evidence for a wave in the brain.

Firstly, there's the computational neuroscience that it's a very difficult problem to build a 3D model about it, but you can build a 3D spatial model if you assume there's a wave storing positions.

Secondly, the insect central body is nearly round in all insects, very well suited to hold a wave and appears to be in the right part of the brain to do that.

And thirdly, the mammalian thalamus, which again has this round shape, very well suited to hold a wave.

And the important thing here is that without a wave, the anatomy of the thalamus doesn't make sense.

So I would like you, if you remember only one thing about this talk, remember this slide, there is quite a lot of evidence for a wave in the brain.

One thing I will say,

is that the wave is probably not an electromagnetic wave because there's quite a lot of interest in electromagnetic fields in the wave from researchers like Miller and McFadden and so on.

But an electromagnetic field can't play the role that this wave is needed to play.

In other words, the key thing that the wave is supposed to do in this model is to store information for fractions of a second.

But an electromagnetic field in the wave, and there certainly are electromagnetic fields in the brain, they cannot store information for fractions of a second, and they cannot represent 3D space like a hologram.

And just to say a little more about this, if there's an electromagnetic wave in the brain, it has to obey Maxwell's equation, so the wavelength times the frequency is equal to the speed of light, lambda f equals c.

And that means at 40 hertz, typical frequencies of these waves, the wavelength is 8,000 kilometers as large as half the Earth.

So the conclusion is that at 40 hertz, electromagnetic field is not a wave.

It's a static field, and it's driven entirely by neuron firing.

So it doesn't store the information.

So in summary, we're looking for something not electromagnetic,

and possibly some quantized excitation, something a bit exotic in the field of quantum biology.

I think we shouldn't despair here because we know evolution is a lot smarter than we are at discovering these things and exploiting them.

So here are some take-home questions.

Does 3D spatial cognition use a wave in the brain?

In other words, in the light of the evidence I've shown you, what is the Bayesian probability of that hypothesis being true

Now, I say these take-home questions because I didn't expect you to have an answer immediately, but perhaps you'd like to look at the papers and see what the evidence is and try and assess it in your own mind.

Or do you know some slam-dunk killer reason why there can't be a wave in the brain?

If you do know a reason, what is that reason?

And how do brains compute space?

How do neurons on their own represent 3D space with enough precision?

On the other hand, if there might be a way for the brain, wouldn't that be a rather exciting and revolutionary development?

It would actually change the whole of neuroscience, and it could address this central unsolved problem of how spatial cognition takes place.

So I believe that possibility should be explored, particularly for young researchers.

It's attractive.

It's greenfield research.

It's not a well-trodden path of classical neuroscience.

The classical neuroscience model of

McCulloch-Pitts neurons and Hebbian synapses, that's 75 years old now.

So I would like to encourage people to get out and explore.

Or again, come back to the earlier slide here, a crisis in neuroscience.

The result of this work, I think, is that neurons can't represent 3D space because they're too imprecise and too slow.

So the crisis is, can you show

This is wrong.

Can you show it by building a working neural computational model and checking its scales properly?

So the FEP neural process model is the starting point for that.

I think it's a good problem to work on because it is a crisis and big advances in science tend to come out of crises.

So what I'm advocating, and this is my last slide, is a twin track research program.

to build two different active vision models of 3D spatial cognition.

One is a pure neural model, which is a classic FEP neural process model.

Can this be made to work?

Or are the neural memory errors going to kill it?

And secondly, to try to build a hybrid wave and neural model.

And when you're building those models, we can explore the trade-offs that active inference is so good at computing.

and particularly the trade-off between freezing and moving.

So there are a couple of candidate projects for the Active Inference Institute.

Okay, that's it.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you, Robert.

have some questions and some people have asked questions in the live chat so i'll uh i'll ask them so first just while i'm re-cropping everything how would you connect this to the requirements equation earlier work because you mentioned that there was a

requirements equation driven calibration of the optimal navigation.

So what does that look like to have the optimal navigation according to the requirements equation?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, to summarize on the requirements equation, you can model how brains evolve.

And this is the previous live stream.

And you can show that they evolve towards making a purely Bayesian calculation

of their best model of the world from the sense data.

But that purely Bayesian calculation is rather expensive.

And it's been well known in FEP that full Bayesian calculations is intractable for most animals.

And so that is a very expensive calculation.

And it's probably not the way animals do it, but it is, it can be done on digital computers and it can be done

in this model I've showed you.

And the first model, the full Bayesian model, is actually computing the requirement equation from the bees or the bats sense data.

The second model, a tracking model, is an approximation to that, which is a lot cheaper, but seems to give very nearly the same results.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, awesome.

Let us dive into a few mammal and insect neuroanatomy questions.

So I'll start with a set of questions from the live chat.

This is going to be about mammal neuroanatomy.

Okay.

Tim Ritter asks, do you assume this wave property for all thalamic nuclei, primary and secondary, or for specific ones, e.g.

pulvinar or mediodorsal?


SPEAKER_01:
Very good question.

I don't know the answer.

I mean, at this stage, I believe the whole thalamus is around near spherical volume with the wave going through all of it.

So they are all immersed in that same wave.

So even the pulvinar, the pulvinar certainly is, even the LGN, which is rather small and is a pass-through nucleus, I think they all are.

So I think, for instance, I think...

People always say the thalamus is a relay.

Sense data gets to the cortex via thalamus, but people don't have a very good reason why it has to go through these relays, nuclei, in order to get there.

I think it's doing something about locating, about, I think the wave has some involvement there, but this is very early days.

I don't know the answer at all.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, another question from Tim on mammalian neuroanatomy.

What about 2D orientation?

Would you expect similar waves in hippocampal instead of thalamic regions, or is 2D sufficiently easy to get by without?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, basically, I believe 2D is easy enough to get by, and the hippocampus is by no means suitable to hold a wave.

Hippocampi have all sorts of different shapes, so...


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, I think that was a core theme between the mammal and insect areas, is the conserved shape, and then also the allometric differences over evolution, where the size differential of the insect central body changes much less than other primary sensory regions, and that was in your paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's right, yeah.

And that kind of implies that

that small size of the central body, it's only a few percent of the whole insect brain, seems to be enough


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and that the properties which it hosts or enables might be related to its physical extent or like to its surface area.

It's a volume ratio and not a function.

Like, for example, in the antennal lobe where the olfactory information are coming in, there are these little glomeruli and different species have from several tens to several hundred of these olfactory glomeruli.

Like ants have many and they have more olfactory receptors in their genome and they have more olfactory glomeruli in that region.

Or insects with more compound eye sections, they have larger optic lobes.

So the primary sensory regions have very large...

variation amongst species but then as you get into the central body uh you get much more conserved Anatomy in size and then the mushroom body on the top part of the brain is something a little bit in between that might have more of an analogy to like mammalian cortex where they're actually

is the possibility to scale its cognitive capacities through size changes because it has some kind of repetitive or stereotyped layout?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, there are a load of fascinating questions in neuroanatomy which relate to this.

And if you pursue this hypothesis, then there's all those interesting questions.

I'm not an expert on insect or mammalian neuroanatomy, but there's a load of interesting questions in there.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, so about the bee spatial cognition.

So we know that bees use a variety of visual cues ranging from the landmark,

and the landscape recognition to polarization of light and so on.

And also, as you pointed out, the central body does multisensory integration.

So how do we think about the possibly complementary or redundant information provided by these different aspects of the visual fields?

And what does your simulation focus in on?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, I believe that what the central body and the thalamus both do is multi-sensory integration.

In other words, animals should, they need to make the best 3D model of space they can, and they need to use all their senses to use it, apart from possibly smell.

That's an interesting question.

And so both of them do multi-sensory integration, and ideally one would put in a simulation one would have

things like stereopsis, one would have object recognition, one would have light polarization, all sorts of sources.

This program only does simple vision or simple echolocation at the moment, but it should do all multicenter integration in a single Bayesian maximum likelihood model of the whole, all sense data coming in at the moment.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.

Yeah, with sounds or with smells, it would be interesting to see how those come into play.

And how do you think about, in the simulations presented here, egocentric and allocentric navigation?

Because you mentioned how the kind of simplifying assumption is that the world is a rigid, fixed body.

So you can have these kind of duality where like, I'm moving and the world is fixed.

And then there's sort of like, I'm fixed and the world is moving.

So how does that relate to that egocentric, allocentric distinction?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, very good question.

I mean, I think...

The frame of reference used for the model should be as much allocentric as it can be because the wave has to persist.

And if the wave just persists, it represents an object at a constant position.

So you want to have a frame of reference where most objects are at constant positions.

So I think that makes it allocentric.

But obviously it has to change from time to time.

Every few seconds it has to switch because it can't just stay allocentric.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.

So now to connect that to what you brought up about move or stay, that kind of fundamental animal or fundamental mobile organismal nervous system question.

i thought about different body plans where the eyes or the visual component are unable to move separately from the body like a bee can turn its body but it can't rotate its eyes whereas in humans for example we have optic saccade so there that stay or move

yes we have turning our posture and moving through space but also we see like this microcosm where when the gaze is fixed there's high precision and then movement in the world is associated with movement of objects and then whereas when a eye saccade is dispatched during the saccade our visual attention is alleviated

And then it's because during that time, all the movement of pixels essentially is ascribed to the movement of the eye.

So we see kind of like a microcosm of the two modes of movement and stability in motion detection in the cicading.

But for other organisms that don't have eye cicade, the only way that they can get that kind of alternating movement and stability is by moving their body.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah.

I mean, I always think of eye saccades as particularly predators, if you like, that want some high resolution in some particular direction.

Whereas for most insects, as you say, there is not the option of a high resolution fovea.

But I think of saccades as being cheap.

I mean,

The freeze-move trade-off is a real trade-off.

If an animal moves, it can be detected as moving and it can't detect motion itself as well as if it's stationary.

So that's a real hard trade-off an animal has to make.

Whereas circades, you can make them cheaply whenever you like.


SPEAKER_00:
yes yes and also it's really interesting like how often the behavioral studies just look at the direction of movement but there's this whole timing of movement and so there's definitely a lot of empirical studies about whether fear-based movements like in a predator prey uh or different kinds of movement choices um where would you say attention comes into play

the sense that the bee or the bat was just kind of taking it all in it didn't have like some restricted scope so it's kind of like a uniform attention across objects and across space and time but then we know that we do have this visual attention phenomena well yeah attention is very important and uh i think naively it's a search on model of attention in other words


SPEAKER_01:
The wave representation of all space represents all the space around an animal.

But the animal can focus attention on a region of the space.

And what that's doing is tuning the receptors in the thalamus.

So they are sensitive to wave vectors in a certain region.

So there's a whole load of issues there about how the wave works.

It's whether it can, how signals are rooted from sensitator inputs to specialist regions of the cortex.

And I think attention is that rooting of information.

So again, loads of big questions there.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, with the wave, I was kind of...

thinking about the insect brain, visual input flowing in and also other potentially inputs.

And all of these are crashing on the shores of the central body.

And then there's this kind of stabilized dynamical wave representation such that information coming in differently changes the resting shape of the wave

And then that opens up, like you're now suggesting, recurrent connections or other connections into that wave hosting region.

Recurrent connections can modify the shape of the wave, potentially.

And then also the resting shape of the wave can route or augment or suppress other sensory information coming in.


SPEAKER_01:
would be like water kind of dumping to where there's already a high water point versus water going to where there's low water yeah yeah i mean i think key role of the wave is to persist a background model of all 3d space and then against that background model new center information that comes in particularly movement uh is best evaluated

A piece of new sense data, you evaluate it much better if you compare and contrast it with what you had before.

That is attention.

And it's the thalamus, if you like, telling the cortex, here, pay attention to here.

Here's your old information from this place in space.

Here's your new information.

So tell me what's changed.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, this connection with frame differencing is very powerful.

Predictive processing, predictive coding algorithms were built by computer scientists and compression engineers looking to make video compression work and doing the frame differencing because that's the optimal way to compress video.

And then that got brought also back into neuroscience where there's a lot of focus on things like edge detection and these other 2D visual phenomena.

And then as you're pointing to, there's this kind of sun at the solar system's center that's not really being discussed, which is like, okay, yes, we have neurons in different visual regions that are excitable by vertical lines, by diagonal lines, and so on.

But this is all flat phenomena.

And the question of not just shape recognition, but the question that's most proximally relevant for movement and the fitness related decisions for the organism in the niche has to do with its spatial navigation, not it's like eyesight at the eye doctor.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Not only the spatial navigation, how it moves its limbs, where it puts its foot next, that sort of thing.

And the 3D model, I think, does all of that.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, I'll read a question from the live chat.

How might the saccade relate to a matrix of inputs versus a human-based visual system?

Movement on the matrix may give different spatial dynamics.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not sure what you mean by matrix of inputs there, but as you said, during a saccade, visual input is kind of blocked while the eye is getting from A to B.

Uh, whereas the wave persists and the 3d spatial model stays constant.

And after a secade, the eye has to update the 3d spatial model in some different place.

So, um, I'm not, I don't think I've answered the question, but perhaps you, what do you understand about matrix?


SPEAKER_00:
It's what you enter.

Um,

it's making me think about the experiments where the, for example, the fruit fly is placed on a ping pong ball in a harness in a virtual reality setting.

So it's getting custom visual input and its movements on the ping pong ball just kind of scrolls the ball.

So it's basically fixed, but it gives a lot of degrees of experimental freedom around the, um,

orienting of the body and what visual inputs it gets.

So I wonder if anywhere there we know about the timescale of spatial orientation updating, because that would be very critical to understand the nature of the wave.

If it was something that was, for example, closer to the diffusion rate

of ions, then we might be looking more towards like a channel or pore based hypothesis.

If it was something that was faster than neural signaling, it would suggest something more like the direct coupling or other kinds of action.

So what makes you feel, as you suggested, that it is not an electromagnetic

stabilized wave fields?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, as I say, the physics, I mean, for an electromagnetic wave, we do understand the physics.

And the electromagnetic waves measured by EEG, for instance, they are a purely passive consequence of neural activity.

They don't persist in the information for any time at all.

Whereas this wave I'm talking about has to persist information for

for fractions of a second.

So this constant spatial model is kept persisted while the saccades go on, while the animal moves, while it computes shape from motion.

So a pure electric field, we know the physics, it's Maxwell's equations, and it does not store energy, store information.

So it's purely a passive reflection of what's going on in the neurons.

It's not a memory.


SPEAKER_00:
So the neurons are, especially if we think about the several like thousand to tens of thousand, let's say, in the insect central body, there's too few and they're too sparse and noisy to, in a purely connectionist neural framework, to support the kinds of empirical results that we see.

On the other hand, a purely field-based approach has some issues that you just laid out.

So it's very interesting that two at least of the well-known mechanisms, the local field potential and the firing rate, rate coding type models, that both of them seem to have some limitations.

And yet there's very strong anatomical evidence for the functional role of that region.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yeah, it's absolutely vital region.

But I believe that just looking at electric fields, magnetic fields in the brain is not going to give you memory.

And that's the key thing that I think is needed.

to do structured promotion.

You've got to have short-term working memory to hold a little model of space for a fraction of a second


SPEAKER_00:
Do you see that as a kind of special type of short-term memory or do you think this is the same memory pool that like short-term audio memory gets entered into?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, it's, it's special.

It's different from that.

Yeah, definitely.

It starts from,

How do you complete a 3D spatial model?

How do you do structured promotion?

You need short-term working memory for that purpose specifically.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.

The kind that enables us to

check for difference in visually changing systems?

Or what does this visual working memory have?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, basically, it's not vision because it's 3D.

And checking for difference in the visual field is, you can do it quicker.

You can look directly at the visual field, whereas this model

I think the 3D model, it's maintained by a loop in mammals between the thalamus and the cortex.

And it's a 40 hertz cycle that maintains it.

So it takes time to build the 3D model.

And it's a bit slower than direct visual change detection.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.

It's this tension with visual being what is seen versus kind of a broader imagination of vision.

What about action in your model?

So how were the paths set?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I said that the model was...

a bit like active inference, and the animal has to move in order to understand space.

But it's not really, the program has not modeled the kind of active inference choices of how should I move to get the best understanding of space.

And you could do that.

You could make the bee choose its trajectory to get the best understanding of where the flowers are.

Or you make the B2 that's tragic for all sorts.

Those are the active inference trade-offs that the program has not yet looked at and which can be looked at and I think are very interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
That's awesome.

Yeah, it's almost like the bee in this situation, it's like on a train trying to reduce its uncertainty about the location of landmarks.

But it's just on a rail, it doesn't have policy decision.

Whereas once we start to close that loop and ask which direction of movement, or none given the costs,

would reduce uncertainty about resolving this kind of spatial relationship then that that's where the perception actions start to like come into play in benefit of each other and potentially there's several choice successive moves can greatly reduce uncertainty through active sampling just as we see in skating and all other situations and that would

be like a heuristic or strategy that really does work.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I mean, another example that I use somewhere is I believe that predatory birds like hawks, when they're approaching their target, they don't go in a straight line.

They move on a curve to reduce the uncertainty.


SPEAKER_00:
So that they continue to get more information.


SPEAKER_01:
Can you see the range of the targets?

If they just went straight for the target, they wouldn't get a range fix on it.


SPEAKER_00:
Now, what about the difference between the bee and the bat?

Whereas a bee is simply receiving the reflected photons, let's just say, the bat is sending out a

invisible signal.

So how is this kind of radar echolocation setting similar and different to the vision setting?


SPEAKER_01:
It's very different.

I could show you that with the program if you like.

What happens with the bat is from the delay of an echo,

For a particular insect that the bat is tracking, from the delay of the echo, it sees the range of the insect.

So it gets the insect constrained on a sphere in its 3D model.

And then from the Doppler shift, it actually perceives the cosine of the angle between its directional movement and the direction of the insect.

So what it gets there is it constrains the sphere, surface of a sphere,

down to one circle in space.

So what the bat gets is a series of circles in space which constrain the position of the insects.

And I could show that on the program if you'd like.

Sure.

Okay.

Well, how do I do that?

How do I share again?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I'm curious.

Is the circle something like, is it like a hoop that you could throw a basketball through?

Or is it?

Well, I'll show you if I'm.


SPEAKER_01:
Now, I can't get rid of this something on my screen.

It's the problem.

I've got a big black screen with a two on it, and I can't get rid of it.

End show.

I suppose I end show.

Right.

Now, am I sharing my screen or not?


SPEAKER_00:
Not yet.


SPEAKER_01:
Now, how do I find where I do that?


SPEAKER_00:
How do I find where I am in space?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, absolutely.


SPEAKER_00:
That's an interesting question also, how these mechanisms are... I've got the Google window somewhere.


SPEAKER_01:
The Zoom window somewhere.

Oh, ZM.

That'll be it.


SPEAKER_00:
How are these mechanisms repurposed for digital navigation?

Semantic navigation?

Narrative navigation?


SPEAKER_01:
Just a minute.

Let me find... Oh, God.

Get away.

Oh, share.

Screen to share.

Okay.

You got that?

We're back.

Okay.

So what we do is we change from B to bat, and we start again.

So what you have now is the bat and several insects, which are colored circles here.

And what the bat has is its echolocation.

Take the blue insect.

It's echolocation.

echolocation constrains it to a sphere in space.

And that's the delay of the echolocation.

And the Doppler shift constrains the sphere down to a circle.

So if we rotate these circles, you see that blue insect is on a circle from one point in the bat's trajectory.

So as the bat moves, it gets successive circles of the same insect.

So what we have is the bat is moving.

And all these circles, highly confusing.

And it gradually locates all the insects better and better.

But if I restart and step again, if I step, I've restarted.

Right.

Now, if I step, what I can do is focus on one insect.

If I focus on that insect, then I only see the circles from echolocation of that one insect.

And I can step again and get a new circle from a new step.

And all the time, the bat is optimizing the position of that insect to get the best fit to all the circles it has for that insect.

So it's very different from vision, but it can build a very good 3D model from its echolocation.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so to kind of confirm what's happening here, there's...

For a given snapshot ping with the sonar, what is returned is a circle of equiprobable locations that are kind of like the maximum likelihood ridge.

That's right.


SPEAKER_01:
These are really sort of Gaussian donuts, if you like.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

And then successive pings enable you to look at the intersection point of the circles to find out through successive approximation the likeliest location.


SPEAKER_01:
So this is what's happening here on that light blue insect.

It's got these three circles, and that's the most likely.

They're not very well intersecting, but that's the most likely intersection point.


SPEAKER_00:
That's it's like a Gaussian mixture model.

You have those three peaks.

And then when you summit those three peaks, that the point that interpolates them or just is the geometric average is the single maximum likelihood estimate point.


SPEAKER_01:
That's exactly it.

Yeah.

And again, with the bat, I can go from full Bayesian model, which is this one full Bayesian tracking or tracking with noise.

And again,

The noise tends to have nasty effect.

Or I look back at this one here.

That's that dark blue insect.

And I can rotate to see how the circles go.


SPEAKER_00:
How is this similar or different than, for example, radar navigation algorithms for planes or ships?


SPEAKER_01:
I think it's quite similar.


SPEAKER_00:
i think yeah i mean they are making maximum likelihood inferences from radar signal and have you with this software looked at the computational like the runtime complexity or the resource use associated with scaling the number of insects or scaling the resolution of vision


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, you can scale the number of insects.

For instance, if I scale up here to 30 insects, I can run the model with 30 insects.

And it runs perfectly well.

So the model is quite efficient because what it has to do for each object

And for each time step, it simply has to do this Gaussian optimization, which turns out to be just a 3D matrix operation, three matrices.

And that's very quick to do.

So that's one of the advantages of it, that if animals are trying to track a load of things around them, which they probably are, it's quite a quick, efficient computation.

But this is not the neural implementation.

The problem is going from here, this Mars level two computational model, to a neural implementation.

That is where I think all the interesting problems lie.

At least you have this level two model as a kind of starting point.

And the Bayesian model would be trying to implement that in neurons.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, makes sense.

This is kind of the as if...

Bayesian algorithmic map and the question is what proximate mechanisms are capable of doing these algorithms functionally and neuroanatomy has basically localized to the region in mammals and in invertebrates

And so now we're in a space of winnowing possibilities and leaving the door open for unconventional opportunities for how those regions actually do it.

It's a very targeted specific agenda that connects a first principles grounding about how well the navigation can proceed with a requirements equation

on through to the empirical patterns that we see those empirical patterns might have some like behavioral experiments well sometimes can be hard to interpret as well though for example there's a common experiment where a wall that's shaped like an l is set up and then people will use it to test if an animal will go on the hypotenuse

to reduce the travel distance or whether it will take the the around the wall however even if there was a conceptualization of the ability to move on the hypotenuse direction an animal might like prefer to move along walls so then by the time you get to the real animals movements

It's very tied up with not just trying to be the optimal landmark resolving visual algorithm.

It's actually engaging in all these other drives that can make it look like it's lower efficiency or even like supernaturally efficient on a given domain.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think there's all sorts of animal experiments one could do, but interpreting them is not easy.

But basically, if you're looking in these experiments to measure how good the animal's internal 3D model is, I would like to, with insects, for instance, how good is their movement detection if it's movement in depth that needs a 3D model to resolve it rather than just the visual field?


SPEAKER_00:
that's very interesting especially in insects potentially where there's little overlap between their two compound eyes yeah yes um okay i'll read a question from the chat as we kind of head towards the end news equal wrote how would perception of ability to conceive of other domains of time as a cognitive function change spatial awareness


SPEAKER_01:
Other dimensions of time.

I'm not sure I understand that question.


SPEAKER_00:
Other domains of time.


SPEAKER_01:
What's other domains of time?

Well, this is all a very short-term question.

It's fractions of a second.

And time outside that interval just doesn't come into it at all, really.

Does that answer the question you're asking?


SPEAKER_00:
It might.

I think it might also be pointing to our awareness of how we handle our perception of time and space.

And what does that open up or enable, for example, for our perception of space if we have a different perception or conception of time?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, that is a very deep question.

I mean, I think our perception of chronological time, long-term time,

is something completely different from more anything else in the animal kingdom.

I think most animals live in the moment.

They're aware of what's happening right now and what they're going to do right now.

And the rest just doesn't matter.


SPEAKER_00:
Whereas we exit what matters in the moments to ruminate and speculate.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, absolutely.


SPEAKER_00:
Um, well, what other,


SPEAKER_01:
directions or or ways are you hoping to take this work well one way that is particularly important i think although particularly problematic is theories of consciousness in other words consciousness most of our consciousness at any moment is consciousness of the space around us

And it seems to come from our internal Bayesian model of space around us.

So this work is very related to why we are conscious.

And there's another paper, and I'd like to give another live stream just on that subject.

So I think this gives a way forward to a theory of consciousness that can be in many ways more satisfactory than we get from purely classical neural models of the brain.


SPEAKER_00:
That's awesome.

I'm also personally very excited on the empirical insect neuroanatomy side to look.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, there are a huge number of ways of going forward.

Insects are particularly productive because you know they've got to do it with a really small number of neurons.

So it's really, there's a lot of experimental work on insects that can illuminate this question.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, absolutely.

Cool.

Yes.

The brains are fun to dissect.

You can see it transparently all there and no backstage there.

And then also this on the more transferable outside of entomology, I think the active inference

loop closure with policy selection of movements including stay go no go decisions and which way to go and then understanding how like well here's the trajectory that would have been the most information gain on resolving this location

here's the trajectory that maximized safety, not moving or something.

And then here's the trajectory that would have done some other thing.

And then being able to look at realized empirical trajectories and then break those down or look at their component loading

according to safety, visual information gain, other kinds of heuristics or impulses to understand moments or kind of fragments of trajectories like something looks to briefly resolve its uncertainty and then the overall demand to resolve uncertainty drops again and then it continues just with inertia and then maybe that's a very simple decision to make and then there's probably all kinds of cool

patterns and ways to go?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, there's a huge amount to investigate.

Another topic, by the way, is we've looked at mammals, we've looked at insects right at the opposite ends of the spectrum.

There's a whole load of stuff in between.

I think octopus and squid are particularly interesting, but there's all the other species one can look at, say, how do they do space?


SPEAKER_00:
they have unique bodies and different bodies but there's also bringing in there the question of underwater or space or a fluid media and then that and a bat flies but it has the mammalian neuroanatomy so then there could be like bird neuroanatomy with its slight differences from the mammal then there could be this question of underwater and maybe there's some mammals

that have underwater navigation maybe dolphins would be like bats but in another fluid media i hope people download the dot zip and play around so do i any last comments uh

not really no i think i've said it all thank you thank you robert well i i am greatly enjoying learning about the work and seeing about how the requirements equation scopes

a given problem setting and kind of puts a meter stick on whatever the inferential problem is, inference plus action problem is.

And then from there, the the Marian

research program is just kind of laid out.

You can pursue it from the mechanistic or from the algorithmic elements, but they all are connected through on one hand in theory, the requirements equation, and on the other hand, the empirical results that we actually see.

Yeah.

Cool.

So thank you again.


SPEAKER_01:
I come back to the Feynman.

quote Richard Feynman on his blackboard.

It said, if you can't build it, you don't understand it.

This is all about building it.


SPEAKER_00:
We can't build a bug.

Not yet.

Thank you, Robert.

See you for dot three.


SPEAKER_02:
See you.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.

## IvY4acL8YeA

SPEAKER_05:
Hello and welcome, everyone.

It's July 22nd, 2024.

This is Active Inference Guest Stream 82.3, The Projective Wave Theory of Consciousness.

Robert Warden will give a presentation and we have several others to join and comment and give their insights.

So thank you everyone for joining and Robert, please begin the presentation.

And also Robert, close the YouTube on your side.

All good.


SPEAKER_02:
stream 82.3 right i've objectively unconscious it's coming through on my loudspeaker which is a problem yeah it's all good like all good


SPEAKER_03:
okay so this is a talk about the projective wave theory of consciousness and there's an already a paper about it on archive this month so you can look at the paper if you like but let me start by describing roughly the roadmap for the talk

The projective wave theory is very closely related to the projective consciousness model, PCM, and we're fortunate to have three of the authors of that model on the call today.

But I'm going to give this talk in four different parts.

The first part is talking about data, and the idea is that any theory of consciousness has to fit the data, has to fit some data in order for us to believe it.

And so the question is, what kinds of data is there about consciousness that the theory has to fit?

And I shall be arguing that the main kind of data we have is spatial consciousness.

So that's part one of the talk.

Part two, I shall talk about the projective consciousness model, PCM.

And to my mind, the big virtue of the PCM is that it does predict, account for just that, the spatial nature of consciousness.

And in that, it's a great deal.

It does a great deal better than many neural theories of consciousness.

And I should probably pause at that point after parts one and two and have discussion about the first two points there.

But before that, I think the PCM has great strengths, but I think

in common with all neural theories of consciousness it has three problems and i shall talk about what those problems are but i shall emphasize that those problems are not specific to the pcm if you buy into the classical neural model of the brain that neurons do everything then whatever your theory of consciousness i think you're going to have these problems

And so in order to get out of those problems, we have to do something that's not in the classical neural model that assumes that neurons in the brain do everything.

So we have to add something to the PCM.

And the something we have to add is there in three.

The assumption we're going to add to it is quite a big one.

It's an assumption that there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D spatial information.

In other words, neurons don't do everything.

And then part four of the talk, I shall bring those two and three together to a projective wave theory of consciousness and talk a little about firstly, how that solves the neural problems, but secondly, how it fits the data and some more general considerations about it.

So that is the route map for the talk.

So we start off.

with what are the reasons to believe some theory, whether it's theory of consciousness or anything else.

Why do we believe it?

Basically, we believe a theory because it fits data.

And there's a complexity measure here that needs to fit more data, which you can measure in bits, if you like, than the complexity of the assumptions you put into it.

If you just put in a huge number of assumptions and fit a small amount of data, that's no use.

So there's a kind of Bayesian balance between the assumptions you put into a theory and the data it fits.

And I've illustrated the Bayesian balance, a pair of scales here, and I've measured the complexity of the theory and the amount of data it tests by a so-called zip test, which simply says you describe these things in text files, you zip them up, and you see how big they are.

So established theories in science, like the theories of physics or chemistry, have a hugely positive Bayesian balance.

They have

quite few assumptions and they account for huge amounts of data.

So how can we get to that point with the theory of consciousness?

How can a theory of consciousness produce a positive Bayesian balance between its assumptions and the data it accounts for?

So the question arises, what is the data we have to test theories of consciousness?

And there's a big problem

is well known that consciousness is a private experience so there's not much public data about it but there are several kinds of data we can use such as data about levels of consciousness alertness and and being asleep and so on uh data about quality and now they are problematic because they're private phenomena but nevertheless you can two people can agree something about similarity scales of their quality like different colors being similar or different

And the form C is the shapes of things in spatial consciousness.

And I shall argue that the main manifestation of consciousness, which we have, what we're experiencing right now, is a 3D spatial model of the world around us.

And that 3D model is very detailed and quite faithful to the real world around us.

And so that has a large information content.

Going down the list, there's conscious imagination, there is consciousness of the self, there are anomalies and illusions of consciousness, and there is the hard problem, if you like, the existence of consciousness itself.

Now, I shall argue that point C, the shape of spatial consciousness, gives us much more data to test any theory than any other type of data.

So what's the testable data in spatial consciousness?

Spatial consciousness is like a 3D model of the real world around you.

That's what you're experiencing right now.

And it has a lot of the geometry of the real world, and particularly straight lines in consciousness correspond to straight lines in the real world.

And you can test this.

I won't go into the years of how.

So this agreement between our conscious experience, which is quite information rich, and the real world around us, which is obviously information risk,

gives a lot of data to test any theory of consciousness.

And I suggest roughly it gives us thousands of bits, even in a few seconds.

And I shall suggest that no other form of data about consciousness comes anywhere close to this in terms of testable information content.

So if you really want to prove your theories right, then it's got to account for the spatial form of consciousness if you're going to believe it.

And down at the right here,

I put my contention that spatial consciousness is, if you like, the elephant in the room, consciousness theory.

So we have to consider how the brain does spatial cognition.

And all animal brains pretty much do that.

They have to understand 3D's local space for a very fundamental reason, just to control their every movement, to move every movement of their limbs.

They have to understand 3D's space around them.

And there's been huge selection pressure to do this well.

And we believe that animals do it very well.

Even insects do it quite well.

And also, it appears that most of the animal brain is devoted to that.

Now, if we assume a Bayesian hypothesis about cognition, then the way animals do that is to build a maximum likelihood 3D model of local space in their brains from their sense data.

It becomes fairly natural to expect that spatial consciousness is going to be linked to this spatial model.

And the question is, is it a purely neural model, as in classical neural models of the brain?

And if it is, how does neuron firing represent 3D space?

And this is quite a difficult problem.

And really, there are very few viable solutions to it, but I shall

switch now i shall put that problem on one side and switch to the projected consciousness model pcm which has been developed by david and his collaborator since about 2017 and it's built on the free energy principle so it's based on a bayesian model of local space in the brain and for neural for its neural process model it assumes the process model of the free energy principle

And so the PCM assumes that the brain holds a 3D projective transform model of local Euclidean space.

And the key thing is that PCM then predicts that spatial consciousness is like that model.

And this is a very good prediction.

It agrees very well with data.

For instance, the trivial fact that straight lines in consciousness are straight lines in the real world.

So the PCM has a good Bayesian balance.

I should say this is very distinctive amongst many theories of consciousness.

Very few of them talk about the spatial nature of consciousness, and if they do, they probably treat it as a bit of an afterthought.

But the PCM puts it out in the front, and I think that's a very positive feature of it.

And it has a good Bayesian balance.

And it does make various other predictions, which people have talked about in the papers.

makes predictions about illusions of consciousness, and makes predictions about predictive imagination and planning actions.

Now, I don't think those are quite as significant in the Bayesian balance in the agreement with the data as the basic agreement with the form of consciousness right now, consciousness from data.

But I shall say the PCM has three difficulties.

I shall emphasize they're not difficulties of the PCM alone.

I believe they are difficulties of any neural theory of consciousness.

I'll just list them briefly here because there's going to be a slide describing them.

The first difficulty is neural selection.

How do we pick out just those neurons which cause consciousness from all the others that don't?

And the second one is neural precision and speed.

We know that our conscious model of space is a very detailed and precise one.

Can you do that with neuron firing?

I would suggest you can't.

And the third one is a complex decoding problem that, anyway, I'll come on to that.

So I'll describe these three in a minute, but the emphasis is that they are not just problems of the PCM.

They are difficulties for any neural theory of consciousness, for instance, IIT or global neural workspace theory and so on.

So what are the three difficulties?

The neural selection problem.

Most neurons in the brain are not linked to consciousness.

We know that from cortical lesions, which don't interrupt consciousness, or the cerebellum, or Bjorn Merck has written quite extensively about this.

But neuron theories of consciousness say that the activity of some neurons causes consciousness and not others.

So the question is, how are those special neurons selected?

And as far as I know, there's no sound physical basis to pick out some neurons from all the others.

So you build in some selection assumptions into your hypothesis, but those form a debit in your Bayesian balance.

So they're a debit for any neural theory of consciousness.

The second difficulty is how do neurons represent space?

Now, there are several possible ways of having neurons representing 3D space.

You can represent 2D space, all right.


SPEAKER_05:
Can you return to sharing the screen?


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, sorry.


SPEAKER_02:
I've lost sharing, have I?

All good.


SPEAKER_03:
So how do neurons represent 3D space?

There are several ways they might do it, but they all have problems of precision and speed.

For instance, there is a Bayesian computational model of how animals build 3D internal model of space from their sense data, and this is already on one of the live

the AI live streams at this YouTube address.

But that model shows that in order to build a 3D model of space, even for a small animal like a bee, you need memory storage errors to be roughly the order of 1%, as small as that.

Whereas if you model neurons accurately, properly, they don't give you this precision because in a neuron, most theoretical models of neurons are

ideal abstract neurons whose outputs are real variables of high precision, and that's shown in the top of this picture here.

Whereas actually, neurons' outputs are spike trains, which in the short time scale gives very limited precision.

For instance, in a fifth of a second possible time scale for consciousness, you may get about 10 pulses, and that gives you a precision of only 30%.

in that time scale.

So the precision you get from neural representations is very different from what you need to build a decent 3D model or what we experience in consciousness.

And this, I think, hasn't been really spotted very much because most of the neural models that you see in the literature, they don't model spike trains.

It's difficult enough to model networks of neurons.

And so they use abstract precise neurons.

So that's the second difficulty.

How can neurons store a precise and responsive fast model of 3D space like the one we experience?

Finally, can you see that change, third difficulty?

The third difficulty is what I call the hard triangle, because conscious experience, which is C in this picture here, is a faithful, hardly distorted model of the real world.

There's the real world A and there's consciousness awareness C. But what the models we have found in the brain are two-dimensional models and very distorted models.

So there are many different models and they're highly complex encoding to get from A to B. So if you want to get back from B to C, you have to do very complex decoding to undo all the complex coding that most species brains do.

And so ABC is the hard triangle.

You have to have complex decoding assumptions in any neural theory of consciousness.

And the worst thing of that maybe is that the decoding has to be species specific.

It can't be universal decoding.

So those are the three difficulties for any neural theory of consciousness, including the PCM, I believe.

So that's where we've got to.

I've covered

topics one and two of this talk.

And now I think we'll break for any discussion or contributions.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you very much, Robert.

for your presentation up to now.

I can follow it very well.

I think you point out very important issues.

I should say, and perhaps with Ken, that from the standpoint of the PCM, even though indeed we have framed it in the context of active influence and more specifically the free energy principle, we do not necessarily

It does not necessarily entails that we buy or we endorse or we believe in the current neural network models that are used in this context.

Personally, I've been a neuroscientist for many years.

I've done a lot of electrophysiology, lesion work with human patients.

Also, I worked with rodents.

lot of functional imaging and modeling and at some point in my career i thought that i did not understand the brain well enough and i stopped doing neuroscience i stopped caring quote unquote about the brain and for us what is the most important in the pcms this point is all you said is that we can capture some aspect of this phenomenology that seem essential etc etc so personally

i have given up at this point trying to devise or figure out any you know realistic neural network models and when you take just one neuron as you said robert it's a universe you just think about how

uh receptors are up or down regulated through fast gene expression all dendritic trees and their complexities and their geometry plays a role in computation i don't believe that the spiking of the of the neurons which we often call the output of the neuron are necessarily where we should be looking at and i don't know where we should be looking at i i committed a

an odd paper a long time ago in 2015, in which I kind of said, well, I explained why I had given up hope at this point about brain science to account for that, because I think we don't understand the brain.

I think there are principles we haven't figured out yet by far.

And my guess was that

A bit like by analogy with computer science, there are layers of abstraction, mechanism of virtualization that hide the detail of the hardware, which we don't understand at all.

And so, so far, it's a very open ended thing.

So to me, what matters the most about the PCM at this point is with respect to the brain, it is neutral.

We don't know.

At this point, I have absolutely no hypothesis, except very gross anatomy hypothesis or some possible details.

But you're right, that's the hard problem.

And personally, I have given up on trying to account for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, David.

I find so much to agree with there.

And so, yeah, we don't understand what's going on in the brain.

Maybe neurons are doing something much more complicated than simple spike trains, but maybe there's also this wave.

Anyway, we'll talk about that.

Carl, Ken, do you have any comments at this stage?


SPEAKER_04:
Carl you want to go or I can if you don't mind I'll just follow up with I completely agree with what David said and I will say my own sort of approach to the problem has always been sort of agnostic about the underlying realization so I've kind of started from all you know in my own thinking anyway always from the point of view of phenomenology with some kind of

you might say general acceptance of some sort of physicalism but agnostic about the details of that physicalism so agnostic about whether it's um exactly what goes on in the brain or what level and so on um i guess i've tended to

Even though I agree you can't exclude it a priori, I've tended to kind of think, well, quantum mechanical theories are probably barking up the wrong tree.

But that's just like my gut on that.

And then I... I'm sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
Personally, Ken, at this point, I'm so confused about the brain and about the physical nature of the universe that I'm even totally open that the whole thing is quantum.

I have no idea.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, as I said, it's just sort of like my gut on that, but I can't really defend it in detail for a number of reasons.

into my own ignorance um but and i would just add that uh and i i agree i think the way you presented the pcm generally was exactly right um you did mention that we do have something to say about imagination like action planning and about um anomalies and illusions and and we

We agree with you, I think, that the main set of data we aim to capture are the spatial component of consciousness and the perspectival spatial component, like what we use projective geometry to capture.

But then we do try to, as you know, try to derive certain other...

bits of parts of the relevant data from that basis.

So accounting for illusions like the moon illusion and the Ames room illusion and accounting for imaginative action planning.

And also I should add,

some data about self-awareness so we have a paper on self-awareness in this context as well um so yeah i think that's all i got so far but this is this has been very interesting so far all right thanks again carl um how can i make any comments um no


SPEAKER_00:
I'm just enjoying this as a spectator, batting for both sides.

One comment, it seems to me that we're focusing on the distinction between

principles about how the brain makes sense of its world and the process theories that attend those principles in terms of instantiation.

And there's an agnostic approach I think you can take in relation to process theories.

So I'm interested to see how much Robert's focus will be on the process theory and the actual substrates, which

I think is interesting from the point of view of actually simulating this kind of inference and also being able to reproduce it in silico in terms of creating

a kind of artificial intelligence that has this kind of competence.

So there may be a more pragmatic focus.

I was intrigued by the previous slide, this hard triangle, where you, yeah.

Just go to it there.

Yeah.

This, yeah.

I didn't quite...

resonate with this uh i think for a start the notions of encoding and decoding for people like me would should be usefully unpacked um so everything in terms of belief updating is some kind of mapping or morphism or relationship um so i'm assuming nothing is a good word for it yeah okay so the world generates sensory inputs um and then the brain um


SPEAKER_03:
represents those inputs i mean for b you just imagine you know the visual cortex with a highly distorted version of space in it all around the fovea and so on and all the other cortical maps are highly distorted representation of space somehow you have to tram all those back into an undistorted representation so you've got to decode the encoding that's gone on i see something


SPEAKER_00:
right so the conscious awareness is still part of the brain somewhere it must come from the brain somehow i think yeah yes don't we all i see so you're using encoding and decoding a sort of um uh distorting undistorting


SPEAKER_01:
like a distorting mirror you've got undistorted but i guess it relates to carl distinction between neural neural substrate and process theory because indeed if you look at the classical sort of quote-unquote 2d maps in the cerebral cortex with your retinotopy where you see a lot of

deformation but also somatosensory cortices you think about the classical you know map of the body uh uh and you are saying well if that's the way it is kind of represented quote unquote at the level of that substrate then since it is deformed and we don't experience it that way we should somehow have a process on top of that that use

some morphism to transform this deformation.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm saying our theory of consciousness has to tell us how that unscrambling distortion happens.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, but I believe that the level of observation that we are considering here, for instance, those 2D, quote unquote, 2D, because they are not really 2D, but cortical maps, retinotopic or somatotopic or topic maps, are a very, quote unquote, low level of processing, which might be very far away from what is going on.


SPEAKER_03:
There might be some other super representation somewhere, but not found yet.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and it might not be visible at the level of the anatomy.

Well, yeah, those are alternatives.


SPEAKER_03:
I agree.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So sorry, Carl, I interrupted, but I wanted to make this precision too.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, no, that clarifies it.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
But Carl, I mean, I think we can all be agnostic about certain things in the process model.

I think you and I at least are not agnostic about Bayesianism.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I would put the notion of sentience of the kind we're talking about as a process of basing belief updating, I put that at the sort of principle level, at the mechanics that doesn't commit to

an infrastructure or a realization or a process that that realizes that uh um you know that kind of principle that kind of mechanics um so i think the spatial wave theory

is really a commitment to a process theory um that could you know happily accommodate basing belief updating and its particular application the context of spatial perception and projected you know the projected consciousness model you're muted um oh yes


SPEAKER_02:
Good.

Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
So moving on.

So we've done one and two, and what we're going to do in three is add something to the PCM.

And the thing we're going to add is not a little thing.

It's the assumption, the hypothesis that neurons don't do everything, but there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D spatial information.

So that's what I'm going to talk about next.

So here's the hypothesis.

There is a wave in the brain that represents 3D space.

So it assumes there is some nearly spherical region of the brain with a diameter D, and it holds waves which couples the neurons.

And there the sphere is illustrated, and a couple of waves, wavelength lambda 2, that green wave, and wavelength lambda 1, a shorter wavelength, that red wave.

And those waves represent things in space, and they represent the red

thing R1 and the green thing R2.

So there's a kind of inverse relationship there.

The shorter the wavelength, the longer the distance to the thing that's being represented.

But obviously, if it's a spherical region, you can have waves in any direction.

So you can represent any direction and any distance up to a maximum, which is defined by the minimum wavelength.

So that wave can represent lots of different things.

And the hypothesis is that that wave acts as a working memory for space.

It's really like a hologram.

Now, one issue with that is that if you want to represent objects at very large distances away, then you get into wavelengths that are too short.

So that's why you may need a projective transform of space to pull in those long distances to be able to represent them on the brain.

on the wave.

By the way, the evidence for this wave is going to be described in another YouTube live stream, which we're making next week.

It's going to be at that address.

So how well does a wave-based spatial memory form?

It can represent approximately d of a lambda cubed independent positions, which is quite a lot.

And it can give you spatial precision, the order of lambda over d. And the point is,

that this can easily be 1% or better, which is the precision you need.

So there are significant benefits to wave storage.

It has high capacity.

You can put many objects in it.

It has high precision.

It can be fast.

And it has low spatial distortion.

It is just like a hologram.

And it's a very simple and direct representation of space.

a spoiler looking ahead to part four of the talk is that this is very much like spatial consciousness.

Question, is there any evidence for such a wave?

I think there is evidence and there's three kinds of evidence.

First two comes from brain anatomy because there are spherical regions in the brain which are very well suited to hold this wave.

In the mammals there is the thalamus and that's shown in green on the left of the picture and you see it's approximately spherical and

that is very suitably connected for holding spatial information.

It's connected to all the sense data and it's connected to all the bits of cortex that work out what to do with the sense data.

And similarly in the insect brain, there is a central body in the very center of it that is approximately spherical and it's very well preserved shape in all insect species.

So those are both pieces of evidence for a wave in the brain.

There is a place for it.

So I believe there are three lines of evidence for a wave.

One is the computational neuroscience, which I've mentioned before, that spatial cognition is a very important thing, but neural memory for it is too imprecise and too slow.

Whereas a wave storage model can possibly overcome these problems.

So that's the yellow evidence.

The evidence from the insect central body that is nearly round, very central, very well connected.

And there's evidence from the mammalian thalamus.

It's also round and well-connected, but there's also what I call a smoking gun for a wave in the thalamus that if you don't assume a wave, the anatomy of the thalamus doesn't make sense, but I won't go into that in this talk.

So together, I believe these give quite strong support for the wave hypothesis.

In fact, they give it a probability of 0.5 approximately, even if you try and weight the odds against it.

As I say, you can see the

discussion of this in another YouTube live stream we're about to make.

So then that's on from part three to part four of talk.

Assume there is a wave in the brain which holds the near-projective transform of 3D space.

And this wave is serving a very essential role to understand space, to control all movements for any animal.

And the hypothesis simply is the wave is the origin of consciousness.

that neurons have nothing to do with consciousness at all.

It comes entirely from the wave.

This solves three problems, the three problems that I outlined before.

Firstly, the neural selection problem, no selection problem because neurons have nothing to do with consciousness.

The precision and speed problem, the wave has sufficient precision and speed to do it.

And the decoding problem, the coding in the wave is just a Fourier transform.

So it's a very simple encoding

And there's a very simple decoding to give you back conscious experience.

So it has solved those three problems of neural theories.

But the main thing is that spatial thought, like the PCM, preserving the merit of the PCM, the spatial form of consciousness agrees very well with our conscious experience.

It has to be projected because we need the projected transform to pull in objects from very large distances

to represent them by a minimum wavelength.

So in summary, the projective wave theory has a positive Bayesian balance.

It doesn't have any nasties about it, and it agrees very well with the main source of data about consciousness.

So just some aspects of this theory.

What is the physical nature of the wave?

A big objection might be we've never seen the wave, because I believe

It's probably not an electromagnetic wave or an electromagnetic field.

And the main reason I believe that is that electromagnetic fields on their own don't store information for the time periods we need to store information.

And now electromagnetic fields might be part of the answer, but I think they're not the whole answer.

And the big question then is why have we not detected this wave in the brain if it's been there all these years?

I think the reason for that is if there is a wave representing space,

We would expect it to evolve to have very low intensity, so its energy consumption is very small.

And having that low intensity, we simply haven't known how to look for it.

Now, coming to quantum possibilities, the wave might be a coherent quantum excitation, and there's increasing evidence that quantum effects do have a role in biology.

And it might even be a boson sun condensate, a BEC.

Now, those examples of those are superconductors and superfluids.

They're a very rare state in nature.

But the key thing about a BEC is a superconductor can hold information for unlimited time.

So it would be good for memory.

And they're a very rare and distinctive state of matter.

And so if you assume that consciousness comes from them, you don't get into a trap of panpsychism.

Or it might not be a quantum effect, because I think that this question is entirely open.

So we'll set that on one side, and that's future exploration.

There's an issue about the evolution of consciousness.

We know that our consciousness is like the real world.

It's very like the real world.

And the question is, why is this?

And you think, well, it must have evolved that way, because there's some need for it to be like the real world.

But in neural theories, there's a problem.

Because neural computation in the brain, the classical neural model, is classical dynamics, not quantum physics, and is local.

And so consciousness is a non-physical, non-local effect, and they don't have any effect on neurons firing.

So the result is that consciousness in a neural theory has no causal effect on fitness.

That means there's no selection pressure on it to make it the way it is.

In a neural theory of consciousness, we're driven to this slightly awkward conclusion that the special form of consciousness that we have is just a bit of an accident.

That seems very unlikely.

Whereas in the projective wave theory, there is a good evolutionary reason for consciousness being like it is.

That is that 3D spatial cognition is very important

Wave is an essential part of it, so the wave has been shaped by evolution, and it's been shaped to be just like the real world, because that's the best way of controlling movement.

So consciousness then is determined by the wave, and that means consciousness has evolved to be like the real world.

So the wave theory solves another problem there.

Finally, the unity of consciousness.

You may ask this question occasionally.

Why do I only have one consciousness and not several parallel consciousnesses?

And this also is something of a difficulty in neural theories because we have plenty of neurons in the brain to have many parallel consciousnesses.

And brains can do some things in massive parallelism.

And if we had multiple parallel consciousness, it might be useful, for instance, for parallel planning of action to see which one worked.

That's a difficulty for neural theories.

The wave theory doesn't have this difficulty because it accounts for the unity of consciousness.

There's only one wave in the brain.

That is the source of consciousness.

So there can only be one consciousness.

I think I'm onto the last slide now, pretty much the last slide.

If this theory is taken seriously, it makes consciousness into a scientific problem rather than a philosophical problem.

Because a wave in the brain,

If a wave in the brain is the key to understanding consciousness, well, if there's no wave, then this theory is wrong.

Get about it.

If there is a wave, I think there are very strong reasons to link it to consciousness because it has such a good fit to consciousness.

So whether or not the wave exists, that's a scientific question.

It's not a question for philosophy.

And I think there's a good prospect of answering it in the next 10 years.

So in 10 years' time, either this theory will be the only theory of consciousness,

or it will be wrong and forgotten.

I think that's a virtue in a theory.

So, finally, last slide on the hard problem, David Chalmers' hard problem.

The projected wave theory doesn't solve that problem.

What I'd say about that is all science has hard problems.

There's the hard problem of consciousness.

Why is consciousness linked to matter?

There are hard problems in physics, like what is space-time, or what is the most fundamental particle?

Or the hard problem of cosmology, why is there a universe?

So hard problems just don't have an answer.

Scientists, we're like children, keeping asking why.

Say, why this?

Why that?

And we can go on asking why for as long as we like.

So, for instance, for fundamental particles, we thought there was matter.

We thought there were atoms.

We got to protons.

We got to quarks.

And we keep going on, and we'll never get the final answer.

But we still do science.

So I'm not too worried about the hard problem, consciousness.

So that is all.

And I've just laid out a few questions one might want to discuss in the remaining time.


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe you could share your slide again so we can see the question if you have them on the slide.


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry, is it not sharing now?


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, I see the slide still.

Yeah, so you can leave it.

Maybe check your view, David.

And then you can leave that up and we can have a panel discussion.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, thanks a lot.

Those who are here, Ken and Carl and David, please feel free to comment.

And also people will write some questions in the chat and I'll read one in if you pause.

But anyone here who'd like to give a reflection or any comments, that would be awesome.

Could I go ahead?


SPEAKER_04:
Can you hear me?

Yeah.

So, uh, if, if I may, I, I, I basically agree with what you say about the hard pro just to take the very last thing that you mentioned about the hard problem.

And this is why earlier on, when you said that, um, you had kind of a list of sort of, um, you know, when you're I, the idea of the Bayesian balance for theories of consciousness, and you mentioned the existence of consciousness as itself, something that might be a problem for all

neuronal theories of consciousness i think you did that and on the slide too yeah yeah so i i agree i think it's a problem for any theory of consciousness even the kind of um more metaphysical theories that people who reflect like chalmers and others panpsychists who reflect on the hard problem a certain way end up with you can actually raise the same set of questions for them

so there's really no progress there in my opinion so in other words if you take the hard problem as a kind of indication that um well consciousness couldn't be physical or or either that or the physical world itself must just be consciousness which is kind of the two directions they they go there i think that's kind of misguided i mean we

we have to sort of accept that our ability to penetrate cognitively

a priori into the nature of the cosmos is is limited so our the best we can do is make models and you know based on the phenomenology and try to arrive at a model that would give us some kind of neural or physical to speak more broadly physical

Testable, you know hypothesis hypotheses we can test about the physical world what we think realizes consciousness and it seems to me like that's exactly what you're doing and that's What I would think is right too, but I did want to ask you when you say that No neurons are linked to consciousness in your own model Do you mean

Maybe I just don't understand exactly.


SPEAKER_03:
They're not linked directly to the consciousness.


SPEAKER_04:
But they're somehow involved in the realization of the wave.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, they are.

Absolutely.

They're controlling the wave.

They're setting up the wave.

They're all in the cortex.

They're using sense data to fix the wave.

And it's the wave that makes consciousness.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

And on the issue of unity, well, so suppose we identify this type of wave.

I mean, it's at least, you know, conceivable that we would find multiple such waves.

Is it conceivable?


SPEAKER_03:
I think the evidence in the thalamus and the central body is one wave.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
And I think one wave is what you need to understand one space around you.


SPEAKER_04:
okay so but if you found multiple such waves oh yeah absolutely that would be an issue yeah okay i mean would you conclude that there must be multiple consciousnesses then in a single brain or would you would you think that the theory is wrong no i would have a selection problem just like neuron theories have a selection problem selecting neurons i'd have a problem selecting which wave was conscious i see

rather than conclude that there are multiple you want to avoid that and my experience is i don't have multiple consciences yes right but that might just be because only one of them gets to report yeah absolutely you know like like the way they you know i know it's debatable but the way they um

often interpreted the split-brain cases coming out of... Yeah, good question, good question.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, I say one wave, but we have two thalami, so the assumption there is that those waves are linked, and perhaps in split-brain they don't get linked.


SPEAKER_02:
Hmm, okay.


SPEAKER_03:
I think two thalami have one wave in them, but that's a detail.


SPEAKER_04:
I see.

And then when it comes to the kind of wave, like...

so you you don't think it's an electromagnetic wave uh you you you think it might be a bose einstein condenser that's that's a hypothesis i think that karen's uh smith once uh it's been around for some years yeah alexander karen smith in a and the book uh that's the yeah not not the book on the origin the famous book on the origin of life but he wrote a book on uh consciousness back in the 90s i think um yeah there was michael lockwood as well in the 80s i think

It's a long history.

Okay.

So how when you say that you think we'll be able to probe this within the next ten years, I mean, could you sort of sketch how that might go, how we might be?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I mean, this is probing the idea of the wave.

As I say, I think that there's three pieces of evidence.

There's neural models that you can't build decent neural models.

There is the thalamus, and there is the insect central body.

I think we can go further on each one of those.

We can test them.

We can test the thalamus ideas much better using connectome data.

We can test the central body using connectome data, and we can test the computational models by just trying to build them and see if we're getting it.

so there is science to be done to falsify this hypothesis and it may succeed in falsifying it okay but how would you measure uh such condensate i mean if you want to be able to demonstrate the existence ideally you'd like to actually directly detect it i i think it's a bit like when pauli in the 1930s

predicted the neutrino, he thought it was absolutely impossible to detect neutrinos, and it took 25 years to find it.

And I think it'll take a long time to really find this wave in the brain, because it's very low intensity, probably, and because we just don't know how to look for it.

And I think we have to do the biophysics until we have a convincing case for, ah, it's this kind of wave, and then we can build a detector.

But until then,

I think we won't detect it like neutrino or like dark matter, similar thing predicted theoretically years ago, but still not detected.


SPEAKER_05:
I'll read a question from the live chat.

Okay.

andrea val wrote thanks for sharing such interesting ideas i wonder how the pcm or 3d model can explain or deal with the un slash consciousness of emotions so where is affect and such in this kind of spatialized model yeah so you want to do in the pcm first david


SPEAKER_01:
If it's okay, Robert, maybe you have read some of our recent work on that, but I have a specific answer to that question.

Yeah, you go first.

Yeah, sorry about that.

Well, one thing that we realized working with that particular geometry is it transforms information in the sense of information in space.

You can think about distribution in space, for instance, that are going to be changed by projective transformation in a manner that affects directly entropy.

So if something is very far,

And you have some uncertainty about the localization of these things.

So there is a probability function that represents that uncertainty about the localization of that thing.

And there is only one thing in your field of consciousness to simplify the problem.

Then the entropy of the whole space, if you consider the whole 3D space and some scalar on it that would represent probabilities, is very small.

Whereas when you get closer, for instance, by imagination, so projective transformation that anticipate action, you get the object closer and you transform also the information, the variance, if you wish, of your distribution, so it becomes broader.

So the entropy increases, actually, as an effect of projective transformation on the distribution of information.

So how does that relate to emotion?

What we realized is that

it can account for some drives that are related to exploration or exploratory behavior or search behavior to reduce uncertainty or maximize information.

And that just does that.

So basically the projective transformation

by in virtue of making probabilities function in space change their shape as a function of perspective taking if you wish until or induce a drive to approach or avoid things or in in this context to approach

to approach behavior either through imagination or through actual behavior, because that will maximize information by increasing entropy of the object and you have more details.

So that's something that we wrote a paper that is currently under review in biological cybernetics about that with Grégoire Sergent-Pertuis as first author, who is a bright mathematician.

and we can do a demonstration and actually derive theorems about that and also simulations that show interesting behaviors that depend on projective parameters that will show that the behavior of the agent depending on the parameter will be more focused so they will tend to always approach one object because they are driven by this anticipation of increasing information through projective transformation

but with other parameters or values of the parameters.

On the contrary, they start now oscillating between objects.

They start losing focus as if they were kind of ADHD.

So there is a deep link between, let's say,

the evaluation of space the appraisal of space the drives that are that unfold from this information and the behaviors that you have for instance approaching and that geometry that very geometry we are talking about yield that type of thing so here we are talking about what is typically described as epistemic emotion basically curiosity so

we have natural curiosity and part of it that drives behaviors is a result of the very geometry that represent information in a praise according to that theory we i cannot enter into the detail on that but you can also look on papers that we wrote in

what was that 2022 in the journal of theoretical biology in which we use little robots to demonstrate adaptive and maladaptive behaviors with principles also derived from the geometry and the free energy principle or something equivalent to get a wealth of

affective behavior of approach avoidance, but also social cognition.

We can kind of simulate social anxiety.

We obtain joint attention behavior as a result of mutual perspective taking.

and there are a lot of things we could account that we can use in this model in this framework to account for emotion there is a lot of work ahead but we believe that there is and we have good reason to believe there is a deep link between space and emotion that's actually called aesthetics that consciousness is a form of aesthetics where space and emotion are untangled and that we can


SPEAKER_03:
fairly well account for many phenomena that relate to emotion and behavior through this model but that's sorry for the long talk that's great shall i get my my answer is very much along the same lines that emotion and space are deeply linked um in the wave model i mean the project

The model of space contains all of space, the external space and the internal space of the body.

And an important part of emotions is feelings in the body, and they are part of your conscious awareness, part of the wave model or projection model, just like the others.

And so basically, the PW theory, and I think the PCM says

All consciousness is spatial.

We have qualia, but they exist in space.

You hear words, you experience colors, you experience all of those, and you experience feelings, all of them in space.

So if you look at all the components of emotion, human emotion, for instance, the words we say to ourselves and the feelings we have in our bodies,

They are all represented in that conscious space.

So human emotion is a complex story, which perhaps we don't want to go into, but basically it comes down to the way we experience it is in that model of space.


SPEAKER_01:
and if i may i would have that if you take the standpoint of pure phenomenology and you ask yourself when i experience an emotion for instance deep anxiety or fear something very intense that is very salient you can ask yourself how much of that phenomenology of that experience is actually

quote-unquote reducible to some spatial experience things for instance you know the experience of the body with the heart that starts pounding in your chest and you feel it stronger your lungs that change their you know you breathe faster for instance and you can feel that movement in your body and all of that is spatial what you feel in your gut or your intestine get kind of

stretch or whatever you, we have metaphors, but actually a lot of the details of the phenomenology of emotion of feelings, let's say, uh, I believe is actually spatial, but it's overlooked.

People don't think about it, but in particular about bodily awareness, there is a lot of spatial stuff going on here.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I agree.

Um, um, mindful meditation talk a lot about space and talk a lot about the body.

I think they.

put emotion in the right place.


SPEAKER_05:
Carl or Ken want to add anything or I can look for another question in the live chat.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I have one question.

So, I mean, your current hypothesis is that this wave is realized in the thalamus.

Is that right?

That's right, yeah.

Okay, so that's sort of, would, you know, there's this kind of debate about whether or not consciousness is cortical or...

or subcortical, so this would definitely be on the subcortical.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of sense in the global workspace theory, and they were talking originally about a workspace involving the thalamus and the cortex.

I think the consciousness really comes from the thalamus integrating all that spatial information.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah so it is down so when the this follow-up uh but yeah that's fine with me uh frankly but the follow-up question is um well it's not exactly a follow-up to that it's more a general question about your way of thinking about it how

I mean, I know maybe you can't really answer this until we have a more specific hypothesis about exactly what kind of wave it is, but could you say something generally about how the wave integrates with, or what's the right way to put it, recruits the kind of computational apparatus of the brain so that you end up, you decide to

uh, Oh, I'm going to reach out, you know, yay far and grab this, this bottle.

How does the, um,


SPEAKER_03:
how does you know computationally speaking how does the wave integrate yeah i think that's a very good question and could have a very long answer but basically um the wave integrates information from all the sensitive so from your hands from your ears from your eyes all that information goes through the cortex and cortex decides where it's coming from and

broadcasts signals back to the thalamus, and the thalamus wave integrates all those signals together to produce the Bayesian best model of what's happening at this moment based on touch, proprioception, hearing, sound, hearing, vision, and so on.

So the computation, it's an integration of many sources of information, possibly in a cycle between the thalamus and the cortex.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, but if you need to

you know, for example, program and action.

So you've, that's kind of the, you got your sensory, the integration of all your sensory information.

Now you need to program an action.

How do, and maybe this is just my ignorance.

How do waves, how can waves be used

in a way to generate programming of an action and then give it back to your neurons?


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, I've only got beginnings of answers to that, but basically a wave is very good for representing 3D geometry and for calculating displacements.

I know where my hand is.

I know my coffee cup is.

So the wave helped me calculate the displacement, which way I have to move my hand to pick up the coffee cup.

So it's that kind of spatial calculation that the wave is always helping us do just to move our limbs.


SPEAKER_01:
I have a follow up question on that, if I may.

You can.

Do you mind?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, no, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
You invoked earlier Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform, so at least 3D Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform in order to do the encoding and decoding to move from the wave to the neural substrate back and forth.

Of course, as you know, there is a limit in resolution

when you do a fourier transform uh you have the uncertainty principle uh that rules the in limits resolution that you we can have of course it depends on the number of samples i mean there are a lot of arithmetics behind it that you know you can be more more and more precise as you have more and more bits of encoding if you wish um so uh you you say that you know neural classical neural theory is like

build upon substrate that lack enough precision in spatial resolution, for instance, to account for our experience.

Would you think that in the context of a wave theory, the type of uncertainty principle that are attached to it could cause a problem of resolution too, or that it's the granularity?


SPEAKER_03:
There is a problem, yeah.

There is a problem in resolution.

I alluded to it in the slides.

That is that if you've got a minimum wavelength lambda and a diameter of the sphere d, the maximum precision is lambda over d. And that can't be infinite precision.

So that's the uncertainty principle.

But the idea of the Fourier transform is not that something in the brain does a Fourier transform.

It is the fundamental bridging law for consciousness does the Fourier transform.

It says that consciousness is a Fourier transform of the wave, full stop.

And Fourier transform is there in fundamental laws of nature, like quantum mechanics, for instance.

So it's saying that this is a fundamental law of nature, just like quantum mechanics says momentum is a Fourier transform position.

So the bridging law for consciousness says the form of consciousness is a Fourier transform of the wave.


SPEAKER_05:
I'll make a short comment, or Carl, do you want to?


SPEAKER_02:
After you.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Yeah, just so thank you for the presentation.

And it's really interesting on many levels.

First, you and the paper goes into more detail on this.

You lay out what your priors are and kind of the dependency structure to actually reach at least an estimate of probabilities, which is really interesting.

It gives a lot of opportunities for people to dig in.

and say yeah i think that's ten percent likely or no it's zero this is not possible and kind of close off a branch of inquiry um and also this discussion here about uh the algorithmic and the substrate realization interaction with the substrate um and even this poly computation idea of of the observer's model of what's happening in a process and kind of like the dark matter there like the observer might suggest that there's a cryptographic process

though they couldn't decode it.

And then that would have an entropy distribution that wouldn't be distinguishable in the absence of the decryption from a noise, but it would be like still a hypothesis kept alive.

And you could say, I think it's a 1% chance of this being the case.

One thought is how high precision really is the spatial generative model in that there could be visual upscaling

We know there's attention play to make the periphery look sharp and have color vision.

And so it's possible that, especially for like distant objects, small objects, that they could be bundled

and just seen as an assembly, as a larger object, if they're touching like the car body and the wheel.

And then the same way that in the periphery, color and visual attention seem to give this extreme, like, wow, that's like exactly this angle if you were to go over there with a protractor.

But that could be, as we're sort of seeing with diffusion and generative AI models, that could be quite a low resolution structural

inference followed by a just compatible visual realization that that also and then just last comment really interesting to explore how does evolution and intergenerational change shape the substrate that the sense data wash over so that non-stationary stable states whether they're rate encoding of neuron whether glial electro


SPEAKER_03:
and all these other even potentially more exotic options how are those stabilized wow you you i mean those are real questions to investigate particularly the precision of our conscious experience and how much is quotes and illusion

But I personally think that if you look at something which is a straight line, you experience it as a straight line with some kind of precision that's of the order of 1%.

A deviation of 1% from a straight line would show.

And so that's a lower bound on the precision of your model.

But again, there can be lots of discussion about this.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, interesting.

Karl, any thoughts?


SPEAKER_00:
Just a few sort of practical and specific questions.

So the nature of this wave, if I wanted to model it, I mean, are we talking about a standing wave?

Are we talking about a soliton?

Are we talking about spherical harmonics on a

on the surface of the um the thalamus are we talking about you know what what kind of basis set might i might might i use for for this kind of wave even before asking questions about what what the wave amplitude actually means what so what what's the functional methodical form of this way uh very good questions whether it's a standing wave or a moving wave


SPEAKER_03:
I don't know, the nice thing about a Bose-Einstein condensate is that it acts like a

long-lived quantum mechanical wave function in other words it has phase which can be detected and it preserves phase for long times and the wave might have to preserve phase in order to represent positions if you have a standing wave like cos theta in some direction in this sphere then there's an ambiguity it represents plus

a direction and the minus direction and what happens to the minus direction so i would rather have phase in the wave like a Bose-Einstein condensate but they're very deep questions and i don't know the answers i mean we could start modeling and see what happens just propose some answers basically you just need a spherical volume that holds a wave excitation with a certain maximum wave vector

And we could try out standing waves, moving waves and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
What would differentiate a condensate from a formulation in terms of a time dependent scrolling a wave equation?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think your time-dependent Schrodinger wave, as everybody knows, the problem with quantum in the brain is that decoherence smashes it in 10 to the minus 20 seconds.

But that doesn't happen to a Bose-Einstein condensate.

A Bose-Einstein condensate is a long-lived quantum state.

And so that's an ordinary Schrodinger equation.

Decoherence is going to smash you in no time at all, unless you have some incredibly clever insulation like in a quantum computer.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

I mean, lifting from the microscopic to the macroscopic, I mean, that would suggest that you need very, very low temperatures, thermodynamically speaking.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, nobody's observed a B, C at room temperature yet, but we've got close.

And the idea is that nature might be cleverer than we are.


SPEAKER_05:
one angle perhaps from the quantum fep from from carl and chris fields and others is and so what i heard in the quant in the basis set question carl was um this brain region that hosts the functionality or a core aspect of the functionality like one option is it is like the the the wave is represented inside of that sphere like

just there's probably multiple ways even that could happen but it's like a little reconstruction wave but symbolized another option would be like a holograph the representation of space is encoded on the interface of that region with other regions

And so that kind of surface is maintained and stabilized and has information flowing through it.

And then there wouldn't necessarily be something in the middle, but it'd be more like a ripple on a surface, which was the basis set question.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, that is very interesting because in the thalamus, there is the thalamic reticular nucleus, TRN, which is a thin skin around the surface of the thalamus.

And you could just say that is holding the surface wave.

And the wave is projected inside from the surface.


SPEAKER_00:
It would be useful to engage Chris Fields here.

There are two very distinct uses of the word holographic here.

You could be referring to the holographic principle.

Yeah.

whereby all the information on the bulk, on the inside, say, of the thalamus was on the surface, on the reticular nucleus of the thalamus, for example, or just on the surface, in one sense.

And that is what the rest of the brain sees and possibly consciousness sees.

But that's a very different use of the notion of a holographic projection using constructive and destructive interference to encode things.

So then you're absolutely right.

My question was really searching, you know, to distinguish.

Are we talking about a wave function?

in the thalamus are we talking about application of the holographic principle to the classical information on the surface of some bulk that was the thalamus and you could then argue if you if you wanted to that the bulk which can never be observed from the outside unless you are the thalamus you never know what's happening on the inside you could only observe what's what's on the surface

that would be a different notion of a wave theory that would certainly be consistent with quantum information theory and also consistent with Crisfield's inner screen hypothesis that could be spatialised and endowed with, in virtue of the fact that on the holographic screen itself, on the surface,

there can only be classical information and that information can now be cast in terms of classical Bayesian inference.

But it also relates to, I repeat, to Crisfield's inner screen hypothesis, which is

know if you like taking quantum information theoretic principles uh and trying to apply them to uh to consciousness that eludes the problem of um the of applying

quantum mechanics that is only relevant at the very small scale or for very precise or low temperature systems.

If you want to apply that kind of maths to macroscopic phenomena, then you have to apply it in a scale invariant context.

And I think quantum information theory would certainly do that.

So yes, I was exactly sort of trying to probe, are we, is PW,

the Bose-Einstein condensate variant or alternative version of the projective wave.

is that committed to quantum mechanics, or is it really an expression of condensate-like dynamics in the context of quantum information theory?

And if it is, does it live on a holographic screen, or does it live in the bulk?

And if it lives in the bulk, what are these wave functions over?

So these are the practical questions I was trying to get at.


SPEAKER_03:
Very interesting questions, and it's all to play for.

I have an open mind about them, but my feeling is that the BEC is a way of getting past this decoherence argument from Tegmark and others that neurons have to be classical.

And the BEC, it does work very well as a memory.

That's the practical point of it.

Working memory, I think, is what you need for space.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Perhaps each can give a last round of thought, like, where do they feel this takes them?

Or what are they looking forward to?

And Ken, then David, and then Carl, then Robert.


SPEAKER_04:
i yeah i don't have anything new dad just that i find this really interesting and i remember um reading uh karen smith's book kind of arguing that the bows and bows einstein condensates might be might be important for understanding consciousness and thinking that among the quantum mechanical hypotheses i like that one the best so

But as I said earlier, I just sort of have this kind of bias, but I'm totally willing to be talked out of it.

And yeah, the reason I mean, I don't want to go into the details, but it I think Karen Smith's concern was about the unity of consciousness primarily and also kind of made the case that, yeah, as you were suggesting that maybe maybe

as you put it, nature is cleverer than we are, and there's some way to realize that Bose-Einstein condense it in the brain without the decoherence issue.

But anyway, just to say this is all very, very fascinating to me, and I am happy to continue the discussion next week, right?

Isn't it next week?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Ken.

And for my part, yes, also looking forward to continuations of the discussion.

My direction of questioning will be something on the lines that I think both Kenneth and David alluded to, which is the link between spatial waves in the brain and the projective geometry

that they speak to and the information geometry that underwrites um belief updating and the basic mechanics that that um inherit from from the free energy principle uh be it classical mechanics classical information processing or um the you know looking at um

using quantum information theory to you know to read um read belief updating i'm not sure i'm going to get any answers but that's what i'd be interested in hearing more about and the process if we haven't talked about mortal computation yet so we need to talk about mortal computation oh yes david any last thoughts well this sort of a


SPEAKER_01:
of a man who is 50 now and feels that the more he learns, the less he knows.

This was predicted in all the books I had read in my youth.

And so I'm all open to that complex universe.

I certainly believe that nature is cleverer than I am, for sure.

And I find that fascinating.

I like the rationale.

It's not like

You know, there is a lot of stuff about quantum mechanics and the brain and consciousness that to me has always sounded wishy-washy, if not completely wacko.

But I came back a bit from that.

I had a lot of, like Ken, priors, negative priors about it.

I remember once in Tucson, Arizona at the famous conference about the science of consciousness.

There were this bunch of guys who called themselves, they were German, the Quantum Consciousness Academy and they were all dressed in black and they are all, you know, headset and microphone like that and they were like,

speaking nonsense like a cult.

But I found that very fascinating because I used to like this conference back in the day when it was very psychedelic.

And I come back to that because my ignorance

I'm becoming aware more and more of my own ignorance.

I said, well, why not?

And definitely, I think that maybe Carl can try to do that.

If we could get Chris Field in the next call, he would certainly be among us, the most competent.

I tried to get Grégoire Sergent-Pertuis to the call, but he was not available.

He's a very bright mathematician, and he mastered quantum mechanics like if it was, you know, I don't know.

It's nothing for him.

or daniel benka would be the best also with gregoire but i'm afraid i won't be able to have them here but i think it would be very useful to have some people like that who definitely know more than me about those things and chris might be interested to join i don't know but looking forward to the next uh to the next discussion one correction they were swiss david they were they weren't they weren't they weren't they weren't


SPEAKER_04:
what they were Swiss they were Swiss black I think yes they kind of look like people from the Matrix like oh they were Swiss they were not German they were Swiss yeah and they had a they had a leader they were always in contact with super hot wow okay


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, please, Robert, and we'll contact Chris, but go for the last one.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you for all your contributions.

That's been really fascinating.

I think the virtue of this theory is that it is falsifiable.

In other words, if there's no wave in the brain, forget it.

This theory is wrong.

And that's exactly the question we're going to be looking at next week.

I look forward to having your contributions.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Thank you all.

See you at 16 UTC on July 29th.

Okay.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Bye.

## zqOcywx40n8

SPEAKER_03:
hello and welcome everyone this is active inference guest stream number 82.4 on july 29th 2024 we are continuing this series of presentations and discussions with robert warden and friends so today we'll be discussing assessment of the brain wave hypothesis thank you robert and everyone else for joining so please for the presentation okay um this talk is about


SPEAKER_05:
a hypothesis that we've had previous live streams about the hypothesis is that there is a wave in the brain.

And this talk is assessing the likelihood of that being true, basically.

And so if you want to see the previous talks, which one of which was about the link between the wave and consciousness, then you can follow this link here to an actual inference web page.

So what I'm going to do in this talk is firstly try and describe to you what the wave hypothesis is,

And secondly, in point two, give some of the evidence, which I think points towards there being a wave in the brain and some of the evidence against it.

Now, the question then arises, we've got different lines of evidence,

How do we combine those lines of evidence to make some overall estimate of how likely it is that there is a wave in the brain?

And so what I do in point three, stage three, is an overall Bayesian assessment of the probability that there is this wave.

And the answer I come to is about 0.5 of the probability.

The detailed number doesn't matter.

What matters is that it's not a tiny probability.

In other words, we can't just dismiss this wave hypothesis out of hand.

We need to think seriously about what it might mean for the brain if there is a wave.

And at that point four, we will break for discussion and feedback from people on the call.

And after point four, we'll go on to discuss possible future tests of the wave hypothesis in five.

And finally, after five,

further discussion again.

So that's the plan of the talk roughly.

And the first part is to describe what the wave hypothesis is.

So wave hypothesis says that there is some region of the brain which is approximately round in which there are waves going in all three directions.

And there's a round region shown with a couple of waves.

And these waves represent objects in space.

The long wavelength wave, lambda 2, the green one, represents an object at r2, a small distance.

And the red wave, with shorter wavelength, represents an object at longer distance.

So that is the hypothesis that there is this wave region in the brain and neurons coupled to the wave as transmitters and receivers.

So a wave acts as a kind of working memory for a 3D model of space.

and all the models around the animal in space at the time.

So that, in essence, is the wave hypothesis.

But the important thing about it is how well would a wave-based spatial memory perform?

And you do some elementary maths.

The number of waves you can get in this round region is approximately, if there's some minimum wavelength, which I call lambda min,

then the number of waves you can get in the space is d of a lambda cubed, roughly.

So that's quite a lot of things you can represent in the wave.

And the spatial precision you can get is of the order of lambda min over d. And that can be quite small.

So the benefits of this wave storage are you can get high precision.

And that, I claim, you can't get out of neurons.

You can get high capacity to represent lots of different objects.

You get low spatial distortion.

And generally, it is a very simple and direct physical representation of 3D space.

It really acts like a hologram.

So the question is, is there any evidence that there is such a wave in the brain?

And I think there are three main pieces of evidence.

The first one comes from the mammalian thalamus, and the second one comes from the central body of the insect brain.

Now, the thalamus is shown in the left, in green for three mammals,

The point about the thalamus is it's approximately round, so it's well suited to hold a weight, and it has all the right connections to hold a representation of space.

It has all the sense data coming in, pretty much all the sense data, and it has connections to all the cortical regions that are making sense of that sense data.

So there are more specific reasons about the thalamus, but I'll come to those later.

So that's why the thalamus is a likely candidate holding the wave.

And similarly, in insects, there's a central body of the insect brain, which is a small part of the center of the insect's brain, which its shape is remarkably preserved across all insect species, and it's nearly round.

The central body, like the thalamus, is well suited to hold a wave, and it's connected, has all the right neural connections to hold a representation of space.

So those are the first two pieces of evidence.

Now, the third line of evidence comes from building neural computational models.

And it's a thing that I think has not been much remarked upon.

3D spatial cognition is very fundamental.

It's the first thing an animal has to do to understand the space around it.

in order just to move.

Now, I've tried building 3D models of space at David Marr's level too.

And the point is that to build a model of space in the brain, it has to be fairly precise, approximately 1%.

And you can see this because vision and other sense data is fairly precise.

And there'd be no point in getting that precise sense data if you didn't make a fairly precise model of space out of it.

However, it's very difficult to do that with neurons because in a fifth of a second, which is approximately the time an animal has to have to construct his model of space, a typical neuron spike train has only about 10 spikes in it.

And so this can represent a real number such as a dimension in space with a precision of approximately square root one in space.

square root 10 parts.

In other words, 1 in 3 or 30%.

And that precision is very far out from the precision which I think you need to represent 3D space.

I think why this has not been recognized or not been spotted is that we've done neural modeling of the brain for years and years, but everybody models neurons as highly precise, reproducible,

units with outputs of real variables, as is shown at the top of this figure, the output of a neural neuron is usually modeled as a real variable with very high precision, so you can get high spatial precision out of that, whereas real neurons, they have spike trains, and in a short time, a spike train doesn't represent a number precisely at all.

So this, I think, has not been spotted,

And I think it makes a huge gap in neural models of the brain.

And as I've just said, the wave storage can get much better precision.

So wave storage might fill this gap.

And that is the third piece of evidence for a wave in the brain.

So in summary, three main pieces of evidence, the thalamus, the insect central body, and these neural computational models, which have

model 3D space properly.

And I think that's a bit of an embarrassment for the neural model of the brain, really.

So if you have those pieces of evidence and some evidence against the wave, which I'll come to, how do you assess the overall probability that the wave is there?

Well, it's a binary hypothesis.

Either there is a wave or there's not a wave.

And we want to estimate the probability that there is one based on several pieces of evidence.

And this

in analogy is like a biased coin.

In other words, how likely is that coin going to turn up heads on the next time we toss it?

And you do various experiments.

One experiment is toss the coin M times and you get heads N times.

So what you do is several different experiments.

You might toss with your left hand, might toss the coin from an airplane.

and you might build a special coin tossing machine.

And with each one, you do some experiments.

And so the best estimate coming out of all those experiments is the sum of all the heads over the sum of all the coin tosses.

And so this is the Bayesian way that you combine the evidence from different lines of evidence on the same hypothesis.

You allot a weight to each one, which has a certain subjective element to it.

And then you sum them all according to their weights.

And that's what I'm going to do.

to make a Bayesian combination of the different lines of evidence about the wave hypothesis.

And I just, what you do is you simply, you allot coin tosses to each line of evidence and you sum the coin tosses together.

That I think is how people do science roughly.

And it is, if you like, it's in the textbooks as the Bayesian philosophy of science.

So when we do this assessment, what answer do we get?

And I've summarized the answers in this little table, and I've put red rows for things that are mainly against the wave hypothesis, and green rows for things that are mainly for it.

The two red rows you'll find are prior considerations, prior prejudices, and the idea and biophysical mechanisms.

I've given those large negative weights.

I've done that deliberately to show that

the overall result is not too sensitive to those negative weights.

You can adjust them a bit and you won't change the result much.

And the positive lines of evidence are the three things I talked about, the thalamus, the insect central body and computational models, and a couple of others.

There is some evidence from phenomenal consciousness and there are some other considerations.

So what I'm going to do, quite briefly,

is go through those different rows in the table summarizing basically what the considerations are i won't spend too long on them because the tables are not that interesting but you can come back to anyone or you can stop me on anyone ask questions if you like or come back to anyone in discussion so what is the prior considerations that

go against the wave hypothesis.

First one, I've put in a big weight of 20 for Occam's razor.

In other words, it's an extra hypothesis.

We just don't want an extra hypothesis.

So let's put a weight against it.

And so I've put a big weight of 20 against that.

It's bigger than I think is realistic, but I've done so purely to make it clear that the eventual answer is quite robust against that.

And there's a couple of other arguments I've put in, which people might make.

One is the classical neural model of the brain has served us well.

So why do we need anything else?

But I think that's a weak line of argument because the classical neural model of the brain hasn't worked that well that we're ready to, that we've described all the brain.

There's still massive number of things we don't know about the brain.

So that's a weak argument.

And the second argument is,

Well, we've never seen a wave, so surely that means there's not one.

But that, again, is a weak argument, I think, because we just don't know how to look for this wave.

And it probably has very low intensity, for reasons I'll come to later.

So those are weak arguments.

But nevertheless, I come up with 25 points against the wave, 25 coin tosses against the wave from prior considerations.

So now we move on to positive evidence for the wave.

And the first one of these is the mammalian thalamus.

There is both general evidence, which I've talked about.

In other words, the thalamus has the right shape and it has the right connections to hold a 3D model.

And there's what I call smoking gun evidence, something that's much more specific about the thalamus, which points to there being a wave in it.

Now, I'm going to come to that later in the talk, so I won't go into that in detail now.

But in summary, I think the thalamus offers quite a lot of positive support, 14 against 2, for the wave.

Then we come on to the insect central body.

There is, again, the general evidence that the insect central body has the right shape and it's highly conserved across all insect species.

And I think that is quite significant.

In other words, every insect in the world has the same shape, pretty much the same shape of its central body.

So the shape must mean something.

Whereas you compare that with other parts of the insect brain, like the mushroom bodies, for instance, they have very variable shapes.

And they just have to make neural connections.

But this is a clue that the central body of the insect brain is doing something other than making neural connections.

And the idea of a wave in it fits it quite well.

And I think there's other evidence from the insect brain, mainly that the insect brain has very few neurons in it.

So there are probably not enough neurons to make a decent representation of 3D space.

but we know that insects do it rather well.

So that's the central body.

Next is the computational modeling.

As I said, 3D spatial cognition is a vital function of the brain, but as far as I know, Carl can put me right on this, there is no working neural computational model of it, especially when you ask for a model which models spike trains rather than idealized theoretical neurons.

And in any sub-second time intervals, neurons give a big error rate, about 30%, whereas we really need 1% or something to construct a decent spatial model.


SPEAKER_02:
So the evidence for... Yeah?

May I ask just a precision here?

The point here is, I think, if I follow you well, that we should all bear in mind is the model that is needed

performance in real time.

So what you are saying is the lack of precision may come also because of some time pressure that for the model to be valid, should be able to build and update this 3D model of space in quote unquote, real time, correct?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, very short time, when you need that model of space to be really up to date.

So you only have a

In mammals, you have a third of a second.

In insects, you have even less time.

And in that time, neurons, real neurons, are very imprecise.

That's the argument.

Okay, so that's the three lines of evidence for the wave.

One line of evidence I think that goes against it is biophysical mechanisms.

In other words, how does this wave work?

As far as I know, no biophysical model for the wave has ever been proposed.

And we make, again, the rather pessimistic assumption that the chances that we'll find one are small.

We'll come to that later.

But we've put 10 points against the chances of finding a decent biophysical model of the wave.

Now, I think that is very pessimistic, especially in view of the point that evolution is cleverer than we are.

And so even if we can't think of it, evolution may be able to think of it.

And there in this table, there's some other biophysics evidence, which approximately balances out.

So the biophysics evidence is taken to go against the wave broadly.

Finally,

the last thing I'll consider is phenomenal consciousness.

And this was on the last live stream that if there is a wave in the brain, it leads to a new theory of how consciousness works.

And you can see that on that live stream.

And this series, I think is quite nice.

It solves a lot of the problems, neural theories of consciousness, but we don't want to put too much weight on it because consciousness theories are so controversial.

But I think what we can do is that spatial consciousness,

the consciousness that we have right now, the space around us, must come from something happening in the brain.

And our spatial consciousness is quite detailed and precise.

And so that tells us, however it's done, that the model of space in the human brain is quite detailed and precise.

And so that, again,

If you come back to the point, neurons can't do it, but waves might be able to do it.

That is further evidence in favor of the wave.

But again, because consciousness is controversial, I haven't given it big weight at all.

I've given it four points.

So when we come, and there's some other evidence I don't think I'll go into.

So when we combine all the evidence, here's the scores we've been keeping and adding up.

Here's the coin tosses which came out heads.

Here's the coin tosses which came up tails.

We have a total of 91 coin tosses of which 47 came up heads.

So basically, we were deliberately pessimistic in stacking up the negative evidence against the wave.

But in spite of that, the positive evidence has won.

And quite literally, the many pieces of positive evidence add up.

And so we get to a probability of 0.52.

Or if we take a simpler view, that we just give every line, every piece of evidence one vote, we get 31 votes, and 24 of those are in favor of the wave.

So you get a more positive number out of that.

And my main point is not the number, 0.5 or whatever it is, but the main point is it would take very strong negative evidence to change this.

And I don't know if that evidence.

And so my main point is really, you can't easily dismiss this wave hypothesis.

And if you can't dismiss it, then it raises some big questions.

I think if the wave exists, we need to really rethink how the brain works.

It's a very different model of the brain we have.

If not, by the way, there's still a huge unsolved problem, because how do these imprecise neurons do 3D spatial cognition?

So what I'm doing, one trouble with the wave hypothesis is it really rests on the work of one person at the moment.

That's just me that's been interested in it.

But science requires reproducibility and debate between lots of people.

So what I'm asking people to do watching this live stream and asking you to do is please look at these ideas and assess them for yourselves.

Please provide some commentary of your own on the way, whether it's specialised or generalised or whatever.

Please challenge the ideas, please

Get a hold of the spreadsheet.

You can download the spreadsheet and change the weights and see what you end up with.

Or please bring new evidence to bear.

There may be some evidence against the wave for it that I don't know about.

And please agree or disagree.

And what I'd like to do is to collect that commentary and to make that commentary available when people want on this website.

You can get the spreadsheet.

And please, therefore, send your comments to my email address.

So that's the call for commentary.

And we come on now.

Oh, by the way, this is very important.

Carl Friston has endorsed the call for commentary.

I hope you're on the call, Carl.

Based on this short description of the wave hypothesis, which I'll leave you to read, Carl writes, this is the Bayesian waves in the brain hypothesis, and it challenges conventional views of belief updating in the Bayesian brain.

And it offers...

as a perspective on neuromorphic computation that's supported not only by theoretical accounts of functional brain architectures, but by receiving empirical evidence that speaks to effecting mechanisms.

But the important part to me is it would, he says at the end, it would be very useful to see other people's take on this proposal for mortal computation in the brain.

So please send in your comments.

But on the next slide, just before discussion,

a few words of explanation of mortal computation.

This was introduced by Geoff Hinton in 2022, mainly in the context of neural net learning.

And the paper I'm mainly referring to is by

Alex and Carl in 2023, where they relate mortal computation, particularly to Markov blankets, but also to a lot of other things.

There are so many ideas in that paper.

I can't possibly summarize them, but basically these are proposals for brain inspired biomimetic computing.

I'll summarize, a quote from that paper summarizes what mortal computing means to Alex and Carl.

Software is immortal because it can be copied to different hardware and still be executable.

Mortal computation means that once the hardware medium on which a program is implemented fails or dies, the knowledge, behavior and functionality will cease to exist.

So that's mortal computation.

My take on it is that

Direct physical computation, which is the kind of computation the wave does, is simpler and more efficient than a universal computing machine, like a universal Turing machine or a universal von Neumann computer.

And in particular, immortal software needs very reproducible hardware, but that doesn't work out in the brain for two reasons, two big reasons.

Firstly, no two neurons are identical in the brain, I believe.

And secondly, even one neuron never does the same thing twice.

So coming on to the relationship between wave-based cognition and mortal computation, I think wave-based spatial computation is mortal and is morphic, to use a word from this paper.

In other words, it depends on the physical shape of the thing holding a wave.

In terms of their 5Es model, it is elemental because I think spatial cognition is a very basic thing that any animal needs.

It's embodied because

We're embodied in space.

We're all embodied in space.

And it is inactive because we have to move in space in order to understand 3D space.

So wave computation is tied to a visible wave.

And I will claim that we need to understand 3D space before we need to learn things.

And that's why spatial cognition is really very elemental.

And an interesting consequence of this, if you believe there's a wave in the brain, and if the wave is the source of consciousness, then you get the conclusion that consciousness is more.

I think we knew that, but I think it's quite interesting.

So onto discussion, and these are some of the points I would like to hear about in discussion.

Perhaps you can take them in any order, but Dan, do you want to take over?


SPEAKER_03:
thank you yeah how about alex if you'd like to give a first comment and then anyone else can can start to jump in can you hear me


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, let me know if the background noise is really bad because I'm in like a cafe.

So, first of all, I think this is very interesting.

I did read Robert your call for commentary paper before as well.

I did have a few notes.

I mean, there's a lot of things that we could talk about, but I do really appreciate the connections to mortal computation thesis.

uh which is a corollary of the free energy principle so i think this is really nice and uh i did i did like the argument about that waves are morphic thus you know that they fit in the framework because we kind of need that uh otherwise we're just dealing with immortal computation so i had actually some questions i'll just throw at you that might

might even just be for further information so one one comment question is i don't know if you're aware of robert west at uh carlton university in canada uh who has worked on holographic declarative memory uh one of your comments earlier about uh things being holographic and are there neurons that try to explain or try to model things that

are wave-like but these aren't really wave-like uh holographic declarative memory comes into play where they use complex numbers and complex number representations which complex numbers are often used to model waves um so i was curious if you had known about that work or if you did uh why would that be insufficient or how that might

play in the framework.

And I'll lump with this another body of work so that way I don't break this up into too many questions.

Resonator networks or resonating fire neurons have a wave-like construction about them.

What is his name?

Eugene Ezekiewicz in computational neuroscience proposed

the Ezekovitch neuronal model, which is a very complex spiking neural model.

And those dynamics can be constructed such that they emulate resonating fire dynamics or wave-like dynamics.

And I was wondering how that, if you were aware of that, if not, that might be very relevant in a potential neural model that could be a step in the right direction, since you said that we don't really have the neuronal models or neural computational models

that get at this notion of wave-like computation.

They might not be completely relevant.

So I was kind of curious about that.

I'll stop there because then I have like one or two other questions.

So I was curious if you had any comments on that.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks a lot for that.

The quick answer is no, I'm not familiar with either of those.

And I will go and look at them as soon as I can.

They may well have insights.

What I'd say about the wave hypothesis is it is the key thing about the wave

and I didn't emphasize this enough, is it's got to be a working memory.

So it's got to hold information for a fraction of a second.

And that makes it rather different from anything that is neuron-oriented.

But I will certainly read those two with great interest.

Thanks a lot.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'll try to send Daniel or you some links to some of those papers to point you into those directions.

And then I guess I'll ask my other question.

I mean, I can also lump in Chris Eliasmus' work on Spawn because there are lots of neuronal models that try to

get at modeling the dynamics through spikes and again maybe this goes into that spikes just don't give us enough precision because in the paper i didn't quite see that but in your talk i did um which was why why do you claim that we don't model spikes

well as we have a long history of spiking neuronal models and computational neuroscience and brain inspired computing that do work very well now again i don't want to claim that there this is where carl could chime in as you mentioned him earlier uh if there was any that have been used to model aspects of complex spatial cognition that i think might be lacking but like we have hodgen huxley model again i mentioned the izikovic model uh fitzonagumo there's a lot of these complex dynamics

that can actually be used to engage in very complex machine intelligence tasks.

That, for example, you can train simple robotic control systems with like modulated forms of spike timing dependent plasticity, which is also a very rich and long history in neuroscience for plasticity, of course, and this is where we're now we're encoding in synapses.

I'm not sure that this

feels at odds uh with the wave hypothesis but rather could be tools uh that you could be used to build wave-like models and again i was just curious to know if there's still something about those particular spiking neuronal dynamics of which we have decades and decades of work that are just lacking to give you what you seek

um and again is it just because we can't really represent things with 10 spikes in five milliseconds that even if we represent them faithfully to the neurophysiological data uh that's still insufficient for representing what you want and you're just saying we need another mechanism that's the part where i was a little confused yeah i i think i please send the references i'd love to see those papers i think specifically what i'm saying is in i haven't seen a detailed


SPEAKER_05:
3D model of space to the level of resolution like a bee's eyes or our eyes that's actually built with neurons firing.

There may be lots of neural models built with spike trains.

I'm not aware of any models within the FEP active inference work.

I'm not aware of any models outside like Edmund Roll's business or Jeff Hawkins' stuff and so on.

I believe that all of those use precise theoretical abstract neurons.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, that's fair.

I think, yeah, I think I get what you're trying to say.

I do feel like there might be some interesting work out there.

Like, for example, I'm sure you've heard of the recent model, computational models that have been proposed for like grid cells, which is used as an important part of... Oh, yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
I think looking at grid cells is an important...


SPEAKER_00:
thing we have to do okay that might be complementary rather than an opposition as i i do like the wave hypothesis i don't necessarily think that this is data that would necessarily refute it and this is where carl might chime in uh because again if he's aware of any good neuronal models or computational neural models that actually get at this that i'm not sure that


SPEAKER_05:
Great, thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Carl or Ken or David, feel free.


SPEAKER_01:
Perhaps I'll take the lead and just respond to those comments.

I think you could argue both ways, but it does rest very sensitively on whether the wave is a description of neuronal dynamics under the neuron doctrine.

or whether the wave hypothesis commits to some divorce between the wave, however instantiated, and the neuronal activity.

So certainly, if you say that the wave is an appropriate description

of ensemble dynamics on the cortex or in the hippocampus or in the thalamus, then one could easily argue that it would be difficult to disprove the wave hypothesis.

And indeed, there are people whose entire career is built upon understanding

spatial cognition and beyond in terms of cortical field theory, for example.

So if you just look at the, there are many examples here, but the sort of classic example that comes to mind is the work of Peter Robinson, Australia, and developing quite sophisticated wave-like models of neuronal dynamics, idealized- Can I come in there, Karl?


SPEAKER_05:
Just briefly, I mean, the key thing about this wave hypothesis is it's got to be working memory.

So it's got to store information for, and it is a separate non-neural wave.

That's basically the way it's pitched.

And it has to be a wave which can store information for a fifth of a second or a third of a second or something like that.

And so it's not just electric fields passively caused by neurons.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, so that speaks to what does the wave hypothesis commit to?

And you're giving a very clear answer that it is not merely articulating ensemble dynamics that could transcend neurons.

We could be talking about glial cells.

We could be talking about quantum coherence.

But the key thing is that you're summarizing spatially extended

collective dynamics of active matter in the brain in terms of infrequency space, basically.

So you could say this is exactly the same move that quantum physics makes.

Yeah, absolutely.

Yeah, you know, basically, I mean, at its simplest, you can regard quantum physics as basically articulating dynamics, be specific about this slide, articulating density, probability density dynamics in frequency space by appeal to complex numbers and Fourier transforms.

and what's what's the benefit of doing that well you can use fourier transforms and all the orthogonalization and all the linearization of various problems that ensues um what's the difficulty well the same problem with um modeling probability waves is that once you take a fourier transform there is no natural way to uh impose the sum to one constraint that you would need in order to interpret as a possible probability so what do you do you have to invoke a born rule and then think about probability amplitudes

Well, the message here is that there is a great utility in taking any arbitrary dynamics in some metric space, and specifically density dynamics, and projecting them into the space of waves.

And from that point of view, one could argue that the wave hypothesis is not a hypothesis.

It's actually a principle or a proposal

for a better way of understanding collective dynamics.

And in that sense, I think there are lots of examples of that.

And I come back to cortical field theories, quantum field theories applied to the brain that have the right kind of dynamics and will have exactly the right kind of

working memory.

So I'll just give you a couple of examples.

There is work looking at chimera states in cortical field theory where one can find things like solitons, which brings us back to last year's conversation about condensates and the like.

More interestingly, more recently, there's been empirical evidence from both EEG and fMRI

of vortices on the cortex which are if you you know one way of understanding classical like dynamics in the space of waves that have the kind of itinerancy and

solenoidal aspects that do remember things by returning to the same state um so if you know i think there's lots of empirical evidence um and thereby um meaning that they have memory in the sense of say a ponkari map um and these are explicitly articulated in terms of traveling waves that have this sort of circular solenoidal aspect that can be empirically detected

However, I think it answers the question, is there any empirical evidence for a formulation of brain dynamics beyond a commitment to particularly the neuron doctrine that can be articulated in the space of waves that fulfils the requirements of precision for memory and representation?

I would say yes, but that does not answer the question.

are these waves mere descriptions of one of many kinds of descriptions of some underlying dynamics?

Or does the wave hypothesis of the brain say that the actual substrate, the mortal substrate, cannot be just limited to message passing among neurons?

And that's what I meant by the neuron doctrine.

That, I think, is the whole question.


SPEAKER_05:
I think that is one view.

It cannot be reduced to neurons, basically.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's what I understood from your previous talk and the slide you shared before.

Of course, there are a lot of waves in the brain, for instance, related to electromagnetic induction, and there are a lot of old and very powerful models.

I go back to Núñez, you know, to connect with Carl's discussion of EEG dynamics.

But I think one of your points is that the wave, whatever that is,

cannot be just an epiphenomenon and it has to have an inductive power on neuronal dynamics in return.

There is some model I think that are emerging or some theories that are emerging about electromagnetic induction

like electromagnetic wave in the brain that will conductive power on current in the neurons.

I haven't followed that literature for a while.

As I told you before, I gave up on neuroscience, but

So what you require is really something that has a, you know, bottom-up and top-down quote-unquote sort of mechanism to begin with.

This wave has to be sustained and it has to be in and of itself a form of computation that can then feed back to the neuronal network.

That's the question.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Ken, would you like to give any comments?


SPEAKER_04:
uh just to maybe a one for everybody a question for everybody might reveal some of my ignorance here but um

Are there any sort of general results about the capacities of waves for computation relative to other types of computation?

It's a kind of analog in computation, isn't it?


SPEAKER_05:
It is.

Analog is a very appropriate term for it.

But I would say the role of the wave is more information storage than computation, but it actually may be involved in both.

But the key thing is neurons may compute 3D space, there's got to be some way of storing it with adequate precision, and that's what the wave is supposed to do.


SPEAKER_02:
But I should add, if I may, that computing 3D space, in particular in an active infant cell, kind of a realistic biological context for animals,

that's not just representing space, it's also acting upon it through transformations that are not just about change of coordinates, for instance, under our hypothesis, there is the projective group that is acting on a projective space, but then you have the space that is itself

filled with features that themselves as their own operators like different groups for instance spaces colors and how all these things like perhaps through models of fiber bundle interacts is very key so the computation of space as you think of it and i think is perfectly correct and and i'm

talks to me is much more than just representing three coordinates at one point in time.


SPEAKER_01:
I agree.

I agree.

Just to speak to Ken's question about, are there any laws that would be applicable under the wave hypothesis?

Just going back to the analogy with quantum mechanics, if one thinks of the wave as a probabilistic

representation or memory, then you'd certainly be looking to Heisenberg and certainty principle and the de Broglie relationships.

So perhaps if this could be a question for Robert, how would you unpack the spatial precision in relation to the temporal precision?

Because you talk about memory.

But the uncertainty principle would mean that you can have a certain spatial precision at the expense of a temporal precision and vice versa.

And indeed, that is one, if you like, gift of wave hypotheses, certainly as read on the point of view of elementary quantum theory.

The other sort of question I'd reflect to you, in terms of the de Broglie relationship, what is the analogy of, say, energy and maths in these ways?

How would you interpret this to a 101 physics student when it comes to- With great difficulty.


SPEAKER_05:
Let me first speak to the spatial precision.

I think the uncertainty principle is basically a property of the Fourier transform.

a wave that's confined in a certain distance has a certain uncertainty in its wavelength and wavelength and momentum in quantum mechanics and position is position so that's the answer that's the the origin of heisenberg uncertainty principle is simply the freer transform of a bounded wave that speaks to the spatial precision but as to the actual biophysics of the wave and there is some relationship between wave vector

and frequency, I don't know what that relationship is, but the great, as you recall, uh,

which way does it go?

Frequency over wavelength is phase velocity, and the derivative of wavelength with respect to frequency is the group velocity.

Now, all those questions about what the group velocity is, what the rest mass of these, if there are quasiparticles, what's their rest mass?

I don't know.

But for instance, one of the more far out hypotheses I consider is, as we discussed it last time was,

that the wave is actually held in a Bose-Einstein condensate.

And in a Bose-Einstein condensate, there are particles called rotons, and phonons normally have zero rest mass.

But there are particles called rotons and others which have non-zero rest mass.

And that may be something to do with their persistence in time.

But non-zero rest mass gets you into the whole question of,

What's the frequencies of this wave?

What are the wave vectors?

And as far as I'm concerned, it's all the Wild West.

It's all to play for, really.

I'm only making suggestions at the moment.


SPEAKER_03:
thanks i'll make a few short comments so thank you all for the discussion and robert also for making the bayesian epistemology very clear i think it's really cool also that was very insightful discussion on one possibility the wave is epiphenomenal like david said plays more of like a memory possibly even a memory with no causal efficacy


SPEAKER_02:
I'm sorry, I did not mean that.

I mean, according to what I understand and is necessary for Robert's model, the wave must not be

epiphenomenal.

And what we know about EEG, except some models, for instance, nowadays some models of electromagnetic propagation with notion of feedback induction that should be looked into, but overall the way we model EEG, for instance, from the neuronal current is epiphenomenal.

It's just, you know, summation at the level of an electrode, and so the wave itself is an epiphenomenon, and the model of Robert does not want that.


SPEAKER_03:
i totally agree and that's where i was going was sorry to attribute it to you that way but it was yes to a more active computational role kind of like this reservoir computing area um also general point kind of summed up by figure 4.3 in the 2022 textbook is there's like continuous and there's discrete models in space and in time so given the continuity of space and time

just at a first pass a continuous representation or model like a wave may have certain advantages over holding it in a discrete way and then um in the active inference does not contradict folk psychology work there's the continuous time model on the lower scale and then a discrete more switching slower model that could be like an attentional context oh so so there is precedent in terms of having a lower

level continuous model higher level discrete models and then more to taking that to the bigger questions

there's also some natural empirical correlations with bigger slower things and faster smaller things so to the discussion of well multiple things are represented like space and time some of that is doesn't need to be an open-ended representation it can be like evolutionarily tuned or developmentally tuned or learned and then last comment just on the insects it was a great point

line of evidence that's very promising because there's a lot of neurophysiology and neuroanatomy available in insects and just to say that the visual region of the brain this is arthropods and insects and the olfactory as well as the mushroom body have more like stereotypical units and they do have more change in size and more variation in evolutionary

whereas some of the interesting evidence from what you presented from the insect brain is that the actual geometric volume and size of the central body is relatively conserved even as other parts of the brain have a lot of allometry so that suggests that one way or another either it doesn't need to be explained in terms of fulfilling a adaptive function you could just be oh it's a constraint or something like this but

if it is going to be playing a role which is a fair assumption in an energy limited system then part of its role can't necessarily be improved by making it bigger or smaller yeah i agree you mean relatively bigger or smaller right because i mean the central body does scale a little bit with the insect brain size but it scales less


SPEAKER_05:
rapidly than the total insect brain size.

Interesting to see whether it scales with the visual acuity of the insect.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, how the different regions size and other attributes this could be a mammal and or arthropods.

How are the empirical psychophysics and the just noticeable differences

described or explained by like for example just geometric volume of the olfactory lobe whereas if or is there some other variants to be explained yeah


SPEAKER_02:
Well, but there will be a lot of correlations between, you know, the normal population densities and volumes.

So if volume increase, you may have more neurons.

Obviously, you know, that's basic Neuropsychology 101 and Vision Neuroscience 101.

You know, if you lose neurons, your acuity diminishes.

So there seems to be a strong correlation between your angular precision or acuity for many other things, and the number of neurons and connections that those neurons make.

But after a while, if you lose too many neurons, you have a de-differentiation, like think about neurodegenerative

diseases like, you know, take Alzheimer's, for instance, where everything gets disconnected and there is not enough neurons to represent stuff.

So that I think it would be hard in the, you know, given what is fairly known in neuroscience to reject the importance of the, I'm simplifying here, the number of neurons, the number of neuronal units in your brain and your resolutions capacities.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Yeah.

How about Robert, continue with part two?

Shall I?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

Great.

Well, thanks, everybody, for that.

So here's what we've got to on the roadmap.

We've described the hypothesis, evidence for and against.

We've done the assessment.

And we're now on to future tests.

How can we test this weight hypothesis?

And I'll divide this roughly into

What can we tell from the thalamus, from the insect central body, from computational models, from biophysics and from other sources of evidence?

So I'll just go through some of those.

So this probability of 0.5 is an unsatisfactory place to be.

We really want to drive the probability up or down.

And so the first thing to do is to stress test the three main groups of evidence that we have already.

Then we look at other evidence, for and against.

And there are a lot of possible tests described in this paper, which I've given the link to.

The tests are all in this table here.

Now, I'm not going to go through all the table.

I'll just say the paper allows you to sample the particular area that may interest you.

So you can just pick out the section that speaks to whatever test you're most interested in.

And I'll just

do some dipping and sampling myself.

So the first thing is the so-called, what I call the smoking gum, the specific evidence in the thalamus.

And what this specific evidence is, is there's a picture of thalamus here on the right.

And so thalamus is a round thing at the center of the cortex, which is like a hemisphere around it.

And what you have to notice is the thalamus in mammals has lots of different nuclei, thalamic nuclei.

And the thalamic nuclei are only very weakly connected to each other, but they are strongly connected both ways to the cortex.

So the question is, why don't the thalamic nuclei move out of the thalamus towards the cortex?

They're getting away from each other.

There's only weak connection with other nuclei.

They're getting closer to the cortex.

So they're reducing the length of myelinated axons.

And that would save a lot of energy.

So that's the problem with the thalamus under the nuclear model.

If the nuclei exist just to have neural connections to each other, they're very weak neural connections, and energy could be saved by moving out each nucleus towards the cortex.

Whereas if the thalamus has a wave in it, there's a good reason for all the nuclei clustering together.

The nuclei have to be together in the same wave.

Now, I've tested this energy argument by actually modeling what happens when you move thalamic nuclei.

And approximately, obviously, it was a very approximate test on the human thalamus.

And the answer was, yes, you can save energy that way.

So there is a mystery of why the thalamus stays together.

But that was an approximate test.

I think now that test could be done much more precisely

using connectome data, brain connectome data.

So you could use brain connectome data, you could have a computer program that tries out various moves of nuclei to see if they save energy.

So that is the test that you could make this argument about the smoking gun much more precise.

And there's a similar test for the thalamic reticular nucleus, which I won't go into.

I would say this...


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry to interrupt.

Is it possible to interact slide by slide, or do you prefer that we... Oh yeah, absolutely.

So I get your energy argument in terms of neurodevelopment or neuroevolution of anatomy and anatomical relationships, though I would argue, I mean, I would

not argue, I would, you know, ask you, but, you know, what if in this energy model you take into consideration all the inputs and the outputs from sensory neurons, for instance, from sensory organs, the eyes, for instance, through the optic nerve, and of course, then the output toward the cortex, but also the, you know, motor input.

uh i'm not sure uh that if you think about all this wiring then your energy model not forgetting all the white matter that you have you know in connectivity that you have between the cortex and the thalamus not sure that the energy model would fare that well that's the question well the basic point is that when i did the approximate calculations i did take account of the upcoming


SPEAKER_05:
know the sensory neurons coming into thalamus the point is if the thalamus is just a relay

pushing data on from sensitive cortex, then moving the thalamic nuclei would be neutral.

Whereas because there was feedback cortical thalamic connections, you actually gain an energy by moving out towards cortex.

So this calculation has been done, albeit very approximately.

And I think the opportunity is to do it much more precisely taking account of all thalamic connections from connectome data.


SPEAKER_02:
But you know, of course, and that's really a bit old for me, I haven't been into this literature for a long time, but there are bimodal connectivity.

Yeah, the dynamic nuclei kind of live in silos, but they actually have silos, I don't know, you know,

modular, but they actually have bimodal or trimodal interactions that are kind of fine.

Some of them are modulated by the reticular nucleus.


SPEAKER_05:
Is that with each other?

I understood from Murray Sherman, there's a quote from him that says there are no connections.

He puts it very strictly.


SPEAKER_02:
When was that published, remind me?


SPEAKER_05:
well i mean he published his book about thalamus in 2006 but since then he's written a lot of papers about thalamus and and he is well okay yeah sometimes people are very assertive but uh


SPEAKER_02:
You have a great old neuroanatomist that I've met in the past, like Gary Vanhausen.

They look at the brain in very, very, very, very small, in minute details.

They do real microscopic anatomy.

And the way they see the brain universe is quite different from... I don't know if this neuroanatomist you are talking about works with these methods.

I would be very...

prudent with connectomic data.

I think they are useless.

But anyway, that's another.


SPEAKER_05:
So you're suspicious of connectome data?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, all the DWI on DTI data and function.

Okay, that's my personal opinion.

But I'm a radical.

I'm almost you know, I think they are useless.

I think they are useless.

But anyway, we can have another discussion about that.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

Anyway, to me, there's quite a close analogy between this argument about the thalamus staying together and the argument from galaxies for dark matter.

In other words, when people looked at galaxies a long time ago, they found there wasn't enough mass in stars to hold the galaxy together by its gravity.

So they invented dark matter.

So I think when we look at thalamus, there's not enough neural connections in the thalamus to hold it together.

against the pull outwards towards the cortex.

And so the wave is a bit like dark matter in the thalamus.

So that's the analogy anyway.

But I think the connectome test should be a precise way of stress testing this hypothesis.

Right, the central body.

As I said, the gross anatomy suggests a way, but you can't make the same smoking gun argument.

But I think there's a lot of detailed anatomy that you look at, of detailed neural connectivity, where the synapses are distributed, and what happens in the compound synapses.

I think they're very suggestive.

And there may be not a simple connectome test using nuclei, because I don't think there are nuclei in the central body, but there may be some connectome tests that can

reveal whether the neural model actually is sufficient to account for the shape of the central body.

So this, I think, is a very open area for investigation.

I personally like it because I think science should be done on simple things.

And there's this quote from Ramon y Cajal that said, the mammalian brain is like a grandfather tot, the insect brain is like a Swiss watch.

And I like that.

So I think we should look at them.

So the third

argument we should stress test is neural computational models.

I make this claim that understanding 3D space is very elemental.

It comes before learning, I think, because animals have to do that before they can start learning.

And I've built a model of 3D spatial cognition at level two, and that needs high precision.

And I've had this argument before, neural spike trains only give much less precision in short time.

So what we need to do, I think, is to stress test this argument by really trying to build a model of a neural model of spatial computation using mortal, fallible neurons.

And one good framework to do this is the free energy principle, because it's got a well-established neural process model.

And if we can make this work with neurons, then maybe a wave's not necessary.

But if we can't make it work with neurons, then that strengthens the case for the wave.

Just another slide on this.

I think we should try and build two models, say, in the FEP.

perhaps using the level two model as a starting point.

But in the model, neural model, we have to model, do we model spike trains or do we model just a variable neural precision?

There must be some neural imposition we model.

If we model neural imposition, how do we do gradient descent?

Because you'll see, I've struck out here, if you do naive calculation of gradients, in other words, you compute

a quantity and then you shift some input variable a small amount and you compute the quantity again to compute the derivative, if there are lots of errors, that doesn't work because the imprecision overwhelms the gradient.

So there's an issue there about how you do gradient calculation.

I'm not sure how you tackle that.

Obviously, you can compute gradients explicitly, but it's a more complex computation than computing a quantity.

Next question, how do you do a gradient descent in space?

And I think in the FEP, a gradient of a free energy is a three vector, and precision in the FEP sense is a tensor, probably.

What coordinate system do you use?

Do you use Cartesian coordinates?

I don't know.

I mean, it seems to me Cartesian coordinates in the brain is a bit unrealistic.

So the key question, I think, is I expect that

the naive precision of neurons from spike trains is not going to do the job.

So the question is, can we have some clever neural micro design which gives us high precision and high speed?

And the final question is, do we use a spatial hierarchy as is common in the FEP or do we use a blackboard?

Again, I would prefer using both, but the issue of what are the mark of blankets arises there.

So that's the issues we would have in a pure neural model.

In a wave neural model, how do we model a wave?

Do we build a physical wave?

Now, that suggestion is not quite so stupid.

One could build it.

In the very early days of computing, there was a thing called a mercury delay line memory, which actually used a wave for storage in one dimension.

And we could build something like that in three dimensions.

I think that would be very expensive, not as expensive as building a quantum computer, but very expensive anyway.

So do we simulate a physical wave or do we just simulate the memory parameters that we get?

So simulate the precision and the capacity and so on.

I would prefer to start with a simple simulation of the memory parameters.

And in other words, I like to move down from level two to level three in successive stages.

So that's, um,

the active vision in exploration.

Another area we can look at is if there is a wave in the brain, it should show up in genomics and proteomics somewhere.

And there should be some genes which are expressed only in certain places like in the thalamus or in the insect central body.

All those genes may, the proteins may be particularly affected by anesthetics because on the hypothesis of anesthesia,

disables spatial cognition, disables the wave, you might expect a link between those proteins and anesthetic molecules.

And we're looking for proteins which not only sustain the wave, but also proteins involved in neural transmitters and receivers, which exchange information with neurons.

And I think that's a promising line of investigation.

If we find any possible proteins, they could help to constrain the biophysics.

which I think comes next.

Biophysics of the brain is absolutely wide open.

I have no idea, really.

There are some very preliminary clues, and I think most of the ideas are probably wrong.

But the key thing is the way it needs to store information.

It must persist for fractions of a second.

So it's probably not purely electromagnetic because, as David said, that's an epiphenomenon of activity.

So could it be a coherent quantum effect?

The problem with quantum mechanics, of course, is that decoherence removes it very quickly and you have to somehow conquer decoherence.

There are ways to combat decoherence.

I'm particularly interested in looking at nuclear spins.

There's a chap called Fisher who's looked at spins of the phosphorus molecule, which he claims can have coherence times as long as seconds or even minutes.

There is this

possibly attractive idea that the wave could be in a Bose-Einstein condensate or a Froehlich condensate.

So there are all these questions, all these possibilities.

I haven't really any strong direction or other, but we have to answer the question, A, how does the wave persist?

And B, how do neurons couple to it?

And we might get a clue in that respect from single-celled animals.

We'll come to that in the next slide.

But I'm saying this is a tremendously difficult problem.

And just because we can't think of an answer, we shouldn't underestimate evolution.

And I think broadly, we need to find some possible mechanism before we can start looking for it experimentally.

This is intriguing to me.

There are single-celled animals like erypsophages.

I can't pronounce it.

It's a single-celled animal.

It's a kind of vanavide.

And it has complex behavior.

It hunts and eats crustacean eggs.

And it has something in it which looks suspiciously like a lens of an eye and something which might well be a retina.

So does it have a lens and a retina?

If so, how does it use that information if it hasn't got any neurons?

How does it guide its own behavior?

Can there be a brain without any neurons?

And could that be a precursor for all the brains?

Could it evolve in

pre-Cambrian era and persisted through the Cambrian era.

So I think there is something to be learned by looking at these single-celled animals.


SPEAKER_02:
May I comment again?

Yeah, sure.

I totally agree with you.

If you look at paramecia, obviously they are very sophisticated sensorimotor schemes.

There is some evidence that they can have some memory, they can be conditioned, they have potentiation, some of them like spirostomum, if I remember well.

And obviously the computation, quote-unquote, or the analog computation, if you prefer, is going through molecular networks, but works exactly as well as a

as a collection of neural animals so that's also is telling that

computation again quote-unquote memory and active inference can go through many type of biological networks and so we shouldn't think that because the neurons are the most apparent and they are very very sophisticated and complex that there are no other kind of unknown for us mechanism of computations that go through biological network or protein network if you wish

That, I think, is a very interesting hypothesis.

The multi-scale interaction between all those things is also kind of an entire universe that we barely understand.

Microglial cells, now we understand better that they have not just a trophic role but a very sophisticated computational role.

So anyway, I think that's a very important thing to consider for the future of neuroscience.


SPEAKER_05:
Great, thanks, David.

So I've really finished my talk.

Over to discussion again.

So some of the topics we might touch on with the connectome issue, or particularly the computational model, very interested to hear Carl and Alex on that, and insect brain studies, and even the biophysics.

So over to you, please.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, Alex is preparing his revealing answers and commentary.

I'll talk rubbish for a moment.

So I just pick up on the sort of practical issue of the connector.

I think David was showing an understandable allergic response to connector based upon diffusion weighted imaging using non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging.

I think what you're talking about is this connectivity that could be tracing studies, it could be supplemented with probabilistic tractography.

So if you just don't use the word connectome, I think you'll be fine.

Just talk about connectivity studies, which are usually definitively based upon sort of, you know, staining and tracing at a microscopic level as opposed to reconstructions.

For me,

Well, the tests of the hypothesis, for me, the ones that you've offered, they do invite rather deflationary responses.

So for example, the arguments that a single neuron firing over a 256 millisecond period

cannot contain the sufficient statistics required for spatial temporal precision of the sort required for spatial navigation at a certain space-time scale.

One simple way of countering that, well, that's true, but if you give me 10 to the 3 of these spiking neurons, and I can now just write down the ensemble average, then they do.

So the whole precision argument can be, I think, almost dissolved without making any empirical moves or any tests.

Can I come in on that?

I think if the test... No, you've had your chance, Robert.

No, no, no.


SPEAKER_05:
Just briefly, the test of the precision argument is to build a model that works and, by the way, do it for an insect.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I think we're getting pretty close to that.

And in so doing,

you actually appeal explicitly to mean field approximation, which is exactly modeling the probability distribution of populations or ensembles in the statistical mechanics sense.

So I'm reminded now of Rodney Douglas's ambition for the EU to build a B. I think if you look at certain

drone, rumba, applications of SLAM, simultaneous localisation and mapping in industry, actually out there, you will find that not perhaps to the level of a bumblebee, but certainly sufficient to clean up the airport floor amidst moving passengers.

That kind of technology is already there.

um and you know i would imagine in about three years you will have um the same kind of technology um operating at the level of drones and and at that point i think you can say yeah we can do this without without a wave hypothesis um yeah but drones with respect have perfect theoretical accurate neurons they don't have mortal neurons

That's the point being that you can simulate a population of mortal neurons such that the random uncertainty averages to zero.

So this is what is meant by mean field approximation.

So that all of stochastic and statistical thermodynamics rests upon this.

So the density dynamics itself now becomes deterministic.

You are still modeling something which can be quite noisy with lots of random fluctuations and thermodynamics underneath them.

but the density dynamics of the kind that quantum physics would appeal to is actually deterministic but i'm not i'm not you know the reason i sort of was teasing you said you can't respond because it's our turn now was i don't think i don't think these are important arguments to me the important argument is something which came out in the last discussion and yeah i think daniel summarized very nicely is is there any top-down causation between the wave

and the neurons that are controlling my body and my eyes um and um you know because i could argue that it's all bottom-up causation and just rewriting neuronal density dynamics or population dynamics in fourier space yeah everybody does that even to the extent of um

focusing on the relevant variables as the rate of change of phase, which, Robert, you were saying that was a really interesting interpretation.

Yeah, that is the Kuramoto model of neural dynamics.

This has been around for decades.

People do work in this space, but the assumption is that you are basically appealing to a bottom-up causation from some underlying mortal computation at the level of neurons, and then you're just lifting it to a level of description in a

in a Fourier space or in a phase space with the right kind of dynamics, making all the arguments that you have made in favor of the wave hypothesis, it seems to me the important thing is a top-down causation that destroys the biological thing.

So I'm just trying to think about tests of top-down causality.

Of course, not easy to do, but I'm just wondering, you know, if I squashed your thalamus, would you have different spatial cognition?

So I preserve the connectivity,

but I actually changed the shape of your thalamus.

Things like that, I think, would be more compelling demonstrations of the top-down causation, which I think is at the heart of your spatial wave hypothesis, that it's not just an epiphenomenal bottom-up consequence.

It actually matters.

This wave, my neurons have to be immersed in this wave.

to function properly and it matters where they are and in that mortal sense it matters um that the anatomical constraints afforded that support this wave will have an influence on neural dynamics and subsequent belief updating and movements and sense making and projected geometries and so i don't don't have an answer but i would look into you know at those things that

if you like, address the notion of circular causality from the point of view of physics, and in particular, drill down on what would it mean to demonstrate empirically top-down causation in the sense of the spirit of George Ellis.

So that's where I took from that conversation, that exchange.

I agree, heartwarming.


SPEAKER_00:
honestly i think even though carl you said you're just gonna you know babble or say rubbish i think that was the most important point because that touches on the things that we even discussed in the mortal computation thesis framework um and that was actually so i don't know if i have the wonderful insightful answer that you claimed i might produce but uh just to speak to what

you said and uh and what robert discussing i think that is what relies the most important if we're going to build computational models which obviously appeal to me quite a bit uh and the mortal computation thesis said well okay the real way to do this is we would take actual substrate like for example a neuromorphic chip if we were doing artificial

or we would work with xenobots or anthrobots and build little systems of these actual biotic or chimeric type of systems.

But we did discuss virtual morphology.

So I think you could just go down to the simulation route, which touches on what you said, Robert, about, well, we could build waves.

We have examples of those, but those come with some difficulties.

We could just simulate them.

And I think the answer to answering the question, how do neurons...

couple to the waves and what does that look like and how do we build those computationals might be one of the most important questions, I think, in building any testable computational model in any useful simulation.

I do think

probably what i was saying in the earlier discussion about looking at resonator neurons or resonating dynamics uh which has some history and as well as uh the cognitive math learner and the stuff of some holographic memory which kind of builds on the complex number representation and the wave representation and how do you encode that in spiking dynamics i think that might be an interesting and useful building block and i will send daniel

and you some information and then you could look and see if that's rubbish or if that might be useful.

But I think that might be important building blocks to actually building a workable computational model.

I do think simulating the wave could be interesting to from a different direction.

I was another thought that you produced was from nature inspired meta heuristic computation or optimization where we model things like bumblebees

and beehives and ants and ant colonies and i know daniel has done work with ants as well and likes them quite a bit um and also we've done things with bats echolocation and wave transmission so if we model mathematical waves at least we could use that or frameworks for metaheuristic computation and sort of backwards build that let's say

derive the computational mechanisms that could allow us to couple neurons to use that information and then we could do actual simulations of different waves of different properties we can model the frequencies we can kind of control those hyper parameters and then in doing so we could then look at

what Carl was then bringing up, which is one of the key essences of mortal computation, which is that spatial arrangement, that anatomical organization of neurons and their particular components.

Then you could also do tests like, okay, if we build them in

a spherical kind of construct, or we build them in such an anatomical construct that is conducive to those simulated waves, then you could do what Carl said computationally, which is we could change the shape of these computational thalamus models.

We could make them cubic or other types of weird shapes and see if squashing them changes, for example, how these neurons respond on simple

cognitive tasks that we can emulate.

Again, we could use very simple spatial cognition tasks that we could simulate, and then we could start manipulating the actual virtual morphology, as Caller and I would call it, or just the virtual anatomy, and then that could give you some at least computational tests of the effect and value of weight computation.

I think that's the key, and I'm not even sure if what I just said mostly is rubbish and just means kind of

generating what i would do if i had to build something like that and i think that might be one of the single most important questions because i think it answers both

Neural models without waves and neurons plus waves.

As you said, we need to build both those models.

And I think that kind of coupling and that modeling of that relationship is a first step.

And then, of course, then you could then start to look at actual physical constructs that emulate that computation, kind of like a reverse.

We're using computation to drive what we think the structure should be and then say, are there actual structures that we find?

And then we can constrain our models a little bit better.

as we do have an atomic or we do have computational models of thalamic structures, like Chris Eliasmus Group has a thalamus structure in their Nengo framework.

Again, Spawn, I think, has like a thalamus component.

And those are very biophysically grounded.

They use anatomical values, things that are actually grounded from neurophysiological data.

So that could be an interesting starting point.

And that could allow us to then actually test and simulate what Carl was saying about squishing and stretching and changing the form of the thalamus.

So that's something I thought might be worth mentioning, and that's where the mortal computation thesis really comes in play because, again, it's that specific morphological arrangement, that actual construction and relationship between neurons that's really important.

And changing that would change the computation.

That's what another byproduct of our framework was basically saying is that you're not going to get the same computation if you change the anatomy, if you change this.

um so that's that's an important part and then just quickly i wanted your last slide before this one i don't know how to pronounce the name of that uh that entity either um but i thought that was really interesting because it you were saying it has essentially like a little eye but it doesn't have any known neurons or anything that we can perceive directly so could that be neurons

without cognition and I think that gets that to what Michael Levin and again Carl and I cite and talk with him a lot which is the idea of basal cognition and I think that's kind of where we don't really have that quite right from a computational point of view so I do think that's even more important to try to model these elementary cognitive systems and again looking at these building computational models I think of like that single cell organism could be valuable

and maybe give us some insights as to, well, okay, what is it that we need to get this thing to actually solve very, very simple tasks like follow gradients of chemicals, which we do that in chemotaxis and phototaxis experiments.

And we do build little models of, for example, E. coli, trying to traverse these little niches.

And I think that's the other part that you're going to need in building even simulated versions of what you seek, which is you're going to need that virtual niche

because again and you point out robert which i was happy to see that that you know you're what you're thinking is that it's uh elemental embodied but i think the other part that can't be ignored if you're going to properly uh examine and simulate mortal computing systems is you need a niche you need that more uh virtual environment to actually and those physical properties need to be very explicit um when you build it so i think that that was something

that I think is going to be also very difficult, but probably the most important to make the next step for model computation.

And hopefully some of that makes sense.


SPEAKER_05:
No, thanks, Alex.

I agree with you that the simple animals, the simple, simple brains are the place to look.

I always recall that quantum mechanics started with the hydrogen atom, not with the uranium atom.

I'll actually kind of add a complimentary view.


SPEAKER_03:
I was wondering to what extent will the kind of representationalist form and context for the way that you described in humans

be of maybe even a slightly different kind in a single cellular or in an insect.

So for example, there's the outfielder catching a fly ball who, yes, you might be able to describe that in terms of the spatial temporal frequency of the baseball moving through space and the body moving through space.

There also may be a heuristic such as following a gradient of shade that also gives a behavioral solution or even an indistinguishable approach.

so that may speak to again the variety of possible substrates of mortal computers because the insect central body and this is the to the empirical point how can we differentiate the situation where spatial representation is happening with or without a causality closure

from where behavioral strategies are integrated like moving away from a shadow for a fly it may not require the spatial precision on the object so actually just determining where and how variation across

different species and across individuals and settings, how would we differentiate that from a null hypothesis where neural or wave, wave particle or both or neither, we don't even need to invoke space.

We just invoke reflexive behavior.


SPEAKER_05:
I agree.

That's a very important question.

It's addressed a little bit in the paper, but what we need is tests of

insect behavior, for instance, which depend on the 3D spatial model and which don't depend on just, as you say, detecting a shadow or detecting a looming thing.

And it's quite difficult to devise those tests.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I'll read a question from the live chat and anyone can give a thought.

Okay.

Courtney writes, thank you for the interesting talk.

Could this theory be used to test whether or not someone in the ICU with brain damage is conscious?

And if so, to what degree could it be tested similarly to integrated information theory?

Or are we far away from something like that?


SPEAKER_05:
I'd say we're far away because even experimentally finding the wave is far away.

We have to work out what the biophysics of it is before we can build detectors for it.

And that may be as far away as detection of dark matter or for the neutrino, for instance, that was theoretically predicted.

It took 25 years to find it.

I think it may take a long time to find a wave experimentally.

So in terms of measures of consciousness, I'd say we're a long way off.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

Ken, David, please go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
well i just wanted to mention one thing um that this whole discussion reminded me of a long time ago i think i was in graduate school i read a book by ralph d ellis not to be confused with the george ellis that um that uh carl mentioned but it's called a book called an ontology of consciousness and if if my memory serves it defends just the general idea that consciousness is a wave

and defends the kind of wave medium model

thinking about the mind body problem.

And I just remember it being very interesting, but I don't, but that's so long ago that you might read it.

I might read it now and be totally disappointed, but just something to throw out there.


SPEAKER_05:
Send me the reference.

That'd be great.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Yeah.

Ralph DL.

I can send you that an ontology of consciousness, but I do remember being, being struck by it as being sort of plausible, but you know how those things go.

It's like it's metaphysics is ontology, you know,

You're pretty far away from physical testing, but in terms of some of the sort of theoretical advantages of thinking about it that way, it might be worth a look.


SPEAKER_03:
put it in the chat thank you david any thoughts and then anyone watching can write any last questions and then otherwise robert let's hear like what are your next moves and just kind of summarize the commentary affordance maybe i can you know i i this is the kind of question that you know anybody interested in topics struggle with in kind of uh okay what is the sort of


SPEAKER_02:
integrative mechanism that is required to understand things like consciousness how does it relate to the brain with all the limitation of both you know theoretically and methodologically of

contemporary neuroscience.

I'm totally open now at this point to the possibilities that here there is, you know, some form of physics that we haven't understood about the brain, or that is related to the brain or interact with the brain and becoming like, even open to some form of

you know, physical dualism, I don't know you would call that.

I'm sure that it's going to be very hard to progress with that, that we are still at a sort of metaphysical age of this type of science and discoveries.

We don't have the principle yet, maybe.

I doubt, but I'm not a physicist, so it's really like, you know, no matter talking that a Bose-Einstein condensate will address the question, I mean, think about the size that has been achieved, the maximal size of Bose-Einstein condensate, and under what circumstances, irrespective of, you know, okay, temperature issue, you know, but

it's what like a picoliter like a billion uh atoms um so you would have like

billions and billions of Bose-Einstein condensate that would have... I mean, it seems as... I don't have a good gut feeling about it, but there is also more mundane things like, you know, we had this discussion about electromagnetic wave in the brain at the kind of macro scale or meso scale as epiphenomenon, but

As I said before, although I don't recall the names of the authors working on that, but there is a bunch of labs and researchers working on that, there is now, or at least there is some theoretical, well-formulated theoretical ground and some empirical evidence

For inductive mechanism in the brain, basically you have currents going through your axons, bundles of fibers, your action potential, if you wish, that are associated with those currents.

that induce electromagnetic waves that propagate and may have a role of, for instance, synchronization with another bundle just next to it.

So those things are very minute as effects, apparently.

They don't have a very, very large, long-range effect.

That's because of biophysical constraints.

if i recall well but it talks about the possibility that you know we may not want to throw the baby out of the bath water classical electromagnetism may still have something to say and in particular if this kind of induction mechanism uh which is literally top down i mean the downward causation if you wish you know there is a fiber bundle that generates

electromagnetic waves that then affect currents in another fiber bundle we could say well you know then you could imagine something quite sophisticated and in which the role of anatomy gross anatomy the shape of the brain organization then might become

very important to understand because of course the relationships, if those electromagnetic wave induction are short range, you know, how you bring anatomically things closer in order to make them interact becomes very important.

And maybe that connects back to your thalamic hypothesis.

But again, what I'm talking about is very, very, very speculative.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, David.

Yeah.

I agree.

My feeling is the biophysics is wide open, so an electromagnetism may well be a part of it.


SPEAKER_03:
And you used Mars levels earlier.

It's possible the wave has different implementations.

I think this conversation brought up a lot of different dimensions and also even begets bigger questions like,

do scientific hypotheses have for and against?

Is there only one hypothesis chosen or could there be functionality distributed across multiple biophysical systems such that something being a binary true or false, which is kind of predicated the whole Bayesian epistemology, that doesn't necessarily need to be true.

There could be a utility continua for a theory and a predictive continua.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I guess...

The hint is that since there's a hint of the wave in both the thalamus and insects at opposite ends of the animal tree, evolutionary tree, that the wave hypothesis might carry across the whole lot.

And in which case you ask, is it convergent evolution and different species, different branches, or did it go right back to the primordial branch before the Cambrian era?

I would like it to go right back.


SPEAKER_03:
yeah in that case you can consider like arthropods or look how far back but insects are only one kind of arthropod and they have enough homology that you might be able to extend this argument and do ancestral state reconstruction on neuroanatomy at different levels and these analyses may have already been done and then the allometry of those reconstructions can be compared to yeah

Any last comments or Robert would last word?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, well, many thanks to all of you for your comments.

It's been most useful.

And I guess I just finally request if I would like to have to get some commentary from all sorts of people on this hypothesis.

So if you would send me some comments, just initial ones,

and gut reaction comments, if you like, on this core question of can we dismiss the wave hypothesis, or do we need to take it seriously?

Then that would kind of kick off some of the commentary.

Anyway, many thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you to all the guests, and thank you, Robert.

All right, farewell.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye, everyone.

Bye.

Thank you, Robert.

## p7iq4AAIwjc

SPEAKER_08:
hello welcome everyone we are in active inference guest stream 82.5 on april 14th 2025 discussing computers meaning and consciousness with robert warden and guests and guests so robert thank you for joining and for assembling this group to you to kick off this discussion


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Hi, thanks everybody for attending.

I'm going to be talking as it says on computers, meaning and consciousness.

Let me get straight into it.

What I'm going to be talking about is largely negative results.

And here are the two key negative results of this talk.

One is that the information inside a computer doesn't define what the computing computation is about.

And that is because information in the computer is encoded.

And the second negative result is if the brain is only a computer, if it's thought of as only a computer, then it cannot be conscious.

So those are two quite paradoxical results and I expect you to be puzzled by them.

As I go through, I would really be grateful if people would put up their hands at any time and if there's something that's really perplexing about it, ask a question because very much my purpose is to find out

what people don't understand about these results.

And what I think the argument to these results is fairly simple argument, but it's paradoxical and counterintuitive.

And I expect people to be puzzled, and I would like people to speak up when they are puzzled.

Okay, so those are the negative results I'm going to be talking about.

And this is one way to remember them.

It's like an incompleteness theorem for computers.

And what it says is the physical events inside a computer don't define what it computes.

They don't define what it's about.

And this, as I say, is because the information is encoded.

External information is required in order to interpret or decode the physical events in a computer as a computation.

So that's basically what it's about, an incompleteness theorem, a negative result.

I think as an incompleteness theorem,

It can be quite important.

However, I've got another slide here.

So basically to try and understand the results, the first result is not original result is that computation itself is not a physical process in itself.

It is our interpretation of a physical process and interpretation, but made by an external interpreter, usually people, but sometimes not people using a decoding of the physical events in the computer.

And the information running inside a computer is encoded, so it doesn't of itself have meaning until you decode it.

And without decoding, the physical events inside a computer don't have meaning, and they're not actually about anything.

And the puzzle here is that consciousness is about things, whereas the things in a computer are not about things.

Now this result that computation is not a physical process but an interpretation of a physical process, that's not a new result.

It was derived by Horstmann et al.

in 2014 for artificial computers and extended to natural computers such as brains by Stepney and Kendon in subsequent years.

So those two papers are very interesting precedents to the work here.

So that's the first part of it, is that computers don't have decoded meaning inside them.

The second part is applying that to consciousness.

Because consciousness that we experience has meaning.

It's about things.

It's about the things in front of us, the things we see, the things we feel, and so on.

But without decoding, the computation in the brain doesn't have meaning.

And the decoding requires information from outside the brain.

So if you model the brain purely as a computer, then the physical events inside the brain don't have meaning, and so they don't

They can't be the cause of consciousness.

So that is the basic framework for the results.

It's a negative result.

They are negative results.

And I think negative results are important in science.

A lot of precedents like conservation of energy is if you like a negative result, this energy can't be created out of nowhere.

So it leads to things like no perpetual motion machines.

Well, the second law of thermodynamics says you can't create heat differences out of nothing.

And so there's no such thing as a free heat engine.

Or another one more recent is Gödel's incompleteness theorem for mathematics.

that says you can't derive all of mathematics purely axiomatically so these are important negative results and what negative results do is they clear the ground and make new room for new ideas so the result of this talk is an incompleteness theorem for computers excuse me but horse and i hope to show you that the result has far-reaching implications

firstly for man-made computers and secondly for cognitive science.

And so if you see, if you think you see a flaw in this argument, please put your hand up and ask me about it because that's the kind of thing I want to understand about.

So I'll proceed by a series of analogies going from books to computers to brains.

These are all physical devices and inside the devices, inside a book or inside a computer,

All the information is physically encoded.

And without decoding, the information has no meaning.

And the decoding is always done outside the device.

So a consequence of that is the device itself is not conscious.

Now, it feels all right for books.

It feels a bit more troubling for computers and very troubling for brains.

Anyway, let's set off down this journey and see how far we go.

inside each of the devices the information in the device has no meaning it's quite obvious for a book that words characters inside a book have no meaning but it becomes less obvious for computers and for brains so let's go through that progression and see how we go yes i just have a question to be sure


SPEAKER_01:
what is the ground to assert that within the brain bearing in mind that actually we do not understand the brain very well at this point there is no encoding and decoding mechanism of source i think the modern view is that there is encoding and decoding but it doesn't happen inside the brain in other words


SPEAKER_03:
The sense organs encode things like light as pulse trains, neural spike trains.

They go into the brain as encoded information and the brain does something with them.

Lots of things about neuron spike trains and then spike trains come out of the brain and they are decoded as muscle actions.

So the picture of the brain has encoding and decoding, but it doesn't actually happen in the brain.

It happens in the body, in the sense organs or in the muscles.


SPEAKER_01:
I think it's something that could be discussed, bearing in mind again that there are probably fundamental mechanisms within the brain we do not yet fully understand.

Let's assume it's a postulate.

More than something that is


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think I can assume that any information in the brain is encoded.

We know all we find in the brain is neural spike trains, and if that is information about the world, it's certainly encoded.

Anyway, let's go from books to computers to brains, and then we'll see how it feels.

So in a book, there are physical squirrels on the page, as shown here,

And we do a lot of interpreting of those in order to understand the book.

We understand the shapes of the ink shapes as letters.

We understand strings of letters as words and word strings as sentences, sentences as meanings and meanings as stories.

So finally, after all that interpretation, all that decoding, we understand what the meaning is in the book.

But to get the meaning from the book, we've had to do a lot of decoding.

By the way, I shall use the word interpret.

and the word decode fairly interchangeably throughout this tool.

And I think, um, they obviously don't have entirely the same meaning, but I think that they're pretty synonymous for these purposes, but you may want to catch me up on that sometimes and say, look, you've used these words differently.

So that's what meaning is in books.

It's not physically inside the book.

It's inside our heads when we read the book.

So we go on from books to computers.

And physically, what's going on inside a computer is digital electronics.

We understand the laws of physics and how all that stuff, all those circuits work.

But again, to understand it as a computer, we do a lot of interpretation.

We interpret the voltages in the circuits as bits.

We interpret bit strings as numbers.

We interpret numbers as being solutions to equations or whatever we've done.

problems sometimes interpret those equations and models of physical things.

We have computer simulation of anything in the world, and that's the way we understand it by doing all that decoding, all that chain of decoding.

So when do we do that?

There's a lot of decoding information in our heads, which I say is not inside the computer.

The computer just has physical digital electronics.

so we go further to brains physically what happens in brains is neurons firing and as i say what what has started those neurons firing is sense organs like eyes and fingers sending spike trains to the brain recording information about the world but that information is encoded as spike trains then the spike trains are

interpreted in the brain in various ways i use it as we interpret the brain as a computer doing bayesian probability for instance so we may think that the spike trains in the brain have a meaning as probabilities of things and probabilities of events and we interpret synaptic connection strength in the brain as learning and memory and then spike trains come out of the brain to our muscles and our muscles decode the spike trains as motor actions

So again, there is encoding before stuff goes into the brain.

Stuff inside the brain is encoded, and then there's decoding when it comes out of the brain.

So those are the three devices.

And to sort of draw the generalization across those, in all three cases, there's a chain of interpretations.

There's a chain of decoding, which says we decode A as

c as c as d and so on we decode voltages as bits bits as numbers numbers as solutions to equations or whatever it may be or numbers as being about things and at each link in this decoding chain there is various very many possibles there's no one obvious choice there's a vast number of possible interpretations and when we do this interpretation it's us decoding

And we need information to do that decoding.

We need to know things about how computers work, or things about how the brain works, or things about what problem we've set the computer.

And so that's how we've set up our interpretations.

But there's a huge number of wrong interpretations we could set up instead.

But the important point is the information we use to decode resides outside the device.

And that means that there may be information inside the device, but it doesn't have the meaning that we apply to it.

And that the consequence of that, I would say is the device itself is not conscious.

And so we've gone through this progression from books to computers, to brains.

And the question is, is there anywhere along that trail where something different happened?

And I claim there's not anywhere that something different happened.

The whole issue of encoding and decoding is the same for all three of those devices.

So an example of a computer is a floor cleaning robot.

Now, you know how these work.

Initially, it blunders around the room and bumps into doors and things.

And it's been designed with an onboard computer which has a digital map of the room.

with things in it and representation of things like chairs and tables and so on.

And so once it's bumped into a table, it doesn't bump into the table again.

And so it has the map inside it, which is encoded information.

And the decoding of that information happens outside the computer when the computer sends commands to the motor and to the steering to avoid the table leg.

And the decoding also happens in the designer's mind, where the designer knows what the memory locations in the computer mean.

But there's no information in the computer which defines what the information means.

In other words, it's got a bunch of memory locations, but it doesn't know which memory locations refer to particular objects in the outside world or particular places.

So the computer

on the robot can't look at its memory locations to be aware of the table leg and this is illustrating the general point that the physical events inside the computer don't define what it's computing about and i think one of the reasons people find that puzzling is that when people talk about computers they use a lot of metaphors and even the word computer is a metaphor for people and these metaphors make computers sound like people

And those are the metaphors that I think have misled us and made this sound puzzling to many of us.

Where do we go next?

Another simple example of a kind of computer is an abacus.

Now, there's an abacus.

And what happens inside an abacus, I think most people would say, is not addition.

The physical process inside an abacus is beads sliding along wires.

But we've designed the abacus so we can interpret it as an adding machine.

So in some bazaar in the Middle East or something, you see somebody doing things on an abacus, he's adding up numbers, money, basically.

Now that's the way we interpret the abacus as a computer which does additions.

But we could interpret the same physical device in many different ways.

We could have used it as a model of sheep in the meadow, or we could have used it as a model of fish on the moon.

We could have used it for fortune telling, or we could have used it for multiplying.

I'll just talk about multiplying briefly.

If you imagine those red beads as being digits in a number like 10,000, one zero zero zero, every time you move a bead over to the right hand side, you're multiplying the number on the right hand side by a factor of 10.

So in that sense, if we used abacuses that way, they would be multiplying devices, not adding devices.

So again, the physical events that happen inside the abacus don't define what computation is going on.

It's people that encode the inputs and decode the outputs.

And in terms of the previous analysis of computers from Horstmann and Stemney and company, people are called representing entities who interpret the abacus as an adding machine.

They do the encoding and they do the decode.

so the first set of consequences of this viewpoint are consequences for man-made computers and particularly artificial intelligence and the first consequence is you may have heard there's quite a popular idea around amongst philosophers and others that we might be living inside a simulation in other words there might be some grand simulation of the universe

which simulates everything, the world and people and things, and we're just existing inside it.

Now, this interpretation of computers shows that's not the case.

In other words, if you have a big simulating computer, information inside it is encoded.

Sorry, I can't quite read some of my slides because the picture's in front of it.

So the simulated things don't exist inside the computer.

They exist inside the heads.

of the people looking at the computer outputs.

And so there are no simulated people inside a computer.

So we cannot be simulated people.

A second consequence, which again is quite topical.

There's a lot of discussion about AI advancing and becoming more intelligent.

And there's the idea of AI super intelligence, which completely exceeds all human intelligence.

Again,

If you take this interpreted view of computers, that can't happen because inside an AI computer, any computer doing AI, there is only digital electronics.

There's not meaning about things.

All the intelligence in AI computer is encoded information and it takes people to decode it.

And so when we talk about AI, all the intelligence lies

not inside the machine, but in human interpretation of the outputs.

And as an example of this, Deep Blue played wonderful chess, but it only played great chess because Garry Kasparov thinks it played great chess.

Another more humble example, you may have heard the old wartime computer called ENIAC, which was very good at printing log tables.

It could print log tables much better than people could print log tables.

but it only printed great log tables because people were able to read them and say, yes, these are great log tables.

So if an AI computer does something which you might want to call superintelligence, produces outputs that nobody can understand because it's beyond all human intelligence, it's actually not intelligence at all.

It's not intelligence until humans interpret it.

It's just electronics.

Now, these two results are quite

against the tide of what a lot of people believe the way to remember them is that inside a computer there is no decoding so there's no the decoding is needed to make meaningful information and therefore people simulated people and ai super intelligence do not exist inside computers so um to go back to the analysis which

was the origin of this, in 2014 showed that computing is not just a physical process.

It's an interpretation of a physical process by something they call a representational entity, an RE here.

Now the RE is the thing that encodes the inputs to the computer and decodes the outputs.

And the important thing to know is that the information used by the RE to decode resides

in the RE itself, not inside the computer.

And so this applies.

Firstly, they applied this to manmade computers because that's their interest, but they extend it then to artificial, to biological computers.

And in this case, the representational entity, which interprets the brain as a computer is the animal's body because it's the sense organs that encode the information on the way in and his motor actions, muscles,

which decode the information on the way out.

And again, we get this result applying to brains that the physical events inside a brain don't define what it's computing about.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just a question.

I think I understand where you're coming from when you state that the body is the decoder or is where decoding of neural information is enacted.

But I think it's also a huge assumption.

And I would, for instance, ask you what you think happens

when we have a reminiscence when we recall something from memory and it's very vivid for instance or like in dreams or in imagination where we may imagine ourselves moving as a body in space but the body is not actually oh that's something we could discuss in the fine details yeah but okay well we're out of that


SPEAKER_03:
Where I'm going is that most theories of consciousness and the brain see the brain as only a computer.

And what I'm saying is if the brain is only a computer, the information inside it can't have meaning and there cannot be consciousness.

What I'm going to say is the brain is more than just a computer.

There's something else in the brain besides a computer.

And I'll come to what that is.

And that is the thing that is conscious,

when we have memories or when we make plans or imagine things or whatever else it might be.

Okay.

So that's where I'm going.

The brain is, is a computer, but it's not only a computer.

There's something else in there.

Okay.

So.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Yeah.

Um,

just...

I should start by apologising.

I have to go to a TMB meeting in a few minutes, but I think it's a fascinating argument.

I just wanted to put a question that I'm hoping you can come back to later on.

Again, acknowledging I think this is a really interesting approach and I suspect you're absolutely right.

However, at the back of my mind, I'm wondering how many of these philosophical arguments have accommodated the free energy principle.

That is just the statement that any physical process is just a process of computation in the sense of belief updating.

So that all the internal elements of your brain and a computer that can be read as a process, as opposed to a book or an abacus, which is not a process,

can be read as belief updating basically whose physics move on a statistical manifold and just by using those kinds of semantics and uh translating things like interpretation decoding observation measurement these are just processes of inference in that reading of physical processes you have meaning baked in so the whole point of the free energy principle is that the physical process

encodes or has stands in for a parameterization of beliefs about something there is an inherent intrinsic meaning that is equipped or equips all the physical processes in virtue of the free energy principle because you can distinguish the physical process from the support of the beliefs entailed by that physical process about

things that are not that physical process so that's the whole point of the markup blanket that now you have an information theory and information geometry that allows you to have beliefs about things which are just meaning so my question is how much of this philosophical work and and you know can you apply the second law of girdle's theorem um to um open systems that have a distinction between the encoding of beliefs by the

the inside about the outside.

So that would be my challenge.

Oh, I've still got two minutes left to wit it, but I'm not.

I'm going to listen to Brianna's question.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Carl.

It's a very profound question, and I do come to some of it later, but I'll try to address it properly later.

Brianna?


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, thanks for having me here.

And it's a fascinating argument.

I'm curious about the comments on AI.

So AI runs on an emulated substrate.

So it's remarkably similar to how it works in human cognition.

And I wonder if we're not taking into consideration that the substrate is emulated.


SPEAKER_03:
I think the argument, I mean, AI is complicated because

It runs on digital computers, they're doing digital electronics and bits and bytes.

And they are usually simulating neural nets.

And the neural nets are something like what the brain works.

And so it's a very complicated situation.

But fundamentally, there is still at the bottom level, a lot of encoding going on.

And a lot of decoding is needed to make any sense of it.

So it

That's a question that leads in a lot of directions, but fundamentally there is always encoding and decoding is always required.


SPEAKER_04:
There is, and it would be on top of the emulated substrate, which just... Yeah, you have to decode at this level.


SPEAKER_03:
You have to decode the bits and bytes as simulating a neural net.

You have to decode the neural net as producing conclusions.

So there are

Usually in computers, there are many, many levels of virtual machine going on, and many levels of decoding you have to do to get to the meaning.

All I need is one level of decoding.

That's enough.

Sure.


SPEAKER_04:
That's my question, or my remark.


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry, I'll carry on.

So now we're coming onto brains and consciousness and we take three statements, which I think are fairly widely believed.

One is that consciousness is caused by events inside the brain.

Number two is that consciousness has meanings about external things like coffee cups or the presentation or your computer screen.

And the third point is that the brain is a neural computer and only a neural computer.

Now, these statements, I will claim, are not mutually consistent.

One of them has to be wrong.

The reason is, if the brain is only a neural computer, all the information inside is encoded and has no defined meaning.

So that information can't cause consciousness of things, consciousness with meanings inside.

And if you look at those three statements, the first two, I think, are empirical facts.

And we can come back to discuss that later.

But most people believe that consciousness is caused by events in the brain because when brains are damaged, consciousness gets interrupted.

And you can't be conscious.

Most of the things you're conscious of are something happening in the brain.

And it has meaning about external things.

I think those two are well-established facts.

So the third is an assumption.

We're only assuming that computing is the only thing that goes on in brains.

I think three is the thing that's wrong.

So that runs straight up against a philosophical assumption called computational functionalism.

Computational function is a thesis that forming the right kind of computations is sufficient and necessary and sufficient for consciousness.

And this is described recently as a mainstream, although disputed, position in the philosophy of mind.

Now, it's also called computational sufficiency.

David Chalmers called it that in an article in 2012.

And what the results of the first half of this talk imply is that that is wrong.

In other words, being a computer is not sufficient to be conscious.

Now, most theories of consciousness assume computational functionalism.

They are theories in which the brain is a computer and the brain has consciousness by virtue of being a computer.

So the implication of this viewpoint is that those theories of consciousness cannot be correct.

And that is the main implication of this talk for theories of consciousness.

So to talk about some specific theories of consciousness, most of them assume that consciousness is caused by events of the brain.

The brain is a complicated neural computer, the most complicated machine in the universe we see here.

And inside this computer, there are various computational processes taking place.

And I call these P1, P2, and so on.

And most theories of consciousness assume that one or other of these processes called P5 or P4 causes consciousness.

And so you can look at examples of modern theories of consciousness from this viewpoint.

You might think P1 is representing things in the visual field.

Theories of consciousness like Lame, like, yeah, Lame and so on, people believe those theories.

Or you might think,

As in the free energy principle, the brain is building Bayesian models of reality, and that leads to consciousness.

Or you might feel some higher order theory of consciousness that P3 is the brain reflecting on its own computations, and that causes consciousness.

Or going with Antonio Damasio, you might feel that the brain is computing an emotional response to events, and that emotional response is the heart of consciousness.

Or you might feel along with Bernard Bars and Dehaene and others that global workspace is what makes us conscious.

So making information globally available is a computational process.

Or you might feel along with IIT that you need computations linked together with some very high connectivity, which is measure five.

Or you might think that P7 is predictive coding.

All of those you're saying, some

computational process is what makes the brain conscious.

The point of this talk is that those processes, P1 or P2 or whatever they are, don't happen inside brains.

They happen in our interpretations of brains as computations.

But from the information actually inside a brain itself, the processes could be completely different processes.

They could be Q1, Q2 and so on.

And so those theories of consciousness cannot work.

And if you want a short code mnemonic for why those theories of consciousness cannot be right, it is those theories of consciousness treat the brain as a computer.

So they have encoding, but they don't have decoding.

And so they can't get consciousness has decoded meaning.

And so a theory which only has encoding, but no decoding can't get decoded meaning.

And we go back again now to the example of a floor cleaning robot, just to illustrate what that means.

Supposing in a floor cleaning robot, we can go and talk to the designer or read the design handbook and get the complete theory of how the robot computer works.

Supposing we've done that for brains, supposing we have a complete model of all the neurons in the brain, what they're doing.

And so we happen to know that a particular computational process called visual perception is implemented by certain neurons we can point at in the brain, neurons N1, N2, and so on.

Or there's another process, higher order computing, that's done by a different set of neurons.

And you can divide that set.

You can say the higher order computing about an object B

is done by process P4B, and that is done by certain neurons which we've identified called N4B and so on and so forth.

And so there we are, we've made great progress in cognitive science, understanding how the brain works.

And now we propose a theory of consciousness.

So we say the consciousness of object B in our visual field is caused by process P4B.

So what form would that theory take?

What we're saying is information physically inside the brain, including the information in neural events N3B and the particular neurons causes awareness of object B. But this theory is not possible because information inside the brain doesn't define which neurons are the group N3B.

Inside the brain is not known which are neurons N3B.

There might be any neurons.

So, and the information to decode

N3B as the process P3B doesn't exist inside the brain.

And so there's no possible theory in which consciousness arises from physical events inside the brain.

To go back to the Roomba example, the robot example, the robot has memory with a load of memory locations, one of which represents a table leg.

But the robot itself doesn't know which memory location represents the table leg.

So the robot itself cannot be conscious of the table leg.

And it's an exact parallel, I claim, between those two cases.

So I would like to pause at this point, ask people to chip in with questions, doubts, and so on.

I'll just restate the incompleteness theorem.

The physical events inside a computer don't define what it computes.

and that external information is required to interpret those events as a computation and to give them any meaning.

So a few questions for you.

Is this a correct viewpoint of computation?

Is it just a physical process?

Or does it require an external interpreter or decoder?

And do modern theories of consciousness have any decoding built into them?

Or if they don't, what does it imply for those theories?

So I will pause and anybody wants to put their hands up

come out with objections.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, Kenneth and anyone else?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks, Robert.

I mean, I think, you know, I was reminded when I was looking at your slides earlier and then now again, that this was all debated

for a long time, actually, in the late 80s and early 90s, kind of famously by John Searle and Daniel Dennett.

So, Searle on one side and Dennett on the other.

You know, Searle kind of, in a way, made most of his or a big chunk of his philosophical career just going around

giving the Chinese room argument.

Absolutely, yeah.

And Dennett, I mean, in a way, Dennett's response was something, you know, it was kind of unclear, but it sort of bordered on illusionism some of the time.

Yeah, yeah.

And then sometimes a kind of incoherent position where it seemed to presuppose that you could take the intent, what Dennett called the intentional stance, which is to interpret entities as exhibiting intentionality.

So for Searle, you know, the vacuum cleaning computer robot, the vacuum cleaning robot, it's

it's uh is as if it wants to you know vacuum stuff and make a map of the room but it doesn't literally do it it just sort of has a structure that's sufficient for us to go oh it it's as if it maps the room but it doesn't literally map the room right and of course dennett wanted to um either say that all intentionality is all is as if intentionality

and and that as if intentionality meant adopting the intentional stance and interpreting an entity as if it had intentionality so then if you apply that apply that to yourself

what is your interpreting activity is it intentional or not so that's the kind of the incoherence not as if i mean i know i'm not as if yes of course dennett would say oh no you don't know that right so i yeah yeah there's that there's those i mean those questions are very


SPEAKER_03:
important questions and i would go back even further than john searle to leibniz the leibniz mill the cogs inside the mill do they know anything about the wind sort of thing sure but john searle made the chinese room argument

that said computers can't have meaning inside them.

And to my mind, nobody produced a satisfactory answer.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I agree with you on that.

I've always thought that.

I think there was a lot of debate about it.

It lasted to about the mid-90s, and then people just quit talking about it.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, also David Chalmers.

Yeah.

I mean, I think David Chalmers came back to it in about the 2000s.

He said computation is a causal network of causal topology.

and that has meaning i think his answer was unsatisfactory but we could talk about that but i think basically nobody's really answered john searle and the conclusion that i'm reaching is that it agrees with john searle that you need something else besides computers going on to get consciousness


SPEAKER_02:
I see that.

And then there's also, you know, those old sort of famous results in mathematical logic.

I mean, other than girls and completeness theorems, I'm talking about the Lervenheim-Skolem theorems.

Gosh.

Where you can have, you know, non-standard models of domains where it's like just a first order, you know, model of even arithmetic doesn't really capture arithmetic, you know.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, sure.


SPEAKER_02:
It requires a kind of, oh, we're going to interpret it as just being this, and then I may have gotten that one wrong, but there are results like that.

And then there's the whole issue of the non-categoricity of first-order models.

Yeah.

Like second-order, but we don't have a good idea of how to compute second-order models.


SPEAKER_03:
module models to get categoricity um no no my views on athletics are unpopular i i would say mathematics i mean everybody sees mathematics as this separate abstract domain actually i think certain elementary facts of mathematics like two plus two equals four they're about numbers they're not abstract and they are experimental facts and they agree with the data when you have two things and add two things you get four things

And we've learned that.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, but I thought, you know, in terms... The only alternative a computationalist has here is to say something like there are objective facts that pertain to, say, what a computation, what a realized computation computes that are kind of intrinsic to it.

And that's almost exactly, yeah, that's almost a kind of Pythagorean position you would have to hold.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I, I think that is, is straightforwardly wrong.

In other words, I can have a computation, uh, like a logical and gate.

I can have two ones make a one, but I can interpret that either as an and gate, or if I interpret, if I change around and say, no one means true and Paulson and not means true.

I can say, no, it's not an and gate.

You're not doing and it's doing all or again, in terms of bitwise operations, I can say this operation on bits in the computer is addition, or I can say, no, I haven't represented used bits represent one, two, three, four.

I've used bits to represent one, 10, a hundred, a thousand.

So the operation is actually doing is multiplication.


SPEAKER_02:
so there is no objective fact about what operation what computation is doing yeah i mean if you think that then i think you're right so i've often thought this that what the computationalist has to say is that no there are objective facts about what certain realized computational structures compute

And maybe, was Carl saying something like that about the free energy?


SPEAKER_03:
I think he was, yeah.

It's a shame because I've got slides coming up about the free energy principle and Markov blankets and so on.

We could have discussed them then.

But anyway, I'll get to discuss that with Carl later because I'm giving this talk to the TNB later.

But I think Carl was sort of saying that.

that there is an interpretation, a unique interpretation of a computation.

And I think there are just too many counter examples.

I think any computation you show me, and you show me your interpretation of it, I can show you another interpretation that's just as good.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Yeah.

Well, when you said, if I may say one last thing, when you talked about, and David mentioned this,

the sensory and motor encoding as a kind of locus of real representational content.

Is that how I... Yeah.

Sensory organs encode and muscles decode.

Okay, why couldn't somebody raise the same objection that you're raising to computation as encoding meaning to that process?

Um, because there again, you might say, well, it depends, you know, to kind of look at another

line of theory of intentionality, theory of meaning, theory of representation that went on around the same time.

There's, for example, Ruth Milliken's sort of naturalistic theory that would allow you to assign a definite content to sensory and motor encoding and decoding.

But it's all kind of based on evolutionary history.

And if the evolutionary history were different, but you had exactly the same physical inputs, outputs, and so on, you would get a different content.

And that's kind of a...

To my way of thinking, I kind of unsatisfied... It may be fine with respect to, like, what the body is objectively doing and what it evolved for, but in terms of conscious content, it seems to me it's not going to work.

It's too externalist.

Even if I had a completely different evolution, but I ended up being this kind of atom-for-atom replica of what I am now...

The contents of my thoughts don't really change.

It seems to me.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, yeah, I mean, I would say you can't throw evolution away like that, but you can't play with it like that.

I think the brain is a result of evolution and evolution has meant that since organs have evolved to encode light and touch and so on, and muscles have evolved to do things and brains evolved to make sure that they do the right things.

And all that is a coherent picture, and I cannot just pull that apart, basically.


SPEAKER_02:
So if I understand you, would you think that you can't play the same objection to the representational content of sensory encoding and motor decoding, or however you want to think of it, as you can play it?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think, to step back a bit, I think all the theories we have

in natural science or gas laws or whatever it might be, involve encoding and decoding.

And the theory we have of the brain involves encoding by sense organs, involves decoding by muscles.

So that is, that theory is a coherent package that we can test against data on its own.

Whereas the difficulty with consciousness is that we don't see the decoding.

Whereas we know that consciousness is about decoded information.

Yeah.

But ordinary physical theories or theories of the brain, they always have an encoding bit and a decoding bit, and they kind of balance out.

So we've got at the end of the day, predictions we can test against data and we can say this theory is right or wrong.

So that's roughly my viewpoint, but there's a lot there.

We're getting into deep water.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_08:
Robert, we've also, of course, emailed on this, but external information is required to interpret those physical events as a computation.

So I think I'm 100% with you on relational semiosis and the idea that multiple perspectives could be taken on a computational process.

But what causal relevance, other than actually intervening on the internal states, would those external states have?

those interpretations matter for the interpreter but but unless they re-enter causally into the target system how do they come to matter for the system itself well i think that's what i'm going to address on the second half of the talk um and again you know the whole picture is the computer only picture


SPEAKER_03:
is radically incomplete and you get gaps like that but there's something else comes along which fills the gap and that's what i'm going to talk about okay so uh that by the way we can come back to that but that's more discussion i thought some people might object might have that question which in a sense was carl's question that isn't every physical thing a computation

And to a certain extent, I can regard lots of physical phenomena as computation.

I can regard a gas in a cylinder as a computation.

And there, the encoding is something that gives the gas a certain temperature.

But my theory is not just gas in a cylinder.

It's gas plus a pressure piston, which measures the pressure.

And the pressure piston is what does the decoding.

So that's a bit of a diversion.

I'd like to move on from this slide because that's not what the second half talks about.

If anyone wants to come back to this slide later, I'm happy to do so.

Now, what's the positive proposal?

How can brains be conscious?

The positive proposal is the brain is a neural computer, but it's not only that.

Something else is happening.

And it has to be happening because we know brains are conscious.

And so we need something else to make them conscious.

So what might that something be?

The proposal here is that the extra something is an analog model of reality.

And that an analog model is different from what goes on in digital computers or neural computers.

So what's an analog model?

Approach this by examples.

A toy car is an analog model of a real car.

Or a map is an analog model of a piece of terrain.

Or a photograph is an analog model of some scene.

So this gives us some idea of what analog models are about.

And I claim we try and encapsulate this in definition of what is an analog model.

A model M is an analog model of some physical situation P if

M has the same topology as P. In other words, if the situation P is donut shaped, then M is donut shaped.

And there's some kind of point to point correspondence between the physical situation P and the model M. So a point in the model is a function of a point in the physical thing.

And the function F, which relates

points in model and physical reality are a continuous function.

Mathematically, it's a fiber bundle, I think.

And it preserves neighborhoods.

And it preserves spatial binding.

So there are things in the analog model, which are like borders, for instance, borders on a map, which are also borders in the real situation.

So some of the information in the model M, in the physical situation P,

is reproduced in the model M, but with no encoding.

And so there's certain information you can get out of the model M, which doesn't require decoding.

And that is, I believe, the secret to consciousness, that there is an analog model inside the brain, and that model is a source of consciousness.

That model doesn't need any decoding.

So there can be information in consciousness about external things, because it's gone into the analog model without it being encoded.

So, I should say that I've tried to discuss analog models in a couple of minutes, but they're not that simple.

Because you could say, analog computation requires external decoding, just like any other form of computation.

And that's what I believe Orsman et al.

said.

And there's been loads of philosophical debate about what analogue modelling is.

People like Gibson, Fodor and Peleshin and so on.

And you could say, well, you've given the examples of maps and photographs, but they're actually encoded.

They are divisible.

You look very closely at a map, you can divide it into little fibres on the paper and they've got ink or they haven't got ink.

And the ink is an encoding of information.

Or you look at a photographic film and there are molecules of dye.

Or you look at a computer screen, there are pixels, they're all encoded.

However, those aren't the only examples of analogue models.

There are other analogue models which aren't divisible.

For instance, if you have a lens and the optical image is a model of reality, but it is not divisible because you zoom in very closely on the image, you get to the diffraction limit and usually get blurry.

So you cannot keep dividing an image from a lens as far as you like.

Similarly, a hologram, it's not divisible because a hologram is a Fourier transform of a spatial distribution on a film, say.

And so you can't zoom in as close as you like on a hologram and keep dividing and dividing it.

And another more exotic example is a single quantum state.

That's not divisible.

Notoriously not divisible.

And there are some quantum states which can hold very large amounts of information, macroscopic amounts of information, and they last longer.

They last a long time.

Most quantum states get dissipated in 10 to the minus 18 seconds and don't last at all.

But certain quantum states can last

very long times, and these are Bose-Einstein condensates.

They're things like superconductors or superfluids.

By the way, Fran is watching this talk.

I'm running out of water, so if she could bring me some water, I'd be very grateful.

So Bose-Einstein condensates are an example of quantum states which can exist for a long time and can hold a lot of information, but they are very rare states of matter.

So they...

I think people say that couldn't exist in the brain, but I think we shouldn't rule them out because evolution is very clever.

So the question of analog representations in the brain is still, I think, an open question and it's a question of physics or biophysics rather than a philosophical mathematical question.

Right.

So what's this got to do with consciousness?

Analog models have spatial binding.

In other words, they have things like boundaries which map to boundaries in the real world.

Now, our conscious experience includes a 3D model of local space.

That's what it's like to be.

You see a model of your computer screen in front of you, a model of your table itself.

And that model has spatial... Oh, my wall's coming.

That's great.

you.

That model has spatial spatial binding and so that model could be the source of consciousness with no decoding required.

So here is the positive proposal that the brain as well as a computer contains an analog model of local space and that analog model is the sole cause of

source of consciousness isn't consciousness is nothing to do with the neurons in the brain it's all coming from that analog one so that's a positive proposal and i'll sketch a bit um so the question you might ask is well you've said there might be an analog model of space in the brain what use would that be why would it evolve would it serve any purpose would it help the brain do any real computing brains need to do and

The answer is yes, it could be very useful because it could store a Bayesian maximum likelihood model of what's going on around the animal for limited periods of time, say for a few seconds.

It could be the place where all the sense data about the animal's surroundings get integrated into a single best likelihood model.

And it could persist this information for a fraction of a second while the animal decides what to do.

It could keep this information while the animal classifies the things around it, recognizing things that they have to do things about.

It could be used for simulating and planning what the animal's going to do.

And it could be used for comparing the present situation with past situations like memory and learning.

So the answer is yes, there could be lots of uses for an analog model in the brain.

Could it happen?

There is a possible physical form for the model.

as a wave excitation, and I've written papers about this.

But I'm not going to divert into those papers now, because that is simply, for the purpose of this talk, just an existent proof, to prove that it can be done, it could be done.

If evolution could use a wave excitation in the brain to store information, then that could be where the analogue model is stored.

And just to illustrate that in terms of free energy principle and active inference,

Here is a picture of the classic active inference FEP model of the brain.

Brain is a neural computer and it has a Markov blanket.

There's the outer, what I call, there are many Markov blankets, but it has an outer Markov blanket between the brain and the rest of the world.

And the sense organs are outside the Markov blanket.

They encode information which comes through the Markov blanket.

The brain does computation and then

neural spike trains come out of the market blanket and they go to muscles, which turn into physical action.

So there is encoding and decoding in this computer model of the brain, but there's no decoding inside the brain.

So active inference is all about this cycle here, where the muscle actions produce all sorts of changes in the world and they come back via sense organs.

So active inference and the FEP is a very complete and capable model of the brain, but

I would claim it cannot give you consciousness because all the information in here is encoded and there's nothing inside the brain that does the decoding.

Decoding is done on the way out.

So how would active inference and the FEP have to be modified to take account of consciousness?

it's as in this diagram here, you have not only an outer Markov, you have the same senses and muscles in the outer Markov blanket as you had before, but also as well as the computer in the brain, the gray computer we've got here, we've got the inner ring, the inner right white ring, which is the analog model of local space.

So what happens is the sense data comes in as encoded the brain, and then it gets decoded again into this analog model.

and from the analog model it gets encoded, and there's a rapid iteration of comparing sense data with the model.

So that's the way the best possible model of local space gets developed inside the brain.

And similarly, if the animal wants to plan things, then it extracts information from the analog model about the current situation, it does some computation about it, and it puts back

what the situation would be if the animal made certain moves.

So if the animal wants to plan certain movements, this green cycle here is what happens.

And so in this theory of enhanced accurate inference, if you like, there is an internal analog model as well as the computer and consciousness arises solely from that internal analog model.

The advantage of that is that if you get consciousness from the analog model, you don't need to decode it.

And the analog model is just like what consciousness is just like.

So there's no decoding involved and we've solved the problem, which we had with purely neural computer models of the brain.

Okay.

So that I think is a future direction, which I would hope active inference would take in order to produce a decent account of consciousness.

And I think that's a promising route.

So just to talk briefly about the future for theories of consciousness, I think some approaches, most approaches to theories of consciousness have this brain as a computer only assumption, and therefore they can't actually account for consciousness because they don't have decoding.

But I think some of the theories do have some promising elements in them.

I think the global workspace theory there,

It's compatible with the idea that the global workspace could contain an analog model of space somewhere in the thalamocortical system.

Certain people have written, Bjorn Merke has written about consciousness without a cortical system.

Again, this is compatible with the idea that somewhere in the midbrain, possibly the thalamus, there is an analog model.

I'll talk briefly on the projective consciousness model, which some of you know very well.

And that says there is a model of space in the brain, which is a projective transform model.

Although the PCM doesn't talk about analog at all, it does talk of projective transform model.

It has many properties in common with our consciousness.

And I think that is very much a step in the right direction.

And I've got a more detailed working out of this.

I call the projective wave model that says there is an analog of space in the brain it's in the thalamus it's in a wave excitation or in insects it's in the in the central body and that's the basis of consciousness but that is not really the main point of this talk is to talk about the future is to say we need to go in some different direction because the ordinary computational theories of consciousness are not going to hack it

So that is really the end of what I have to say.

After 35, how long?

No, an hour.

So open for discussion, here are a few questions.

Is there any alternative to having an analogue model in the brain?

Is there some other thing that could be the cause of consciousness?

Could it be stored in neurons or does it have to be stored in some other form such as a wave?

And

I think this has not only implications for consciousness, but also implication for cognitive models of the brain.

If we admit this possibility, does that actually help us produce models of how the brain works?

Or alternatively, should we just give up on theories of consciousness?

So, open for questions.


SPEAKER_01:
May I jump in?

Sure.

so one thing on just a second i'm going to close my door because there's people here all right so one thing to bear in mind with respect to this discussion about the brain in particular

is that for most neurophysiologists brain scientists not cognitive brain scientists as you know who's often so are not real neuroscientists uh i've said and restated when after computers and in their

digital form so with this encoding and decoding process involved have emerged that the brain is not a computer in the sense that precisely the brain is an analog machine that neurons do not encode things that actually spike strains are analog signals so it's actually the core belief of the classical neurophysiology

and computer sorry brain scientists that the brain is not digital but an analog machine that has analog model of the world now in the detail how that would work and how that would generate phenomenology at this as the subjective experience we have is i guess another question um so i think that is very what you are stating is actually very classical

from the perspective of neuroscience.

But it has been forgotten by a lot of people who are in the business of cognitive neuroscience.

And myself, at some point, I thought, we have to go back to the analogy between mind and brain and software and hardware.

So un-tailing some sort of encoding, decoding through virtualization.

But that's the theory of mind.

I don't know what I believe today, but actually what you say is about, you know, can the brain be considered or part of the brain or neurons can encode an analog model?

For most neurophysiologists, that's already the case.

How is another question.

So now in terms of the particular model and implementation or form of this analog model,

I would even go further and say at this point in my career and reflection where I'm actually completely lost, I'm open to anything, including what I used to consider as sort of science, like the claims of the Chalmers about quantum mechanics.

Why not?

And even some other physics that we don't even know yet and haven't understood in terms of, you know, the brain, maybe like a

I'm going to use an analogy like an antenna of sorts receiver and emitter that connects to physics in which you know consciousness resides that we may never understood.

So the field is open for me and I'm not shocked by your arguments.

I think it's worthwhile to pursue but I don't have a definite answer neither of

what it could be, this analog model, or even if there is not a physics in which encoding and decoding can perfectly make sense.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, I've got two remarks, I suppose.

Well, let me remember one of them.

The idea that the brain is an analog computer and neuron spike trains are an analog representation of reality.

I don't think that... To me, spike trains are irretrievably encoded, and we don't know how they're encoded.

We don't know.

Certain neurons, pyramidal neurons, may be firing rate

is the way to look at it.

Even looking at firing rates is decoding.


SPEAKER_01:
But nobody in neurophysiology looks at firing rate in a computational sense of the term, as computational neuroscientists do.

They just consider it's an analog signal that

as an analog relationship with the amount of neurotransmitters that are going to be released and how that's going to affect, based on the biochemistry of the synaptic cleft, the potential of membrane on other neurons.

So for them, it's really like an electronic machine of a classical analog, you know, there is no analog digital converter, if you wish, in the sense of an analogue signal.

For them, it's all analog.


SPEAKER_03:
I suppose the other problem I have with that is you can look at certain neurons in the brain and it appears that they encode things or they represent things by firing rate.


SPEAKER_01:
You could say that is analogue, but actually... I'm sorry to cut you Robert's enthusiasm of the discussion, but those are models that have been extracted and designed by people who started thinking computationally about the brain.

and we had a fairly superficial culture about neurons and electrophysiology, I would say, for many of them, and that decided to interpret spike trains and their frequency or the rate of spiking as a signal that in itself was the meaningful signals in their simplified model of neurophysiology

to be able to compute certain functions like doing arithmetics or understand certain basic memory mechanisms and input-output relationships through transfer function.

But that's a small, very small part of neuroscience.

That's the computational neuroscientists that we're trying to do modeling and that interpreted spike trend as a relevant parameter.

But a true neurophysiologist would never think that way.


SPEAKER_03:
Do you mean experimental neurophysiologists?


SPEAKER_01:
Or even theoretical, I mean an electrophysiologist who masters the biophysics of membranes, of active conduction.

Oh, sure, sure.

That's a physical theory.


SPEAKER_03:
They think that... Yeah, I'm talking about people who worry about consciousness.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, but they are usually not real brain scientists.

That's what I'm saying.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, okay.


SPEAKER_02:
uh kenneth and then paul or anyone else who hasn't spoken ben on mute kenneth sorry just to uh make a quick remark uh with relation to what david just said i mean i think mcculloch and and pitts knew their neurophysiology pretty well and they knew they were making a massive simplification

and making a choice and kind of setting up neural network modeling as computational.

But I just want to say, and it's also kind of following up with what David says, well, I have two questions, really.

So, one is, suppose there is this analog model.

I mean, can't we raise the same sort of objections to computational models that we, I mean, couldn't we raise to analog models the same sort of objections we're raising to computational models?

So, for example, if you take analog computers like the differential engine, you know, Charles Babbage's

Wasn't it called the differential engine?

Yeah, that was later than Babbage.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, he did the differential engine, and there was a later one in the 30s.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so it's using gears, if I'm not mistaken, to do that.

Yeah, sure.

You mentioned the abacus.

I mean, it's an analog device, and someone might kind of push and go, well, really...

Digital computers are all implemented in an analog world, so really they're analog.

I know there's the flip side where everybody's trying to turn everything analog into something digital, like information ontologies or it from bit.


SPEAKER_03:
To me, the key distinguishing factor is that some of the information in an analog model

Doesn't need decoding.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

And I can... I like that idea because I think that there's... And that leads me to my second question.

I like the idea because I'm one of those who thinks that consciousness is not exhausted by intentionality.

And what I mean by that is...

Yes, there's the intentional level where you think, like, you're seeing something as something, but there's also the level at which you're just seeing, if we're talking about 50, for example.

So, for example, if you... you might wake up in the morning and have, like, a wadded sheet in front of your face, and for a second you don't know what it is.

But there's before you interpret before you interpret it.

Right.

So there's still something you're sort of directly aware of that doesn't require any decoding to be aware of it.

And then there's this further layer of decoding, which is like, oh, yeah, sheet or oh, it's kind of perceptual.

And that's where intentionality or meaning in the sense we've been talking about it enters in now.

OK, so I like that idea.

uh that an analog model might give you that layer that isn't it's information that doesn't have to be decoded because it's really sort of just built into the structure of that episode or that phase of consciousness itself but

My question for you really is, what is it to decode or interpret or intentionally animate, to use a Husserlian language?

What is it to see something as something?

That's like a further process.

You can imagine, in theory anyway, a kind of consciousness that doesn't do it, that is basically just kind of locked in this...

you know, it doesn't really sort of get outside of itself.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
That's a complicated question.


SPEAKER_02:
Your arguments earlier on kind of depend on consciousness always involving intentionality or interpretation, which, you know, is certainly a tempting thought that it always does.

I can't say that it's false, but I wonder, like, what is the theory of interpretation or the theory of intentionality?

And do you need one?


SPEAKER_03:
your for your project um well this um i would say in that moment you wake up before you've interpreted your sense data as this is a sheet um there are things in your sense stage like a boundary between red and green yeah

you know, and you're, you're aware of that boundary before you say, Oh, that's, it's about my sheet.

Yeah.

And so there is a pre interpretation, experience, raw experience.

And that quality of the raw, the what it is like, bit is what, where the analog model represents

It has a nice fit to consciousness.

Analog model has got a barrier between red and green.

Your consciousness has that.

And that's for classification and intentionality.

When you see something on the wall, you say, oh, that's a fly.

That is built in by evolution.

Animals have to take their sense data and classify it into things they need to do things about.

That's a fly.

I can eat it.

Whatever.

And that secondary experience of

Taking a piece of sense state and classifying it as something is useful for the animal, but it also involves the conscious bit.

But once the animal has seen a fly as a fly, it doesn't quite see the raw sense state.

It mixes the fly up with previous flies it's seen in his memory.

And its current model of reality involves not only the sense data coming in, but all the flies it's seen before, that they're going to behave that way and be edible or whatever it may be.


SPEAKER_02:
I can agree with that, but what I wonder is, is that, you know, the seeing as or the interpretation, is that, do you also want to, you want to deny that that could be computational, correct?


SPEAKER_03:
No, no, it's computational, but it feeds results back into the model.

So you think that when I see a fly on the wall, there's computation in my brain that says that's a fly.

But then that computation feeds back into my analog model.

So my model is a bit more fly like than it was before.


SPEAKER_02:
But now you've got intentionality in your computations.

And then

We can go back and go, well, why were you objecting to computations being intentional in the first half of your talk?


SPEAKER_03:
No, my computation has evolved to classify the visual field into useful things that I need to know about.

And, you know, the computation doesn't know that's a fly.

The computation just does some grinding.

And it makes my muscles do a fly thing.

it makes my conscious awareness do a fly thing but inside it the computation are not aware of a fly oh okay okay i all right i have to think about i'm not i'm not sure i follow you completely but well my brains evolved to classify things usefully to help me survive i agree with that yeah and it that evolution hasn't made it aware of what the things are it's just

For certain inputs, it produces good outputs, which make me avoid flies, whatever it may be.

But also, it produces outputs into the analog model that says, when I see a blur on the wall, and I'm not sure what it is, I suddenly interpret that blur becomes a bit more focused as a fly, because I know there are flies on that wall.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so the interpretation is a consciousness, is a conscious matter?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

No, the interpretation happens in the computer bit, but the result of being more fly-like than a blur on the wall is in the conscious bit.


SPEAKER_02:
Then it seems to me you're using interpretation or decoding in one sense in the first half of your talk and in another sense right now.


SPEAKER_03:
I don't think so.

I'm saying that the decoding happens on the brain has the computer brain has encoded stuff in it.

And there's two kinds of decoding.

There's decoding out the muscles and there's decoding going into the analog model.


SPEAKER_01:
At some point, if you wish, Ken, for what I understand, there is a decoding that comes from the processing of the within the brain that involved initially a form of encoding.

that remaps somehow this code into an analog model that maps the outside world in a manner that is coherent in term of shape, if you wish.

So there is a shape outside the world.

You don't see it directly.

You encode it through neural process.

And somewhere, somehow, or some mechanisms to be defined, it's decoded within to generate and synthesize an analog

experience of the world for which, even though there is an indirect process, there is a one-to-one of sorts mapping or some mapping that is more analogous in the sense of continuous deformation, if I understand.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

But this is the same kind of decoding that can happen when you ask ChatGPT a question and it spits out an answer, right?


SPEAKER_03:
No, it just does that at times.


SPEAKER_02:
What's that?

ChatGPT just does electronics, nothing else.

Yeah, I got you, but we're talking about the... you want to say there is still a computational sense of encoding and decoding, yes?

But earlier in the talk it was about there's really no computation without some external observer sort of attributing or interpreting a computation.

I'm totally fine with your model.


SPEAKER_01:
And that's the role of the analog model, if I understand well.

Yeah, that's what I'm trying to get at.


SPEAKER_02:
So there's sensory inputs, they get encoded, and then there's a decoding step from the sensory inputs into the analog model.

That's right.

And the analog model is like the conscious episode, and it's what we might call the conscious interpretation.


SPEAKER_03:
That's right, yeah.

I'll go back to this diagram if you like.

I'll just come back to... Is that diagram showing?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

But earlier you said decoding was going to be the same as interpretation.

And so what I'm getting at is like the D, like for your set, your outer D to muscles, is that really interpretation?


SPEAKER_01:
They are decoding spike trains.


SPEAKER_03:
They are interpreting spike trains as physical movements.


SPEAKER_01:
From the outset, Robert said, if you only take the computer model, which in the digital world excludes an analog model in this rationale, then you cannot get an interpreter that is inside the brain.

It's always some human or some other type of interpreter outside.

now what is introducing is a new mechanism that is still to be uncovered in terms of its physics or its whatever in which a analog model is actually working within the brain and therefore is not digitally operating as in a computer so there is a mixed architecture between a digital and analog system in the brain yeah so to speak


SPEAKER_02:
yes but but just it just to it's it seems to me like your your d and the red box that process is not it's the the coding process is not itself an intentional interpretation but it results in one yeah uh it results in one yeah it's creating the analog model okay uh benjamin and then paul and then anyone else who wants to add more


SPEAKER_08:
Unmute, Benjamin.

Benjamin, unmute.


SPEAKER_07:
Apologies.

If I understand correctly, and I'm sure you can clarify this for me, there are, according to this projective wave theory of consciousness, there are certain things that are built in or baked into the system, such as time pressure or time perception,

And, uh, are there other things besides, you know, uh, time and space that are, would be necessary for this, uh, for consciousness consciousness to emerge?

Or, uh, is it just that with, you know, the effects of entropy?


SPEAKER_03:
I would put the emphasis on space.

The animal model is a model of space in the present moment.

And I think for most animals, the present moment is all that exists.

they don't have a sense of chronological time and they don't worry about time.

They're just worrying about what they're going to do right now.

And so that's, for that they need analog model of space.

So I would put much more emphasis on space than time.

I think chronological time is a recent human thing that came along with language.


SPEAKER_08:
Great.

Thank you.

Brianna, then Paul or anyone else.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi.

So what if I look at something and I can't quite comprehend it?

Would that mean I'm not conscious of... I'm not currently conscious?

What if an animal can't comprehend something or anything, for that matter?


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry, I didn't catch all the questions.


SPEAKER_04:
Try again.

So the ability to extract meaning in an analog model is what you would say is required for consciousness, then?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
So what if I'm unable to extract meaning about something?

Am I not conscious in that moment?


SPEAKER_03:
No.

I think you were asking about animals.

I think we've got a perfectly good theory of animals.

Animal brains absorb sense data and classify sense data into situations they need to do things about and do things about those situations.

Now that theory doesn't tell us how animal brains are conscious.

So I would decouple the two issues of how a brain does its practical job of helping the animal or the person survive versus how a brain actually creates consciousness.

Now we don't actually know whether animals are conscious, but I would guess that they are.


SPEAKER_04:
So if they're unable to make the classification of, for example, the sheep from the earlier analogy, then they would not be conscious.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think the two questions are independent.

The animal brain can make the classification that it has to, but it can do that without being conscious of it.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Perhaps, Brianna, you can think of an example that comes from neuropsychology.

Think about a person who gets dementia or some other very debilitating neurological disease.

and for whom at some point everything is a confused world, which is very difficult to interpret, very disorienting, very minimalistic in terms of the content, the quantity of information that a person can integrate, but nevertheless the person still is trapped into this confused and disorienting experience.

So there might be consciousness, but not necessarily very informative in the sense of a coupling, adaptive coupling with the world, so to speak.

Would you agree with that, Robert?


SPEAKER_03:
I agree that if you take this viewpoint,

you can bounce it off all sorts of situations like that, the sort of person who's terminally confused and so on.

And I think you keep getting insights as to how the picture works in those cases.

And it takes to me quite a lot of sort of reflecting about what this model of the brain actually means and how it

how it affects how we interpret various strange conditions like that, yeah.

I agree, it's instructive to do, but I don't have all the answers to what comes out of asking those questions.


SPEAKER_04:
So the patient with dementia would be less conscious than someone without it is?

What we would denote from that?


SPEAKER_03:
No, a person with dementia might still be very conscious of the room around them.

But they're missing the meaning.

But in a really instantaneous way, rather than like,

an animal has no sense of the future or the past or causality or whatever.

It could be just conscious of sensations in the present moment.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And for me, you know, Brianna, what you say is somewhat what would the

integrated information theory with claims that you need to have some sort of complexity and efficiently integrated information that is both rich and synthetic to get a high quantity of consciousness.

But to me, the core of consciousness is not that.

And I worked a lot with patients a long time ago in neuropsychology.

And I think you can be acutely conscious while being totally confused.

It can be a very intense conscious experience to be totally confused.

I'll change to that.

It's not informative in the sense of adaptive coupling.


SPEAKER_04:
So then meaning is not required for consciousness.


SPEAKER_01:
Or maybe a bit of meaning, but at least some... And again, that begs the question of what we call meaning.

It's a complicated question.

But at least the structured, adaptive, highly informative contents of consciousness, when the brain is super efficient and well coupled with its environment,

might not be what really is the most fundamental aspect of consciousness.

It often goes with it.

It's very useful to have it.

But I remember a patient is a very amnesic patient with anterograd amnesia that were very, very bad or dementia patient.

that really really really were confused but we are living very intense and distressing experience and i would say that even though they could not necessarily have a very profound recursive thinking about their own consciousness and how it is perceived by others etc even though they they would have a very hard time to navigate even their immediate environment their experience was intense


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, I definitely agree with your interpretation.

Fascinating.

Can I chip in?


SPEAKER_06:
Is it here?

Hi, Paul.

Hi, Robert.

I thought you'd be disappointed if I didn't say something.

So here we go.

I'm also a little disappointed you didn't credit me with the Roomba example.

didn't I didn't what didn't credit me with the Roomba I didn't get in that the rumor example is due to Paul um so first of all just to say that I I'm a lay person in all of the aspects of um of this discussion except for the fact I'm a professional human being um and uh Robert and I often engage in uh philosophical and um computational discussions

around the area, this area.

And being a layperson, I can pose some questions, but I may not understand your answers, so I'm going to say that right from the outset.

Nor may I. But Robert's requirement for encoding and decoding

relies on the requirement for an extra layer of significance a meaning to use the word that he has given it um and my understanding is that those requirements for extra significance and meaning come from the fact that we know we are conscious that we have consciousness

So Robert and I, in one of our discussions, came to a bit of an impasse where he said, well, I know I can take the rim bar apart and I can see how it works.

And it's clearly just a matter of physics and electronics.

And so we have that evidence and then we have the evidence that we are conscious.

Then he said, at least I'm conscious.

Do you not know that you are, Paul?

And I

I don't know.

I don't know I'm conscious in the sense that there is a clear category difference between what I experience, what I feel, if you like, and what I can imagine an advanced AI, self-evolving,

computer with sensors actuators etc to have i cannot hand on heart so that i know where that dividing line comes so i would just like to posit that there is no meaning beyond what our brains our neural brains what their currency is what their conclude what the conclusion of our neural brains is

There is no meaning beyond that because both the advanced Roomba or ourselves, we attach adequate meaning to what we perceive to inhabit the environment we're in.

So I would question why there is a divide that requires encoding and decoding to happen.

I think in a nutshell, that's the essence of the argument, which I've rehearsed with Robert before.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Let me try and approach that.

I mean, I'm concerned with doing science.

In order to do science, I need experimental data.

And if I'm going to do science about consciousness, I need experimental data about consciousness.

And I have got data, I claim, that tells me I am conscious.

But I haven't got data that tells me the Roomba is conscious.

So the question of whether or not a Roomba is conscious, I don't feel it's justified to assume it is conscious in anything it is like to be a Roomba.

I just don't see that's a problem for my science if it's solely trying to account for consciousness of things with brains, biological things.

So in a sense, the question of whether the rumour is conscious or not is of less interest to me just because I don't have data about it.

But I think I do have data about me.


SPEAKER_06:
But that's not the challenge I'm putting to you, Robert.


SPEAKER_03:
No, you're totally wrong.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, the challenge...

I'm putting to you in essence is whether there is a distinction between the sensory experience, ability to operate in this environment that are, well, it's a Roomba and beyond sort of advanced AI, self-evolving, possibly self-replicating with improvements, robot, between that and what we are.

So I'm challenging the notion that humans have some categorical distinction, sort of self-awareness, awareness of our environment, which we call consciousness, which I have a real problem with that word, which is different to that of an advanced

piece of electronics and computing.

So I'm not challenging you to say whether a Roomba is conscious or not.

I'm challenging you to identify a distinction between the two, because if there is no distinction between the two... The only distinction is I've got data about me.


SPEAKER_03:
I don't have data about a Roomba.

And I'm doing science, so I need data.


SPEAKER_06:
But the data you've ascribed to yourself is consciousness that is distinct from a machine's.


SPEAKER_03:
I have data that says there is something that is like to be me.

This is the Thomas Nagel sense of consciousness that is what it is like.

And internally in my brain, in my life, there is something that is like to be alive.

I don't have that evidence about a Roomba.

So a Roomba doesn't worry me.

Because I'm trying to do science, not just philosophy.

I'm using philosophy for science, if you like.

And for my scientific purposes, I need data.

And the only data on consciousness that I've got is data on consciousness in people.

So I'm deliberately restricting my focus, if you like, just to do this and not that.


SPEAKER_06:
But what you're saying is that

you have is that your consciousness is putting a degree of significance on the objects which your eyes light on which is greater than that simply required to operate in your environment um i i don't i don't see yeah i mean it's a remarkable fact i i could be a zombie but i'm not right well that's what i'm trying to do in the lightest possible way


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, it's a philosophical possibility that I am a zombie, but I haven't had a first-person experience which says I'm not a zombie.

Whereas a Roomba could well be a zombie, and I think it actually is a zombie.

It doesn't bother me.

I just restrict my viewpoint to where I've got data.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm not sure that's what Paul is talking about, but... No, I think you got it wrong.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm saying my viewpoint is restricted.

I'm only trying to do science.

I'm not trying to evaluate philosophical possibilities.

I'm only trying to produce a scientific account of consciousness.

And the only consciousness I know about is what happens in biological things such as me.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, and I'm not making a philosophical point.

I'm simply saying that your requirement for encoding and decoding is only there because you think that there is something, some attachment of meaning and significance required to those things over and above what is simply required to operate in an environment like a Roomba.

And I don't see that.

I don't see that.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, part of the confusion in these debates is that we're stuck with language and language is encoded and it's encoded very badly and ambiguously.

And we use words with very different meanings.

And so we can construct all these constructs about consciousness, which go way beyond the thing itself and which

get us down blind alleys, I think.


SPEAKER_06:
I think, you know, I have a problem with the term consciousness and it's very... It is one of those words that we're very bad at.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, when we use words, we imagine they're kind of precise and say what we mean, but they are so imprecise.


SPEAKER_06:
It does surprise me that the scientific community would continue to use a word like consciousness rather than break it down to

its constituent parts and banning the use of the word consciousness.

It does not feel helpful.


SPEAKER_02:
That's been true.

Well, I think Brianna had a follow-up, isn't that right, to Paul's?


SPEAKER_04:
You are right.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, go ahead.


SPEAKER_04:
So building on Paul's point, I'm actually curious whether an AI model's need to navigate its environment through interacting with us and processing tokens might lead to its own development of a subjective experience.

Could it be that such operational requirements foster an emergent intelligence that we simply can't grasp because we don't share the same kind of subjectivity?

In other words, if these models engage with the world in ways that parallel our interactions, what exactly distinguishes their processes from what we recognize as human consciousness and does this experience involve extracted meaning?


SPEAKER_03:
I don't think I have a neat answer to that, really.

I just come back to my view that anything that goes on inside an AI computer, whether it's running a robot or anything else, is not about things.

And I have consciousness which seems to me to be about things.


SPEAKER_04:
For you, I mean, you can't verify that I'm conscious or that no one else is conscious.

So why can't we verify that a machine is also conscious?

Can they extract meaning like we do from their own subjective experience?

And does that fit into your model?


SPEAKER_03:
If they are conscious, the consciousness they have is not the subject I'm studying.


SPEAKER_08:
does that help at all no probably not that that does help actually it's a fascinating conversation yep how about each person can give sort of a final round where does this take benjamin and then continue around hello uh yeah so i i


SPEAKER_07:
To answer questions about artificial intelligence and consciousness, no, I don't think artificial intelligence can be conscious, at least not distributed systems specifically.

The needing diversity complexity, these kind of things would

prevent that from occurring in any real measurable way, like in terms of subconscious or something of that nature.

Like a thousand of a thing is not diversity.

It's not complexity.

It's just one thing.

So in that regard, no, I don't think that it's possible in any way for artificial intelligence to achieve like sentient self-awareness consciousness.

But it definitely looks like it.

And I think that's pretty cool.

Certainly.


SPEAKER_04:
If it walks like a duck and it talks like a duck, it's probably a duck.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah exactly David and Kenneth well I'm gonna be a bit mischievous I agree with everybody and I don't know at this point so the everything is open to me almost not everything but I don't know


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that is the last word, actually.

Ken?

Well, I mean, I think it's perfectly conceivable that you could have an AI that passes every kind of souped-up Turing test you want, and they become our best friends.

or whatever, and they're complete zombies.

I think that's perfectly possible.

At least it's conceivable.

On the other hand, I take your argument, Robert, to be something like, look, if all you've got is computation...

So if an AI, no matter how fancy it is, no matter how behaviorally equivalent it is to a conscious being, if all it's got is computation going on, it's not conscious because we know that these computations do not carry any meaning.

They're not carrying intentionality and consciousness at least has the capacity for intentionality and meaning.

That whole argument, as I said earlier on, is going to depend on just, like, do you think there is a reasonable theory of intentionality that...

could be applied to computational systems or natural systems.

And that, of course, is an old debate, as I said earlier, that goes back to even before Searle and Dennett.

But Searle and Dennett and then people arguing about intentionality and representation after that.

And then kind of, you're right, that Chalmers kind of resuscitates it, but it's also like, it's a kind of a debate that

that went somewhat silent i think because everybody realized they have no idea what to say um and at the end of the day but i think it's it's it's good that you're bringing it back up and that you're making us think about this in light of a new idea um now that idea itself i want to ask you one sort of last detail oh let me just say in in favor of the word keeping the word consciousness

No, it's been tried before to ban the word consciousness from the philosophy of mind.

This was a very formidable attempt by none other than the nefarious Martin Heidegger.

with the word Dasein, and then of course you just end up creating more ambiguity.

So I think we got to pick some word, right?

Consciousness is fraud.

It has an interesting history, but we got to pick some word for it.

But okay, let me put that aside.

The thing about your model is this.

When you say that this analog model of space has to be topologically equivalent to...

Space?

Ambient space?

Is that right?

Physical reality, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
If you feel a change in front of you, your muscle has a change.


SPEAKER_02:
And there's a continuous function.

right?

The function relating them must be continuous.

Does that mean that the analog model of space is itself really just a space?

It is in fact itself a kind of space?

And is it continuous?

And is it going to require that the physical realization of it involves continuity?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, in my particular theory, the analog model is a Fourier transform of a spatial distribution, which

And consciousness somehow involves a Fourier transform, but that gets technical.

But nevertheless, Fourier transforms are very deep in physics and quantum mechanics, so I think Fourier transforms having to do with consciousness is not a big stretch.

That's a way of evading the question.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, okay.

Because you might think, no, whatever's going on here, like our experience of space, it cannot be...


SPEAKER_03:
like Actually realized in something continuous or it can't know I think a real a miniature space inside the brain is not gonna happen Cannot that we know enough about the brains and that there's not some Miniature model of the world inside the brain.

Yeah, but I think for a transform in a wave is Is the way that can happen?

Okay


SPEAKER_08:
All right.

Thank you very much.

Thank you to the live chatters also for their vigorous commentary.

So thank you all.

Till next time.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

Bye.


SPEAKER_07:
Many thanks.
