## fJTlecxnGD4

Welcome everyone to the Active Inference
Institute textbook reading group. This
is cohort 7 continuing on with chapter 8
of the textbook. We already know that we
are in the second half of the textbook,
meaning we're much more focused on
practice uh rather than theory uh which
we had in the first part. In chapter 2,
we were introduced in chapter six,
excuse me, in part two, we were
introduced in chapter six to a recipe
for building active inference models. So
we're familiar with all of uh you know
the core fundamentals including what is
your system of interest or your agent or
your generative model that you are
looking at and then what is on the other
hand uh to use Mark Solmes's words uh
just as we identified a system of
interest we have to figure out our not
system that is what is not the system of
interest what is the environment or
other variables uh that you know exist
in the world but are not um part and
parcel with our agent. Right? So that's
that means identifying what is our
generative uh process or the environment
or the not system. And so we are
familiar with a lot of the core
components. We look at things like
hidden states, observations and uh
actions or policies which are sequences
of actions. And then we identify the
variables of the models, the different
parameters. And from there we just build
upward and we look at what kind of model
is necessary for understanding our
particular system of interest. And uh so
we looked at chapter 7 which had to do
with discrete state space models and
that covered largely the hidden Markov
model in the musician example and then
built up to the POMDP or partially
observable Markov decision-m process uh
which is sort of the exemplar discrete
state space model and that uh was
illustrated through use of the T-mase
example mouse choosing left or
So we know already with the discrete
state space that we if we followed up to
the end of chapter 7, we can build
models where there are discrete actions
being taken like the mouse chooses the
left or the right arm of the maze or it
chooses to visit the informative cue
along the way. But these ultimately
amount to three different actions per
time step. Um they are not a continuous
state space. Right? So for those who are
very familiar with anything from just
general statistics linear regression up
to machine learning and deep learning
models that work with continuous state
spaces often times we want to create
models that can predict continuous
values such as
37.99 as opposed to choose left in the
teammates right and that also means
being able to read continuous data such
as from data streams IoT devices
um financial data
uh there's a plethora of different kinds
of continuous uh data to look at. So
that's what brings us here to chapter 8
looking at continuous time models. The
these are arguably where active
inference started. Um neuronal signals
are usually measured continuously
including from uh electronphilography or
EEG uh devices as well as uh fMRI and
looking at bolt signals as well as a
variety of other physiological data
including things like heart rate. So
whenever we get into chapter eight, uh
we turn to continuous state space models
which the authors state are well suited
for modeling physical fluctuations
impinging on sensory receptors and for
the continuous motion of the aectors, eg
the muscles we used to change the world
around us with model examples for the
dynamical systems involved in motor
control as well as the concept of
generalized synchrony and finally
constructing hybrid models for combining
discrete and continuous variables at
different levels which features at the
end of the chapter. So largely we're
introduced to notation for stochastic
equations uh which invol are involved in
continuous time models. Uh we see a lot
of similar notation to what we've seen
so far earlier on in the textbook. The
authors largely use y to denote uh
observations and x to denote hidden
states. here. This is not terribly
different, but we notice that we're also
looking at and excuse me, let me go to
this is technically the one for the
generative model. Um, here we're also
looking at a more continuous state
space. We're looking at something like a
kind of error term or or or flux uh or
or stochasticity within an equation as
well as we're seeing a derivative. So
we're looking at uh states evolving over
time as a function of hidden states um
as well as well or rather what is the
rate of change of x given x and some
kind of static or otherwise variable
with stochasticity. So from there we're
introduced to other notions. These are
all very kind of standard ideas that of
course are absolutely not unique to
active inference. This is active
inference building upon a lot of
previous work. And so we're looking at
an attractor system, right? So, so this
uh generative model in equation 8.3,
we're introduced to this idea that V is
a kind of attractor. So whenever X is
too high, it tends to become its rate of
change becomes negative as it heads back
towards the value of the attractor. and
vice versa. If X is too low tends to
increase back towards the value of the
attractor. And so that means as an
attractor is a kind of attracting or
fixed point. Um, I I I emphasize this
despite its simplicity because when you
think about it, we're oftentimes trying
to model systems that, you know,
whenever it comes to agents or looking
at organisms or anything that needs to
persist in some kind of way within an
environment, whether it means an
organism trying to take care of its
homeostasis or it be a thermostat
reacting to changes in temperature, we
tend to be dealing with something like
attractors. we we tend to deal with, you
know, an attractor for me is that my
body temperature tends to be roughly
around 98 degrees Fahrenheit, as I use
Fahrenheit in the United States. And uh
so so we're looking at attractors in the
sense of just where where do things tend
around, right? Uh without the attractor,
we can potentially completely disperse
depending on how our model is set up.
There's nothing to kind of guide us in
our directionality. And whenever it
comes to maintaining a bodily or
physiological or other kind of system
that requires maintenance at some
homeostatic level or range, we can think
of the homeostatic level or range as
very much, you know, kind of an
attractor or set of attractors uh in
which the model tends towards to
persist. Right? So, um we see a lot of
these different kinds of dynamics play
out. We're also introduced to precision,
attention, and sensory attenuation. Many
of these make sense to introduce here.
Precision not and potentially attention.
Uh they they could come in more deeply
in earlier chapters and of course they
do get mentioned in previous chapters,
but essentially they make sense here
because they tend to be viewed as
continuous values. Not necessarily, but
um so so they just relate much more to
the material in this particular chapter
with precision as a kind of sharpening
of a probability distribution. So if
precision is uh below zero or excuse me
between zero and one. So what can happen
is that your probability distribution
can come become more uniform and vice
versa if your precision is far above or
even a little bit above one then the
precision of your probability
distribution is going to sharpen right
so a general sense of this is that if I
have a strong amount of trust in the
observations I'm seeing that is I can
clearly tell that the thing that I'm
seeing in the distance I feel fully
confident it is what it is and we kind
of liken that to the idea of precision
that means there's a very high
probability that the thing I see in the
distance is is what I think it is. The
low near zero probability that it's
going to be something else. Right? So we
get this very sharp distribution where a
lot of the the density is centered
around one possibility. Right? Um
similarly uh the other way around if
precision is low we we see a much more
flat broader distribution. I have no
idea what that thing in the distance is
and I'm not very clear on it. So
precision in that sense is kind of like
a sharpening or lessening dynamic. It
can be related to synaptic gain uh in in
neuronal dynamics. Um it it's it's seen
as being very crucial for uh looking at
things like confidence, right? Whether
it be confidence in your your A matrix,
your uh in terms of being able to uh
interpret a situation or a B matrix in
terms of like being able to look forward
or back. And whenever we're looking at
continuous time models where we're no
longer in the world of A and B matrices,
although some of the dynamics are
certainly similar in the sense of
temporality that we find in a B matrix
and relating uh observations or data or
Y to hidden states or higher order
beliefs or
X. So um we're also looking a lot at
examples that use dynamical uh systems
and so a good example is the generalized
locker dynamics. This is kind of a
classic ecological model that looks at
uh relationships between plants,
herbivores and car carnivores. The sort
of common sensical notion of it is that
the carnivores eat the herbivores who
eat the plants and then the plants need
enough time to regrow otherwise their
population will completely die out. Um
which of course because you can see the
dependencies between these three
different um organisms. They their their
populations fluctuate over time as one
proceeds to consume the other and yet
they come back with reproduction and yet
further if they were to to strongly
diverge from these kinds of patterns.
What we we would have is eventual
extinction of at least one of the
species which necessarily in this
situation would lead to extinction of
the rest of the remaining species.
Right? So we see this kind of movement
of them in kind of cyclical patterns
nearly. And whenever we compare the
herbivores and the plants or we compare
the carnivores or the herbivores over
the course of playing out this
simulation over time, we see that there
is a kind of attracting shape to the
continuous state space that is their
populations or their joint um
populations. or the way of looking at
them as they correlate with one another
in different ways over time. Um, we see
these shapes play out as well whenever
we look at
the
Laurens system. And this is from the
bird song example, which is where there
are two birds who are singing with one
another. And the idea is that they're
going to kind of collaboratively finish
a song where they take turns filling in
space for the notes. I almost think of
two guitarists playing solos or
something and they're like trading off
back and forth and yet they're still
maintaining the same song. So there's a
kind of synchronicity, the kind of
rhythm that they need to maintain. Uh
they need to stay on beat as it were.
Um, and there's variation in what they
play over time, right? They're not just
both playing the same notes to where we
get some very, you know, we don't settle
in some clear equilibrium and stay
there. There's a lot of variety going on
and yet they have to stay in step. And
um, ideally they are in fact playing the
same song. So whenever we look at the
Laurens system and we look at kind of
what's going on in the state spaces
here, we find attraction around
two general areas of kind kind of like
two spheres of orbit, right? Um as these
two birds sing their songs over
time and then they continue to explore
this state space as they go.
Right. So we see like or before excuse
me let's go with this after learning
they learn one another's patterns such
that the state space they're exploring
it tends to follow follow this line that
is they're they're much more kind of
synchronized and we notice relative to
before learning where things were much
more chaotic as they're still becoming
attuned to one another's tunes. uh after
learning not only is it more
synchronized but we notice the axes have
kind of increased right so in before
learning they explore actually a
significantly smaller area of the state
space as their kind of correlated line
between their actions you know spreads
around after learning it's much more
focused and they actually make it much
further in different directions of the
state space presumably they've learned
to really well attune to one another
while simultaneously being able to hit
new notes that maybe weren't heard
before. The notes presumably being part
of the state space or identifiable
therein. So a lot of this starts to look
like when whenever we consider
attractors but then we expand it to
where there are multiple agents. It's
interesting to see the different kinds
of emergent phenomena that kind of arise
out of the dynamics that play out
between them and how they synchronize
because in active inference we've often
talked about um agents who sort of that
their internal states you know
presumably if the the agent is is is
sort of optimal enough for the
environment that they're in and find
ways to adapt then what'll happen is
that their internal states will somehow
start to correlate strongly in in
different ways and in different
patterns. and perhaps with a temporality
to where it's not as simple as drawing a
singular
um line but rather it'll be something
much more complex like the dynamics for
example of a Laurens attractor whenever
we we draw it out and how the state
space looks from there. Um so all this
is to say um much of this chapter while
at first glance provides us with
notation and the necessary equations for
solving for minimizing free energy in
various ways and continuous state spaces
uh using those kinds of models. We're
also along the way that the author
authors cleverly snuck in all of these
other aspects regarding synchronization,
communication, some of the building
blocks for thinking about multi- aent
simulations. What does it mean for two
systems, whether it be an agent and
environment or it be two agents or
otherwise? How do how do they
synchronize one another? And then we're
also reintroduced to the POMDP structure
which we see is like everything in the
upper half of this graph excuse me it is
graph in figure 8.6 six um basing graph
and then the the upper half is the PMDP.
Everything below around where this dash
line is we can see is a lower level uh
faster time scale hybrid model in the
sense that for every iteration of the
POMDP up here we see that there are
actually three iterations of the
continuous state space model at the
lower level. So it's kind of like you
can imagine receiving a lot of data over
time and then at some threshold of time
steps such as three in this case we
could send that upward to the higher
level to say okay we receive this data
what does it mean right um it's kind of
like taking in the full
experience and then from there the
poomdp would then use its own model
parameters to update the different kinds
of inferences to send those back down as
priors to level one as we continue the
inference process. Um I
and we we have some nice discussion
again looking at
sakads and
um those kinds of dynamics which are
much more clearly continuous state
spaces more often than not when looking
at kind of like continuous coordinate
systems. Uh we also have mixture models
and clustering which again kind of uh
imagine for those unfamiliar with that
kind of logic imagine taking that hybrid
model we just saw and kind of smashing
it down such that we can receive um
continuous data but then use it to infer
clusters or discrete state space data.
Right? So you you see a certain kind of
pattern in the physiology and you deter
you you determine that someone shows a
particular discrete health state such as
they are healthy versus another
combination of continuous values their
heart rate their glucose levels and so
on. And in this particular state space
uh discrete state space space they are
they are um moderately unhealthy right
and and with this set of values right so
it's kind of going continuous to
discreet
um so I think I'll leave it there
because I' I've already talked for quite
some time apologies for that if it took
away from anyone um I'd like to open up
the conversation then if anyone has any
questions or anything in particular
particular that stuck out to them in
this chapter. And we can discuss it if
you like.
There's always the
um I'll make a first comment and then
John or Isabella like in the first
equation of the
chapter it uh
But you said neural signals are measured
continuously. So often times people look
at the discrete spiking of a single
neuron you know even though that's
that's a simplification but measurements
are often continuous and then later
discretized. So it's sort of like if you
look at the instrumentation that's
actually coming off of real world
sensors in a way they're kind of like
analog and then digital
systems discretize that for the for for
different kinds of
advantages but um analog measurements
are
prevalent and then this is just the the
um even though confusingly with the G
and an F that don't map to equation 2.6
six and 2.5.
This is sort of a different look on the
S and the O from the POMDP in terms of
having uh observables Y which is O
latent states X which is S and then
instead of having the B transition
matrix interpolated between different
latent
states rather there's a continuous
um first derivative landscape with X dot
so kind embodies the same
uh or analogous
elements but with different letters.
Yeah, thanks Daniel. Yeah, it's good
points and because it's worth just
really getting familiar more with the
notation for anyone who's still kind of
picking up on active inference and
I with this in one way and I don't I
don't want to these are my words not the
author's words of course but in a sense
if you think about the the A matrix as a
in the in the discrete state space case
in chapter 7 um and we think of how that
is relating hidden states to
observations. Then we do have something
like a relationship here for this
generative model that very much relates
the two. And then if we think of a B
matrix as the probability of the next
state conditioned on the current state
and uh the current action or policy
being pursued. Um this of course is
different. We're looking at derivatives
or rates of change. But nonetheless, we
are essentially in this first example,
we're relating hidden states and
observations. In the second, we are
relating hidden states to something like
the temporal aspect of hidden states
where the hidden state will come next.
So of course, it's not a transitioning
to a a new state necessarily, but it's
looking at its rate of change, which
then of course could be used to predict
what the value of the next hidden state
will be in this continuous state space.
And then we also have you know V almost
like its own third variable and it
itself doesn't have to be static. This
of course is just like a nice simple
example and it can be used as an
attractor in this case. And then also
with neuronal signals just with my own
some of my own previous work on uh
EEG signals it's so interesting in the
sense of like a lot of them still are
being uh recorded these signals are
being recorded like digitally uh
increasingly so and so you're kind of
limited to the kind of rate at which the
technology records and so even though
you might looking at something down to
the tenth of a millisecond.
If we think about how when we take a
derivative, we're technically like
having to do a lot of um discretization
of of values in order to you know uh
carry out differentiation or or
integration. Then then similarly with
EEG it's like okay well I'm still
discretized to the tenth of a of a
nancond or or a of a millisecond or
whatever you know rate it's recording
at. So it is it is interesting like once
you get down to these fine fine lines
it's like what is discreet or continuous
any anymore that's much more dramatic
than than probably what the sentence
that should actually come to mind but
still it's uh there's more nuance but
but still it's um it is interesting to
think about and for all intents and
purposes for the most part with with
neurohysiological or any kind of
physiological data you still are
typically looking at continuous data
unless unless there's some kind of
particular criteria, right? That that
that that someone makes a judgment about
a value they see and then they just mark
it as like, you know, on a liyker scale
1 to5. It's still a discrete state space
with an implied ordering to it. Uh for
example, so anyway, but now we're
talking a lot about a I'm talking a lot
about data types now.
Um,
so see maybe something we could pick up
on in
the chapter 8 questions unless anyone
No. Okay, no
problem. Yeah, let's look
at chapter 8 of the
KOD.
Nice summary that Daniel and Ally did a
couple years ago.
Let's
see. Yeah. Another random thought is
it's just interesting that the
analytical relationships hold for the
discrete case at
all when they're more
underlying differentiable flow-based
form is
continuous. And yet it works like almost
exactly how one would think in the
discretized setting kind of however you
discretise it. So it's like underlying
circle and then whatever resolution your
screen is. It's like it kind of works
out. But that doesn't seem guaranteed by
the definition of a circle. But yet it
is.
I know it's an interesting way
to put it.
It's I mean
it it's funny. It sometimes it comes
down to like making your own kind of
decision whenever it comes to the
modeling like do you want to view
something as discreet? But then of
course if you're going to build an
active inference like model then it
becomes insanely important to decide
which state space you're working with
right because we then we do start to see
you know I mean underneath there's
similar mechanics between the two kinds
of models if we're able to just say oh
there's just two kinds there continuous
and discreet with all the infinite
varieties in between I suppose but um
but still we end up with with very
different dynamics and
also worth talking about then um I mean
I don't know no one's had any questions
about it so I haven't gone into it but
there are the generalized coordinates of
motion which might just
be but these
are essentially sort of the the actual
mathematical
mechanics behind continuous state space
models. Right? So it ends up what what
ends up happening is that for those who
are familiar with Taylor series
approximation like you can view it as
just you know you over you start to
expand the number of of terms in your t
uh tailaylor series expansion. Um the
the authors note that around six
generalized coordinates are
sufficient, meaning we're going to
expand that far. Um and it works quite
well not just as supplying these core
functions and equations. And then
furthermore, they're also very commonly
used in analyzing neuronal signals. Um
but many obviously many many many other
types of data that don't have to have
anything to do with neuronal anything
necessarily but these are classic
equations that you would find there and
then it also works quite well in the
sense of having a variational inference
model right because as opposed to trying
to like excessively predict into the
future what will happen we can kind of
simplify to or approximate a
behavior often times as authors say with
six generalized
coordinates. Let's look
at
yeah sensory attenuation. What are the
causes and consequences of sensory
attenuation? Just going to check the
chat.
My understanding nothing more than
stochasticity within the agent. Chaotic
movement from one attractor or internal
state to another. Movement and sensory
attenuation. A point where you don't
want to perfectly or accurately predict
sensory consequences or associates of
movement. Box 8.1. Belief I am not
moving. Need to downweight the precision
of that belief. Make it wider or lighter
so that action shift can occur. policy
shift occurs. Increase the attention
again. Wow, we're somewhere between
uh a sentence and a set of short causal
sort of predicates here. Uh very
symbolic, but actually we were getting
warmer over time as we continued reading
down these statements. This is not a bad
way of compressing information that
could help us to
describe sensory attenuation.
Why is that sensory attenuation? So, one
of the interesting things that can
sometimes go overlooked in active
inference and it's worthwhile to to know
be aware of it for anyone who's
interested in uh you know kind of
understanding and then utilizing the
active inference framework. We know that
agents are self-evidencing, right?
So
self-evidencing. Well, that means that
in some way, if we just take it at face
value, the idea is that an agent will
try to realize what it already expects,
right? We saw this in chapter 7 with
preferences. And the more expanded, you
know, way of looking at them is prior
over observations. And if they remain
fixed, which often times they do, such
as in the T-mas, that the mouse always
wants the cheese. At no point does it
start to want the shock and devalue the
cheese, right? So that reminds us of the
kind of um attractor dynamics, right?
You know, and so sometimes people have
used the phrase goal prior, which
probably should not be too terribly
confused with the phrase pref
preferences, but it has been used in in
place of it to say that this is a prior
belief you have. And because it doesn't
change, that is where you are attracted
to, let's say. So whenever it comes to
sensory attenuation, the odd thing comes
up where in the moment you believe you
are sitting still and you decide you
would like to get up, right? But you
can't because you strongly believe
currently that you're sitting
still, but maybe you have in your goal
prior that you do or your preferences
you do want to stand up. But you can
imagine this kind of strange conflict
that occurs even though presumably all
of you wants in a more colloquial sense
to stand up. So what is this sensory
attenuation about and what is belief I
am not moving need to downweight the
precision of that belief so that action
shift can occur policy shift occurs
increase the attention
again let's go to
box
8.1
see of course it's a
text precision control is its role in
movement generation. To understand this,
it is worth thinking about what happens
in the absence of this control. Imagine
first that sensory data are predicted
with high precision. I am sitting down.
I notice I'm sitting down. The messages
from these data are therefore afforded
high synaptic gain and lead to various
inferences about the position of some
body part. I am definitely sitting down.
The problem with this is the equivalence
between motor commands and predictions
under active inference. An accurate
belief that I am not moving. I'm not
moving, I'm sitting down. Cannot be used
to predict the sensory consequences of
movement vital for the initiation of
that movement. How will I ever move if I
firmly believe I'm sitting
down? The idea is to attenuate or or or
sort of partially if not fully, I don't
want to say fully, but but to some
significant actionable degree to reduce
one's precision in their beliefs.
meaning that that that dynamic I
described earlier of sort of a a
flattening which is I they're implying
that in order to stand up I need to
actually temporarily attenuate my belief
that I'm sitting down just so that the
the proprioceptive signals and
everything else can play out such that I
can stand up right so so that there's
this kind of interesting philosophical
nearly aspect of this that is we have to
convince ourselves
implicitly. No assumption that any of
this is actually explicit in the sense
of fully conscious you're thinking this
out loud in sentences or otherwise. But
the sense is that you actually have to
kind of pause your beliefs in some way
or more literally it would be you have
to introduce uncertainty in your
understanding of the current situation
in order to actually change that
situation which is rather fascinating
and it it it comes up is so it's
something to potentially wrap your head
around. It's but it it starts to make
sense and then it becomes useful in a
variety of situations, right? For
example, um it's it's been found to be
rather significant in cases of
Parkinson's disease where someone is
struggling to attenuate
um their their sensory intake, right?
they're they're they struggle to to have
fuller control over how their body
responds, of course. Uh and and so it's
a kind of by being able to understand
sensory attenuation and its connection
to things like precision precision
control as well as being able to see in
other areas of the textbook how they
relate precision and in particular
precision values to potentially being
relatable to various
neurotransmitters. suddenly being able
to understand these kinds of dynamics at
least as of this point in time in the
textbook a couple years ago by these
authors and the work has not stopped
since so and I don't think it's going to
but at least as far as computational
psychiatry is concerned being able to
make these kinds of connections that are
interpretable and have neurobiological
substrates involved um can at least hold
the promise of being able to better
serve different kinds of interventions
and treatments for those who do struggle
with these kinds of pathological
disorders uh in ways that were not
necessarily visible before because of a
lack of the kind of underlying
computational dynamics. And that's sort
of why fields like computational
psychiatry have been sort of taking off
the past several years as the breadth of
computational tools ever widens and more
and more people produce open-source
resources so that broader populations of
people can get involved in these kinds
of work. And of course they're not
purely limited to computational
psychiatry whatsoever. We could imagine
anyone who's working in robotics who's
working with a you know uh some kind of
robot whether it be a automation system
that's building car parts or it be like
an actual robot that has limbs and
navigates the world on its own. In
either case, imagine if it's running on
inference principles, especially a
basian one where we can have the
opportunity to have excessively strong
priors such that the robot never does
anything because it's too terribly
convinced of the current situation that
it doesn't do anything to change it.
Well, then suddenly sensory attenuation
becomes one of the first concepts that
you should look at. And it brings up
interesting implications for
neurotransmitters as well and relating
them to other kinds of cognitive
systems, right? Um being able to have
the capacity for the synaptic gain
precision control dynamics has a lot of
implications for for building any kind
of predictive system. Whenever we're
looking at this or similar
frameworks, what
is getting out of a chair? I was not the
first. Um,
yeah, it's also a sensory attenuation.
It's like especially when we think about
awareness or higher level introspection,
we're attenuating
almost all
perception and only with really
dedicated focus on sensory input can we
even attend
to you just all of our skin all of the
sounds all these other things all
spatial awareness ability to think of
any concept it's like it's all being
attenuated
away that's sort of the attention
question so it's like there's the
attention is all you need and then
there's the other side of the coin point
is
attenuation. But that's the same thing.
It's just like whether you focus on
upweing what is to be focused on or
downweing what
isn't. Yeah. Yeah, definitely. I mean,
it's like if I'm driving on the highway
in Chicago, as I occasionally do,
um, I mean, if I attempt to
maintain attention,
uh, whenever it comes to every single
car that's currently in my frame of
vision, I'm certainly going to have a
tougher time focusing on the particular
things I need to attend to, such as the
car immediately in front of me. that is
suddenly breaking and so I should
respond. And so it's just another way of
kind of reating Daniel's point that is
the kind of attentional dynamics needed
to optimally or at least suboptimally
but enough
to survive a situation let's say um like
those are there and we can't really do
without them. um so much of the sensory
data that we
have hypothetically available to us goes
very unnoticed, right? So, and even for
in the case of robotics like if you have
a robot who is you know putting together
sequentially different parts on a
manufacturing belt um it's not if it
takes in every single signal that it
receives it might not be able to hone
its attention in on the very particular
task at hand. Right? So,
um relates physiologically. We can think
of things like metabolism. We can think
about energy uh expenditure and and
saving um or
conservation. So if you took in every
single thing you ever saw in its full
entirety as if we had perfect, you know,
um um like picture book like memory um
photographic memory. There it is.
And I mean thinking about it
computationally, I mean that's an absurd
amount of data. It's going to be a lot
and if it all gets con, you know, um
stored in long-term memory. So it's just
it's it's such an it's interesting thing
about I mean I've always appreciated in
this chapter that despite the fact that
it's strongly centered on in name
continuous time models we actually sneak
in a lot of really interesting concepts
that are much harder to demonstrate or
describe until we reach this part of the
textbook. This is the
um this is where they
apply or look at luck of voltera
dynamics again but instead we're looking
at it in terms of this eyelink
conditioning problem related to the
neurobiological substrate underneath.
And we're looking at these kind of
classic ways of just looking at
conditioned stimuli, unconditional
stimuli. For those who've have
backgrounds in psychology, this will be
um almost annoyingly familiar.
Um, we can look at how expectations play
out, but then we also see these kind of
potentially
cyclic dynamics that play out that
necessarily have to be that way, right?
Or close enough to being that way such
that the system can persist. And then
over here, this was, you know, just as
they're simulating the system of
handwriting. This is kind of the way it
plays out. And then it itself has a kind
of near cyclical dynamic. Like we were
to segment this, right? We see a nearly
identical structures right next to each
other in what from far away looks like a
simple accidental scribble.
[Music]
This is a little bit different. to
just do this.
But so I
notice still haven't had any particular
questions
and this
is a Julia
library called RX
Infern. And there's been a nice
partnership between the developers of RX
and fur and the institute for quite some
time now. Um a rather active group has
formed around it uh for anyone who is
ever
interested and we're looking essentially
at applying and learning and
understanding as well as giving feedback
to the developers for this package. Um,
and I the reason why I bring it up here
and now is that in my
opinion, this offers some of the most
interesting tools for looking
at continuous time and such a cool
website, right?
Um, continuous time models. And so for
anyone who wanted to get into this
chapter but are still becoming more
familiar with active inference itself
and are really just wanting to look at
how to apply active inference in ways
that they're already familiar with maybe
computationally. This website
alone will show you a variety of ways to
potentially accomplish what you want to
accomplish. ranging from the various
equations and how they draw out
variational free energy as well as Beth
approximation
um talking more about the underlying
dynamics involved that we get a very
good picture of them in the textbook but
very significant on this website as well
plus you get to kind of see it like in
action being tailored for direct
modeling. So they have an entire set of
examples that it looks like they're
still doing some modifications to their
website but it's all here. So we have
basic examples basian linear
regression just being able to simply
look at the relationship between fuel
consumption and speed. Faster you go the
more fuel you burn.
hidden Markov model. They've been
expanding
their set of use cases that arcs infer
could be used for. And so now we're
suddenly looking at a hidden markoff
model as we saw in chapter
7. This is particularly a Roomba
navigating different parts of a house.
And it the hidden markoff aspect is it
relates its its visual sensory receptor
of what the floor looks like to a hidden
state. That is its belief about what
room is it it is in over time in our
classic perception loop. This is only
perception uh hidden markov
models. And then they're starting to
increase even further lately.
support for POMDP models. um which is
great and suddenly makes this
library incredibly relevant because that
would mean that it also covers the kinds
of state space models that are covered
in Briston's classic SPM
12 package for mat lab as well as PIMDP
for Python which um the SPM does
definitely allow for different kinds
continuous state space dynamic
analysis but RX infer out of the box is
very much ready to go for creating all
kinds of models. Here's the Gaussian
mixture model I mentioned earlier where
you can take in continuous values
Y and then use
them
to
infer
discrete clusterings, right? that are
close enough together such that we
decide, oh, this makes up a distinct
cluster.
Right? So, it's so it's just interesting
to think about the the many many ways
for for anyone who's familiar with deep
learning. Some of this will just be
second nature to already be thinking
about these things. But whenever we
think about active inference, we think
about basian perspectives where we're
always coming into a situation with a
prior and thinking about different data
types. And for anyone who's actually
writing code and and producing models,
what data they have available in the
potentially infinite ways that they
could put things together, not just what
data are you using and and and what is
the breadth of the types, but also what
are the inference processes between them
and what kind of state space are they
in? Are you going to discrete discretise
something yourself because it makes
sense to you, but maybe it won't to
someone else who looks at the same
model? They wouldn't approach it that
way. Auto reggressive models lagging a
variable on itself.
I mean these are classic models whenever
it comes to looking
at forecasting and looking at like you
know where where data is sparse and then
suddenly you decide oh if I use the same
data stream but just lag it on itself
maybe it is a function of itself like it
suddenly the the single data source you
have
becomes useful for predicting itself in
that
sense
so then we can see that play out with
observations and then the hidden state
inference kind
of drags or follows after that. So they
have this kind of lag that occurs over
time.
So of course with genera
um with continuous state spaces you know
as opposed to feeling where like we're
constricted to the ab c and ease of
pomdp models here you could have I mean
of course your matrices in the pomdps
could be massive in the sense of you can
include a broad variety of of sensory
receptors or or or data streams coming
in. You could have a plethora of
different kinds of hidden states or
hidden state factors uh each with their
own discrete hidden states within. You
could make an incredibly complex model.
But but that said with with continuous
time models it often feels a little bit
more general in the sense of you could
have m you could have various parameters
some for the same thing some for
different things some which are highly
related to one another but computed a
bit differently and then at the end of
the day you're when you're learning them
it's just to somewhat follow the logic
of a deep neural network or otherwise
we're just looking at something
Like how do we compute weights? But how
do we do
it with respect to
minimizing variational free energy as a
functional of those parameters and the
data coming in? And furthermore, much
more distinctly, how do we look at the
rate of change in those systems? And
then here was the nice generalized
synchrony piece. How do
we synchronize with one another in our
daily activities? I say as someone with
a social sciences background. So,
um, great point with the neural network
analogy
and reinforcement
and the reward function as needed to
give a gradient
descendable strategy to optimize a
functional of
weights which don't directly correspond
to the semantics of the probability
distributions themselves. It's just hope
that there's enough of these tiny guys
firing that you can recapitulate at a
higher level the semantics of a target
distribution versus doing variational
free energy as a direct
gradient tractable landscape on the
probability distributions of interest
and how learning can have a
and then that learning rate is fixed or
you could learn the learning rate and
then how fast you learned that. It's
like the buck stops
somewhere in a given
implementation even though there are
like infinite dimensional
approximations.
It's what brings me back to
the just the general sense of an
attractor is well all these things could
move. We know from chapter six that a
lot of it as well as chapter nine I say
as we wrap up here but
uh chapter nine we also had that that
classic you know we're we're I'll just
say we're we're we're always making our
own decisions of how things should play
out and for one person learning a
learning rate is incredibly exciting and
a means of testing a very particular
hypothesis they have and then for
another person developing another kind
of system or not developing a system
rather just trying to create a
generative model that generally
accurately approximately approximates
uh an organism of interest that they
don't want to make any arbitrary
decisions. They want everything to be as
synced up to the organism they're
looking at as possible. The idea of
learning a learning rate becomes like
dangerous. Is it going to throw your
model results so far off or make them so
terribly
uh non-geneneralizable that it's like
why do any of this in the first place or
can you fit the model to find the
learning rate you know and that that
would be probably a more balanced
perspective. Um but in any case thanks
everyone
for joining today. uh really appreciate
it. And so a week from today, this same
time will be cohort 8, we'll be talking
about chapter three, I believe, the high
road of active inference. And then two
weeks from today at this time we'll move
on to chapter 9 as I was just mentioning
which we'll get much more into things
like model fitting and different kinds
of analysis and group
analysis and wrap up with models of
false inference. And that's very much
where the kind of computational
psychiatry line goes. But many others,
can a robot be
pathological? That kind of question
phrased exactly like that is ever more
strongly on the minds of many today. Um,
so interesting ways of thinking about
things, but um, yep, that's all for
today, folks. So, thank you very much.
Thank you, Andrew. Thanks, Isabella and
John. Bye.