## -qZYxSbJ38E

All right.
Hello and welcome. This is ActInfLab livestream number 40.0. It's March 10th, 2022.
Welcome to the ActInfLab. We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning,
and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at the links here on the slide.
This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we
can improve our work. All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette
for livestreams. Check out activeinference.org to learn more about the lab.
All right. In today's number 40.0, the goal is to learn and discuss this very cool paper that was
published on Archive on December 30th, 2021, A Free Energy Principle for Generic Quantum Systems,
by Chris Fields, Carl Friston, James F. Glazebrook, and Michael Levin. And just like every video,
it's going to be just a conversation going over some parts of the paper. It's not a review or a final
word. And if anything, it's a cry for help or at least a cry for participation because there's so many
areas where somebody with different experience or more knowledge about any of these domains could
connect some dots or give some useful comments or critiques. So especially with this video,
though Blue and I had help from our colleague Jason Larkin with many of the details, there's just so
much to unpack. So we'll try to make this a useful dot zero and then we're really looking forward to the
dot one and dot two and so on when we'll be able to really go into some of these directions. So I hope
if you're watching live or between now and the dot one, check out the paper and listen to this discussion
that we'll have now and ask some questions because this is just the beginning of a few new threads,
probably more than the answering of questions, especially to any desired level of like completeness
or applicability. So it's just the beginning. That's what the dot zero is about. It's a new decade,
40.0. So we'll just introduce yourself and then go through a bunch of the paper. And yeah,
thanks again to Jason for a lot of help and Blue for awesome work on the slides too. Okay, so
I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass to Blue as facilitator.
I'm Blue Knight. I'm a researcher in New Mexico and I have to shout out to Daniel too because you're always
saying thank you to me, but you know, we all have to say thank you to you for providing the affordances to be here and,
you know, discuss these awesome questions. Big paper. I am excited to delve into this. I think it will, you know, start a lot of new trails. So I think, and also,
to bring back Mike Levin and to bring back Chris Fields and to bring back Carl Friston back to the active lab to discuss the dot one with us, hopefully.
Okay. So is there anything particular that you are excited about, Daniel, or do you want to just power through it?
Daniel
Let's jump in.
All right. So this paper really was trying to unite the quantum principles and the free energy principles. So
quantum mechanics and kind of delving into that. And we will see some threads carry over from the last time that we had Chris Fields on here. Maybe the last time we had Mike Levin on here also.
So how is the free energy principle related to quantum mechanics? What does the FEP gain from quantum? What does quantum gain from the FEP? Are we using the FEP now to model quantum systems?
And why are we pursuing this intersection? So this was kind of like the big questions kind of maybe we can start to answer with this paper.
So we are here. Daniel, what's this map about?
Daniel, what's this map about?
So it's a question we are going to probably ask ourselves multiple times so we can insert it like a little emoji, but we can think of among the axes of variation or variability that we are going to explore or where are we are going to tune
our regime of attention or what perspectives we're going to take, it's going to be like along
two axes, ranging from on the right side, FEP, ACT, INF, like, to the left side, which is like
pre or non ACT, INF, slash FEP. It's the x-axis. And then the y-axis is the continuum between
quantum, which we'll probably nuance and hear many perspectives of what is and isn't quantum,
but just to summarize it by saying quantum and not quantum, like pre or non quantum approaches.
And so quantum FEP is in the upper right corner. And we can think of it as being like connected
in different ways to quantum non FEP in the top left, the blue, and then FEP, but from a non quantum
perspective, like all pre now FEP, ACT, INF in green. And then what are all the other connections?
And so who's right, who's wrong, who's useful? Where's their pragmatic value? Where's their
epistemic value? What are we really talking about? Do we agree on the phenomena? Where,
where is their agreement or disagreement? Where are we in this complex landscape?
So I think in mechanics, we refer to it as classical mechanics and quantum mechanics. So now we will be,
this is like the dividing point maybe between classical FEP and quantum FEP, perhaps. Let's see where it
goes. So the aims and claims of the paper, there are pretty much three and we'll revisit these at the
summary because we're going to just give you a broad overview of the summary of results right now.
Given the standard free choice assumption, the intuitive ideas of an agent or information
gathering and using system, IGUS, can be fully formulated within background independent scale-free
quantum information theory. The second claim is that FEP can be a quantum theoretic formulation
that renders it applicable to generic quantum systems. And do you want to read the last one,
Daniel?
Three. When formulated as a generic principle of quantum information theory, the FEP is asymptotically
equivalent to the principle of unitarity.
Cool. Do you want to read the first section of the abstract?
All right. The free energy principle or FEP states that under suitable conditions of weak coupling,
random dynamical systems with sufficient degrees of freedom will behave so as to minimize an upper bound
formalized as a variational free energy on surprisal, also known as self-information. This upper bound can
be read as a Bayesian prediction error. Equivalently, its negative is a lower bound on Bayesian model evidence,
also known as marginal likelihood. In short, certain random dynamical systems evince a certain kind of self-evidencing.
So here, we reformulate the FEP in the formal setting of space-time, background-free, scale-free quantum information theory.
We show how generic quantum systems can be regarded as observers, which with the standard freedom of choice
assumption, become agents capable of assigning semantics to observational outcomes. We show how
such agents minimize Bayesian prediction error in environments characterized by uncertainty,
insufficient learning, and quantum contextuality. We show that in its quantum theoretic formulation,
the FEP is asymptotically equivalent to the principle of unitarity. Based on these results,
we suggest that biological systems employ quantum coherence as a computational resource and implicitly
as a communication resource. We summarize a number of problems for future research, particularly involving
the resources required for classical communication and for detecting and responding to quantum context
states that we make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known
They give us a good roadmap.
So there's five sections, the introduction,
physical interaction as information exchange
and several subsections within that,
repeated measurements and system identification
and subsections, the FEP for generic quantum systems,
and the discussion.
And I think that they actually outline
what's in each section.
So we'll give you that outline overview
as we go through the paper as well.
So just, we're gonna use,
we're gonna actually reuse some slides
from active stream number 17.
That was when we had Chris Fields presenting information flow
in context dependent hierarchical Bayesian inference.
I think contextuality is like an underlying thread
that's pretty important here today.
So Chris kind of lays that out in that paper.
And so if you want to get into that
and dive deeper into two spaces and channel theory,
which we'll talk about a little bit,
but yeah, that's there.
So use that for resource.
Just one foreshadowing here.
The two pieces that they claimed in this paper
as their goals was to connect contextuality
to category theory and two spaces,
and then connect that yellow formulation
to hierarchical Bayesian inference
more looking like the statistical models.
And so this paper is kind of building
a category theory bridge with Bayesian graphs
and statistics and category theory.
And then that's probably gonna hinge over
to a few other areas.
Cool.
So we can jump right into the introduction here.
And we're just gonna highlight some keywords
as we go through.
The authors didn't really give keywords for the paper,
which I'm kind of grateful for
because there's so many other things to unpack here.
So they highlight some things about the FUP
in the words of the authors.
Since its introduction is a theory of brain function,
the variational free energy principle
has been extended into an explanatory framework
for systems at all scales.
The FUP is the statement that any measurable,
bounded and macroscopically consistent system
will behave to satisfy these requirements.
What else, Daniel?
It was just cool how they brought in the FUP
as being the overarching level,
as describing how these particles do two things,
which is possess internal dynamics
that are conditionally independent from the environment
and performing this self-evidencing feature
by returning to some non-equilibrium steady state.
And so just which parts of the FUP
they entered in at or emphasized,
which we can assume are setting the stage up
in their mind best for the interfacing
or the on-ramping into quantum,
whereas somebody interested in like a system
or integration other than quantum
might take a different approach.
Cool.
I think that they borrow also from our particular physics.
We're going to talk about particles
and they talk more about particles in the discussion.
And maybe we can have a deeper conversation
about those in the dot one and dot two,
but they say the Markov boundary of any particle
that's an open exchange with external states
via its Markov boundary underwrites conditional independence
between its internal states
and the external states of its environment
by localizing and thereby restricting information exchange.
So the Markov boundary separates internal and external states
by mediating their exchange.
We've seen that before.
Cool.
So what is active inference, Daniel?
Can you break it down for us?
Two sentence overview.
That blanket that Blue just described
with the insulation,
incoming statistical dependencies
can be interpreted as perception
and outgoing statistical dependencies
can be interpreted as control.
And depending on the situation
and what's zero and what's not zero,
that can have a lot of dynamics that are similar
to some other classic settings
in decision-making, gambling, experimentation,
quantum measurement in this paper.
So what is quantum theory?
This is cool.
Just some pictures and it's connected
in many, many different fields.
So there's a cool kind of concept map
of where quantum theory intersects.
quantum theory here is the idea that all physical systems
can, including the environment,
can be considered observers that act on their surroundings
to prepare them for subsequent observations.
That's become common in quantum theory,
replacing the wave function collapse postulate
of traditional quantum mechanics
with interaction-induced decoherence,
which is like the dissipation of quantum coherence.
This is like the thing that generates classical information.
And they say,
indeed, while quantum theory was originally developed
and it's still widely regarded
as a theory specifically applicable
at the atomic scale and below,
since the work of Wheeler, Feynman and Doosch,
Dutch, Doosch,
it has over the past few decades been reformulated
as a scale-free information theory
and is increasingly viewed
as a theory of the process of observation itself.
So, yeah, I think like when we think about quantum,
we think about the observer.
At least I do.
Like I think about the observer phenomenon,
just the act of observing a system changes the system.
So that's kind of a fundamental thing
that comes to my mind.
What comes to your mind, Daniel,
when you think about quantum theory?
Reading that leaves me uncertain
whether we're talking about like organic chemistry
and the pi orbitals and covalent bonding
and emission and all of those things that particles do,
which is what it sounds like they're talking about
in this orange part,
a theory specifically applicable
to the atomic scale and below.
And then this blue part makes it sound like
they're opening it up into a much larger space.
So I think we'll probably learn a lot about that.
What does quantum mean here?
Are we talking about electrons and protons
or is this something that is like Bayesian inference
in that it's scale free or scale a priori
or scale friendly or something like that?
Nice, scale independence.
So we're gonna jump right in.
So section two,
they talk a lot about physical interaction
as information exchange.
And that's something I wonder also,
like is we have the classical mechanics
and do the laws of quantum always apply
or at some scale are they not applicable
or can we extend them into some theory of everything?
Like are we getting there maybe?
But here in this section,
they say that they use the category theoretic formalism
of channel theory to formalize
the operational semantics of natural languages.
So they develop a generic formal representation
of quantum reference frames
and show how the non-commutativity
of quantum reference frames
induces quantum contextuality.
And I had fun really digging into this
at a level that I felt comfortable explaining it at.
So I'm excited to see if I bungle it or how it goes.
Let's see.
Okay.
What is quantum?
Ah, when physical interaction is viewed
as information exchange, why is it quantum?
It becomes obvious.
The fundamental quantum of information is one bit,
one unit of entropy that one system exchanges for another.
So one bit, one quantum of information
is the answer to one yes or no question.
That is quantum.
Do you want to add anything here, Daniel?
Okay.
Okay.
This is the block text is from the paper.
And just one piece that will be interesting to explore
is just how does time and temperature come together?
Like I had just heard or thought more about the space required
for storage and not really seen it as much connected
to the speed of obtaining that yes or no answer
at different temperatures
and what that might mean for biological or for digital systems.
But I'm sure that's a very
foregone conclusion, maybe working with a quantum device,
but new to me and Jason was like,
oh yeah, of course that's the case.
And they talk a lot.
So foreshadowing, they're going to, you know,
really present this within like a space time independent context,
which is kind of cool.
And then like link it back to time,
which that kind of gets a little interesting.
All right.
So moving on,
Hilbert spaces.
So Daniel,
do you want to say a bunch about this or what do you want to say about this?
And then I'm going to highlight some stuff.
I'll just read what they wrote.
Oh, here's the red part is our,
was our comments on what they wrote.
People can pause it to read what they wrote.
The Hilbert spaces contain all states described as a vector.
And this is one way that qubits are constructed.
By relating two levels of a system,
like electrons in a ground or excited superposition,
and then the collapse into one or those other bands.
And so that's more of like a uncertainty to discrete transition.
But then in the limit of high temperature,
there's a lot of blur or experimental factors that can be modeled as blur that
results in a smoother distribution of outcomes.
And here,
this Hilbert space is describing how the experiment is set up and the information that's being modeled
at a given time.
So the state of that,
this space consists of the options for is like the,
just the experiments space,
including the total target system and the observer.
Maybe.
Maybe.
So I like this quote at the end that,
as Fuchs put it,
infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces are from an information perspective,
merely a useful artifice permitting computation with differential equations.
And they,
they contain all this possible states in an experiment as vectors.
So,
there's more to read about that.
And also the mathematical notation,
if you're curious about cats and bras and some of these brackets that we have.
had to,
to dig through to find solid ground.
Yeah.
Okay.
So the principle of unitarity is the principle that observable information like energy
is neither created nor destroyed by physical processes.
And I thought that this was interesting.
So time reversal symmetry is essential for the conservation of information.
So a system is time reversal symmetric,
if it's equations of motion allow perfect prediction of the starting point,
based on knowing the state of the system at any given time.
So like,
if you know a time,
whatever X time steps,
you can still say something about the starting system because you can run it
forward and backward in time.
And there were some cool things like about if you build up a mirror,
that's,
that's like enables the time reversal.
So some things go forward,
but like the spin of an electron is spun backwards in time.
Right.
So,
so it's like those kinds of things like are,
some things are parallel and some things are opposite in time reversal symmetry.
But anyway,
I thought that was interesting and fundamental to kind of the principle of unitarity.
And also because we're going to talk about time in a cool way,
I think.
Um,
okay.
So,
yeah,
unitarity.
What do you want to say about unitarity,
Daniel?
I said a little bit,
so let me pick out some things here that you want to talk about.
Okay.
This was all with just Jason helping us.
And again,
it's like an opportunity for anyone who's familiar with these to,
uh,
formalisms to help us a little bit more through,
but just to pick up on one point,
just as you mentioned,
like we're doing experiments where it doesn't matter what time we started at.
In a sense,
like it may matter in the sense that the different times lead to different
results,
but a statistical framework for observation that can cut through some of the
parts of the experimental context that are not relevant to compare different
events that happen at different time in a unified statistical framework.
And so that was what led to this principle of unitarity,
that the total probability distribution is preserved with like a mass of one
so that there can be information evolution,
that it's happening in a certain space where there are certain invariants that
allows useful computation to happen.
Cool.
Well, yeah.
Conservation of probability.
So that's something that maybe came up,
um,
like the probability that a particle is somewhere,
like it's somewhere.
There's a hundred percent probability that the particle is somewhere.
So it didn't disappear.
So that was another kind of interesting point.
We were talking,
um,
like,
before this,

I mean,
that's kind of what,
how you get the conservation of observable information as well.
Um,
okay.
Separability and holographic coding.
Okay.
This one,
just to,
uh,
briefly look at a previous slide.
I think this was from 32.
We were looking at sparsely coupled systems from a matrix perspective.
And so the dense coupling of like subunits one through six with each other was mainly like within the click of the red or the blue.
But then there's these off diagonals that reflect the sparse coupling of denser clicks.
And so in section 2.3 of this paper,
they're also talking about coupling patterns in systems,
specifically ones that have a separability.
So like one of those blocks could be the experimental system,
the quantum computer,
and the other one of the blocks could be the experimenter.
And then there could be sparse connectivity reflecting the experimental apparatus.
But that was being approached from a quantum holographic angle,
also setting up for a Markov blanket.
Take.
Cool.
So one sentence on this,
um,
page that I think is important is underlined here.
The entanglement entropy,
um,
is a mutual information measure that detects quantum correlation or coherent between A and B.
Um,
and,
and so that defines separability and either a system is separable or it's entangled.
So separable states are also called decoherent and entangled states are also called coherent.
So just,
just to find out as we go forward and kind of dive a little bit deeper into the math.
It's kind of like if it was parametric classical statistics,
we would say uncorrelated or correlated.
If it was information theory,
we'd say no information or yes,
it gives information.
Bayesian graph.
Yes,
it has causal influence or no,
it doesn't.
And then this is the quantum take.
Yes,
it's entangled or no,
it's not entangled.
Also,
don't forget conditional dependence or conditional independence.
So where,
where is it conditionally dependent?
Um,
and we know that,
that like the Markov blanket can help to define conditional dependence.
Um,
when,
when we've looked at active inference in the past.
Yep.
Um,
okay,
cool.
So where,
do you want to talk about the Hamiltonian or not at all?
Or what do you want to say?
Not at all.
Okay.
Not sure.
So there's one cool thing that I want to point out here.
Um,
you know,
we talked about like,
we see interactions,
strong interaction,
different timeframes and how these are going to vary as we go forward.
Um,
but,
but here,
I really just wanted to point out that,
that this H of AB is like the Hamiltonian.
So we're talking about matrices,
separability,
interacting matrices,
conditional dependence,
just on the last slide.
Um,
and so the interaction between the Hamiltonian of the matrix can be decomposed,
um,
into this H AB where this is like the interaction between a and B.
So H AB can be looked at as we go forward,
um,
as the energetic interaction between matrix a and matrix B state,
a state B position,
a position B,
or,
um,
they,
they give it to us in a very generic form.
So I didn't really know how to apply that going forward,
but maybe if the authors are listening,
they'll,
they'll come in and rescue us.
Um,
that's the only thing I really wanted to point out from,
from that side.
And then this is kind of cool.
So this,
this equation six,
which we just looked at,
um,
which is the energetic interaction between a and B.
Um,
this is physical interaction,
which I guess is,
that could be physical interaction between a and B.
That could also be energy,
right?
Matter equals MC squared.
Um,
physical interaction equals,
thermodynamics times yes or no questions.
So it's cool.
The authors say this formulation emphasizes what quantum theory is about.
The process of obtaining information,
obtaining information from B requires in particular that a acts on B by asking
questions as Wheeler puts it,
no question,
no answer.
All inference in this framework is active inference.
Equation six does not allow passive perception to be a physical process.
Super interesting.
Agreed.
Agreed.
From a lot of angles.
Angles.
It almost takes it to a level.
We haven't seen from just saying,

perceptual inference,
even the generative type.
So not just the signal processing,
but even a predictive processing generative framework for perception that
doesn't take action into account is incomplete.
hence the motivation for active inference. And this is somehow escalating that into
saying that all inference in this framework is active inference. And I wonder if that's because
like a frame is always needed, some kind of generative models always needed as a recognition
model dual for any observation. So if you're in the business of making observations, you're in
the business of generative model modification one way or another, or you're not the kind of thing
that does either of those, but they might come into play in the minimal active entity or the thing
that can be modeled as a minimal active entity. And so there's a lot of interesting areas. And I
think it's also quite interesting with the natural language equation. So how should we read that dot
operator? Thermodynamics? What? Yes, no questions. And then times? Or what does it mean?
Yeah, there's the category theory like that, that dot operator, I forget how to read it.
So hopefully, it's being rescued. But yeah, I read it as times because, you know, I'm old school.
So going back to that same equation, I thought that this was important. It involves no assumptions
about space, time, objects, or motions. It is strictly topological. Given separability,
it identifies a boundary, fancy B, between A and B, at which the energy interaction, physical
interaction between A and B is defined. So I guess that would be like a space. Well, I guess it's not
space. It's not space. It's not time. It's a physical, it's an energy interaction, HAB. Anyway, yeah.
And this is the Markov blanket, fancy B holography connection, which is that all the information
that is making the sparse connectivity of A and B, we're talking about systems that have like this
screen slash blanket slash experimental apparatus, fancy B, and the properties of it for a system that
might be making classical-like measurements, or maybe it's making quantum measurements. So
implicitly, the prior work had been thinking about what was on the other side of that
experimental apparatus from a classical or from a non-quantum perspective. We'll see.
And this is taking it more into asking what kind of mathematics would be needed to look at it if it
were a quantum system that were being investigated. Cool. And I think that takes us into figure one.
So here, Daniel was foreshadowing, doing a great job of the holographic screen. So this is a
holographic screen, fancy B, separating systems A and B with an interaction, HAB, given by equation six.
And so this says that this screen can be realized by an ancillary array of non-interacting qubits that
are alternately prepared by A and then measured by B. Qubits are depicted as the spheres here,
and there's no requirement that A and B share preparation and measurement bases. So these are
quantum reading or quantum reference frames. So this is like they share the ability to prepare or
measure. That would be like quantum reference frame. And we're going to get into the quantum
reference frames just here in a couple of slides. I think with a pretty good example.
Cool. Anything to add, or do you want to like unpack it with the next couple of slides?
Just thinking about this as like a quantum holograph is sort of the generalization, maybe,
of thinking about this in the classical information. What if this were the chat between
Blue and I? So we could have different perspectives, different reference frames, different semantics.
But if we're not in the same chat room, then we're not in the same chat room. That's like the
holographic screen or the observable that's getting passed between these two systems A and B.
And they don't have to be two people. It could be like a person and some other system on the other
side of the holograph slash information channel. And the whole question is what kind of math describes
that classical information channel case? And how is that similar or different or compatible or
whatever with thinking about it not as an information bit from a standard probability distribution,
but like a quantum information bit with a complex statistical distribution?
Nice. So they describe the holographic screen, actually, as they say, the holographic screen,
Fancy B, has an obvious interpretation in the language of the free energy principle and
active inference. It implements the Markov blanket that separates from B. So we've seen the Markov
blanket before and, you know, mentioned it here, but I think that they are going to, you know,
implement this holographic screen of this Markov blanket. Yeah. Perfect. Cool.
Oh, and then the quantum reference frame. Fun. So here they say, we show in particular that
the FEP emerges naturally in any setting in which an agent or particle deploys quantum reference frames,
namely physical systems that give observational outcomes and operational semantics to identify
and characterize the states of other systems in this environment. And so this was kind of a cool
figure that I pulled down. So it's like a man on the train to the man, the train is moving,
and to the person on the train, the man is moving, right? And so it depends on your perspective.
And this is kind of what a quantum reference frame is getting at here. So this says,
quantum features such as quantum superposition are only defined relative to an observer.
When we look at the train from the point of view of an observer standing on the platform,
the train looks in a quantum superposition of different positions.
However, an observer sitting on the train sees the observer on the platform and the ball in a
quantum superposition. So it was a cool illustration of just kind of how things look differently,
depending where you're standing.
Okay. This is awesome. I like how you brought in the art and the images are a little subtly
different, but then in a way that really makes one think. And the classical case would be,
what if both of them were moving or still, and then they only got to get a frame update once every
two seconds or once every five seconds. So then there'd be like still an uncertainty distribution,
but it'd be a classical parametric statistics or information theory, uncertainty about location.
And that's going to be the big question. How is that variance estimation that we've already
been exploring and that type of inference related to quantum information where there's something a
little bit bigger and more complex or different than just simply low sampling rate leading to
positional uncertainty of a massive train that's not subject to so-called quantum effects?
Cool. Did you want to, what, so this is kind of cool. Do you want to unpack this slide here,
Daniel? I'm just looking forward to what the free choice assumption means in quantum setting,
but we just highlighted, what is this all going to say about free choice, this specific slide,
but also the broader discussion. So I agree too. I think the free choice aspect is cool.
Here the authors say, provided A and B are separable, assuming that there are no super determinist
a priori correlations. ZA and ZB, what is the Z? I'm not sure what the Z is. Oh, choices of Z.
So the Z is the choice. The choice of A and the choice of B are uncorrelated. This is the free
choice assumption. Free choice is often claimed to be essential to science as a practice. If it
characterizes any bounded system, consistency with quantum theory and special relativity
relativity together requires that it must characterize all systems. So free choice of a basis introduces
quantum noise that is indistinguishable observationally from classical noise. And
noise is going to become important here as we move toward the end of the A and ZB.
So, yeah. Anyway, that's cool.
Okay.
Nice.
So here they talk about the Z axis in figure one. I should have pasted figure one in here.
They say that the Z axis is a reference frame. Free choice of the axis generalizes the free
choice of the reference frame, encoding each qubit on the holographic screen fancy B, right? So, yeah.
And the part in red, looking forward to unpacking.
A QRF cannot therefore be fully specified by any finite bit string. It is non-fungible in the
terminology of citation 40. It's the quantum act-inf NFT crossover that we all needed.
We have it, but we need to explore it and find out what it means.
Super cool. And they say that they consider A and B to be isolated during the time interval between
preparation and measurement steps. And I think that we'll get into that
in a little bit more like preparation and measurement as we talk about time and memory encoding.
Yeah.
And that's what this nine formalism is roughly describing. Something like that.
There's...
Yes.
Yeah.
What is happening with it?
So, it says the idea of a computation is this. So, you have bits at one time step going to bits at
another time step. And then you have the Markov blanket at one time step going to another Markov
blanket at T plus one. And then this, is it ZA? Is that free choice that's in there?
Ooh. No, it's IF. So, I'm not sure what that one is, but yeah. We can unpack that more. I will
unpack some of the later math, but this, I think it's just important to establish the quantum reference
frame. Anyway. Yeah.
That's good.
Cool. Okay. Next. Where are we? Ah, here we go. See, I'm going to start to unpack some math now.
When I start to roll out the variables, here we go. Okay.
So, we will be interested in what follows in quantum systems considered to be observers that
deploy one or more distinct quantum reference frames to measure particular subsets of the bits
encoded on their boundaries slash markup blankets. And yeah, these will effectively decompose the
holographic screen fancy B into disjoint sectors that we will label E for the observed environment,
F for the unobserved environment, and Y for the memory sector, respectively. So, yeah, we're going to
we're going to break that out. I think. Yeah. Attention also, so they really talk about the sectors
as a sense, right? Like, so I have like my vision sector, my hearing sector, my taste sector, right?
And so like I'm making observations of my environment with all of these, like my temperature
sensing sector. So there's all of these different ways, you know, to observe the environment with
different sectors. So yeah, cool. It's kind of like saying you win some, you lose some, you don't play
every game. It's kind of like whatever space we're talking about here, which happens to be this boundary
that has all these interesting properties. There's some that are being observed, some that are being
unobserved and a special sector that gives continuity of information in some way through time.
Yeah. So this is cool here. Free choice of a decomposition of a holographic screen fancy B
into sectors with different quantum reference frame induced semantics is indicative of agency. So I like
that and I'm curious to unpack that maybe a little bit more something for to ask the authors about in
the dot one. Yeah. Or also all non-trivial agents are cognitive systems that engage in active inference.
What is non-trivial to who? Like how do we escape or how do we escape this infinite multi-perspective
multi-scenario universe or do we just have a way of working with that?
I do think that they get into non-trivial here in a little while. But yeah, they say a non-trivial
agent is a system with internal dynamics that breaks the swap symmetry of its boundary markup blanket
holographic screen. However, they're going to start to use these things interchangeably. So I'm just going to
keep saying holographic screen fancy B. But I guess if your internal dynamics don't break the swap symmetry
or right, like if your internal dynamics are trivial or like not relevant or if you don't,
they don't have an effect on the boundary maybe that becomes trivial.
Yeah. Wondering if that's the mirror versus adaptive active inference boundary that we've discussed or
what this maps to, where does this kick in or not? So we'll explore it though.
It totally seems like it's definitely the mirror versus active inference. That's how I interpreted it
as I was reading it. So it sounds like that to me. Oh, and okay. Now we're going to head into some 17
related information because they're going to turn this discussion from QRFs as reference frames
to channel theory, which is going to enable this context switching discussion that's important
later. So this is brought up in number 17 and 17.1 is where we had Chris Fields and a great discussion
there. So continue, Blue. Cool. Yeah. So channel theory of quantum reference frames.
So I think we've said channel theory is an application of category theory to two spaces.
And I'm not going to read the paper here, but I'm going to go back to some of the slides that we used
from 17 because I think that we kind of unraveled it there in a way that was maybe digestible more so
than reading equations off of a paper. So this is the two space. Daniel, what's a two space? So K is a set,
A are objects, X are attributes. A two space, fancy A over the set K is the relationship between the objects,
A and their attributes, X.
I thought of it just like a computer function, like in Python or any language that's just taking in three
kinds of data, the set, the objects and the attributes. So describing a large variety of things,
but it's just kind of integrating those three types of data in a principled way and enabling
transformations between different representations that might look very different or allow for different
implementations, but also commonly use like all of this information or even just a subset of the
information, because that just throws out information, which you can always do.
I really like the Python example. So like if K is the Python dictionary, A are the keys and X are the
values. Like you can describe the relationship between the keys and the values with a two space.
Like that is what the two space does. So like you could say, you know, your keys are apple, orange,
banana, and your values are red, orange, yellow. And so then the two spaces, how do you describe
that relationship? Color approved, something like that. Cool. Okay. So going into channel theory and how
two spaces work, how channel theory works. So it says in channel theory, two transforms become isomorphisms,
which are natural maps between classifiers. So classifiers link tokens to types that encompass them.
Like for a stoplight, a set of tokens would be red, green, and yellow. So that is the set of tokens.
I think this just builds one level on what you described, which is instead of just the data
structure of just saying, this is what the function is requesting, or this is what is being stored in
memory. This is like saying, we're going to interpret some of these edges and relationships
as classifier mappings or infomorphisms like information sharing or statistical dependencies
or some other type of informational edge, but on that space that we've been discussing.
Yes. So they take it to a diagrammatic level where at the center, it almost looks like a pyramid. So
there's a C and this core C is the information channel. This is the infomorphism that allows
semantic information. And this, I thought it was very cool that it's very different from Shannon
information. It's not just bits. It's like the meaning behind the bits. Like you can say, you know,
you can see the word bank and are they talking about a river bank, the bank that holds your money
or like a bank shop in pool. Like there's some underlying, I would dare to say context, that is
important for not just the letters B, A, N, K in that order. So it's not just the tokens in the
particular order, but it's like the semantic context that allows transmission between classifiers. So I look
at this like a shared memory. So like, if we look at the classifier A1 here, which would be stoplight,
the tokens are red, green, and yellow. Classifier A2 would be motorist actions. The tokens would be
stop, go forward, or I say proceed slowly, but it's really get out of the intersection, right? Like
that's what yellow means. And then there's other classifier types could be like pedestrian actions,
child's game actions. Like when you're playing red light, green light, do you run? Do you stop? Like
freeze. So, or do you walk, right? So there's all these different classifiers that can then map via a
core information channel C, shared memory, semantic information between those classifiers. Cool. Okay.
So going on, they build from this pyramid, they invert the pyramid to form this cone-cone diagram.
So they say that a commuting finite cone-cone diagram is made of a cone, which is the upright pyramid and a
co-cone, which is the inverted pyramid on a finite set of classifiers. It illustrates commutativity. So
specifically these operators, G12, G23, like you can go all the way out to the set. Like there's a
commutativity or like a superimposability, commutativity between, with a shared infomorphism,
if that makes sense. It also captures a more subtle duality between processes. It enables object files,
tokens, and histories to be viewed, not as tokens, but as types that organize, respectively, trajectory
components, features, and feature-based singular categories, and make them mutually consistent
collections. So like where you have all of those classifiers, they're consistent across the board.
So you can use them to map and unmap, right?
If I can just give a take on this. So G12 is saying that there's a relationship between
A1 and A2. It could be like appending by one row, or maybe changing one little bit through time,
or having some ability to translate like a state machine or something like that. Let's just say that
there's some relationship. And then there's also these F functions that allow the A's to be part of a
shared context, like the pedestrian scene that makes sense. And then that is shaped like a cone.
And then that is kind of like sense-making, that semantics is making sense. And then this co-cone
or the diamond shape is where there's C and D, who are both like cognitive sense-making frames.
And then now they're having a shared holograph A, or shared access. And then it's, that is a different
object with a different geometry.
Yeah, that would be like, I'm looking at the same set of classifiers that you're looking at,
and we both see, we both know what they mean. We both know that red means stop and green means go.
Semantically, exactly. Right, right. Or red could mean apple, depending on where you're going with
that, right? So it could be, it could be an inside joke. Yeah. Okay, cool. So there's the cone-cocone.
Hopefully that was unpacked with some level of intelligibility. So now we can move into figure two,
where they attach this cone-cocone diagram to measurement operators, any set of measurement
operators that are used to measure the states on the boundary that defines the relationship between A and B,
this HAB, between system A and system B. We're the scientists, we cared about our context C,
we're system A, we're making measurements from our perspective of a screen, and we're setting the
context of interpreting those observations in this situation. Totally. I could definitely be standing on
the other side of that holographic screen, making my measurements from D, from the inverted, from the
upside down pyramid, but they would be left and right pointing, measuring onto the same screen, if I was
system B and you were system A in that kind of context. Cool. Anything else to add? No. Awesome.
Okay. So this is just some more, I think, this slide talking about the cone-cocone diagram, but
something that's to point out that there's the dual construction, that is when it commutes. I think I
did say that already. So when the infomorphisms on the same classifiers, where all the arrows are
reversed, when it's reversible, then that's a commuting cone-cocone diagram. So non-community is
the opposite of that, right? So we're going to talk about non-community as we go forward.
And here, what's one thing that I think is happening, hopefully, is like we have been discussing this
in the context of two different observers having the same semantics from the same screen, C and D.
And then they say if C equals D or C prime equals D prime, then you can sort of draw another
consistent world, and this is sort of like a recognition semantics, and then the out cone is like
an operational or generative semantics in a different way, because it's like generating
the observations or something like that. But there's going to be like a dual between the diamond
and the hourglass.
Nice. Cool. Okay.
All right, here we go. More of this commutativity. So here they talk about commutativity as
Bayesian coherence. And we talked a little bit about quantum coherence earlier, but they're bringing
this notion of Bayesian coherence up. So viewing commutativity and Bayesian coherence as fundamental
to the definition of measurement, like if I measure the length of the salamander and Daniel measures the
length of the salamander, we could get the same answer or not. And hence also to the definition of
preparation or action on the environment. So this suggests this foreign rule, which is that's what you blew up, Daniel.
Don't know what it is. Let's start about it.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah, that was that one's right.
Let's let the authors unpack that one for us.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, that's the rule.
So here, blow it up again for me. Oh, I'll blow it up actually myself.
So, ah, too far.
So they say the probability of obtaining
X, the state X is the sum of observations over states. Is that observations over states? I should
have defined these. And the probability of obtaining a measurement, is it a measurement? As an observational
outcome? In the description for coherently assigning amplitudes to components. Okay. So anyway, we can
let the authors unpack that one for us. I can't, I can't do it.
All right. Repeated measurements and system identification. So this is section three, moving on.
We develop in section three, a generic formal description of how one quantum system identifies
another quantum system as a persistent entity, a thing. So here they're going to talk about
thingness and measures records and compares its states by deploying specific sequences of quantum
reference frames. And so like, how do I know that Daniel is a different thing than me? Right?
Yeah, that's cool. Sometimes I think we're the same thing. So we're doing the same thing at the same
time. Is there a thing? Is there a group thing? That's a group thing.
Consensus. We're having a thing at my house. That's it. All right.
So they break this section. So these sections get really awesome. So memory, time, and coarse graining.
The idea that a system must possess a quasi non-equilibrium steady state solution to its density
dynamics and hence be restricted to trajectories in its classical configuration space that do not
diverge exponentially over time in order to be observable as a thing immediately raises the
issues of time as a measurable duration and of memory as persistent over measurable time.
So that they show in this figure that the agent A can only detect changes in the nest density and employ
them as bases for inference if actions and actions if A can write time ordered records to subsequently read
from the memory sector Y. So here the memory sector is Y. The environment is E. And this G-I-J.
Here, I think it's better done in the next one. Oh yeah. Perfect. We have the next screen right here.
So G-I-J is this a time clock, a time step from one memory that's the dynamics of internal time.
Internal clock. That's what it is of the agent. We talked already about the different parts of the
screen and how some are being observed, some are unobserved, and then there's the memory sector.
And here like the unobserved environment is the biggest set. I think it's like mostly, at least in
this image. And so one question is just, what does this represent in terms of our computers or our
sensory apparatus? And how is it related to some of the work that they like cited and some related
work about attention and Bayesian graphs? This is a cool representation also. Like notice that
your observations are different and not overlapping from your memory. Like if you're all memory,
the new information isn't coming in. If you're not paying attention to anything, it can't have an
effect like that type of thing. Right. And so this is an illustration of quantum reference frames
required to write a readable memory of an observed environmental state, E. So E and Y read the state
from E and write it to Y respectively. And the clock is a time quantum reference frame that
defines the time coordinate A. So at the time step, you read the environment and then you write it to
memory Y. Cool. And there's papers. A little perception action loop with memory.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yep. In a loop. Sorry. Cool. Awesome. The figure four
is a memory read write cycle defining one tick from I to J of the environment. So here it's like you
read from the environment, measure or read measure, and then write prepare. So like you prepare for the
next time step. All quantum reference frames and the comparison functions are implemented by the quantum
dynamics PA, which is the big block arrow. So if this were like a EEG headset that was measuring at
a hundred Hertz, a hundred times per second, that would be like a hundred classical information reads
per second. And then you could do signal processing. I think this is kind of like the time step is the
sampling frequency of the experimental apparatus that's defined by this partitioning
of the blanket fancy B slash holograph and then subsectors with these different interpretations
of being like observed, unobserved or memory components.
And the authors say here, they say, formally, we think of this PA as the weighted sum of all possible
paths from the boundary, the fancy B at one state to the boundary, the fancy B at the next state.
So that is the internal dynamics are how the holographic screen is shifted from T to T plus one.
And also this is where there's the cone. So the B are like those, that line of A's that are all lined
up and then now it's bottlenecking. This is the hourglass and then going back out.
Yes. Yes. Superpose those figures for next time.
Yep. Yeah. All right. Then memory, time and core screening. So the internal dynamics that operate
on those states to maintain a non-equilibrium steady state density are spatially localized inside of the
boundary. And the boundary represents a Hilbert space where we talked earlier. And it's not a physical
space time decomposition. So the boundary B is all those little spheres.
Yeah. Still.
What is memory? We'll discuss it.
Yeah. And importantly, they say figure four illustrates an important
distinguishing distinction between classical and quantum representations of dynamics.
Classical physics assumes a space time embedding and the quantum does not.
Interesting.
Yeah. I'm curious about the self evidencing that they mentioned here also. I'll have to ask them about that.
Okay. Okay, cool. Learning and generative models. I'll let you take this one away.
Um, this kind of took us almost briefly out of the quantum, but just to give an example of a simpler
thing that this is like an elaboration or a generalization of a Bayesian approach like Kalman filtering,
which is just taking, it's like a dragging in estimate through time as new information comes in.
And so that's what's happening in a sense here with formalism 27. There's a prior and a posterior
and that's moving forward. So it's kind of like using this dragging filter through time.
If that were classical information, and then there's something different happening with quantum.
And that's that, that piece that we're going to keep on returning to, but this is like a Bayesian
analog. And now the math is being used to describe these quantum systems.
Yes. Okay. Moving on. Section 3.3, identifying and measuring systems embedded in E.
So we've so far considered only observers A that measure the states of their observed environments E
without decomposing E into systems that have their own specific states. And the question of how an
observer distinguishes a system from the environment in which S is embedded is central to classical
cybernetics. So I think that that's important. Like are the other agents, do they matter? Are they just
part of the environment? Like there's always that question of, of, you know, is, is it its own thing,
that other person over there, or it's just my perception of my environment?
And the second part there is like, it's that sort of entity niche differentiation or delineation. And then
under the rubric of object persistence, the conceptuality of thingness to cognitive and
developmental psychology. So that's like children with peekaboo. And so it's like, what connects the
child playing peekaboo to the cybernetic entity differentiating causes? And how does quantum with
its observer based relationality connect those areas?
So here they use a special delineation for an environment that indicates the remainder of E when
other systems in the environment are removed. And the question of how an observer distinguishes an
external system from its surrounding environment prior to and as a precondition for measuring some
state of interest is not something that people traditionally address because it is thermodynamically and
computationally difficult demanding special requirements on those servers.
Cool. All right. So figure five shows us a system. I think it just shows us like,
pretty much where we are systems s. You know, here you have a and b. Identify the system.
Requires identifying some proper component are that maintains a constant state or a density of time
average samples as the pointer state of PI, right? So you need a pointer to point to the system.
Or density of time average samples of interest varies. Oh, so like as this goes to attention,
right? So what is your, what are you pointing to?
Oh, another way I was kind of seeing this one was, um, this, the, the, it's like a clock hand. So this could
be like a time scenario, or it could be quantum with like the spin or with the angle in a complex field
or something like that. But you can decompose the total system s into the time invariant part,
which is like your Python data structure. And that's like saying, here's the, the structure of
the variables. And then just like the variables themselves that are time variants, which is like the
clock hands. So there'd be like the body of the clock. That's time variants. And then there's the
parts that are time varying. I don't know how that, um, R and P and S partitioning connects back, but
that's what this kind of looks like. Yeah. I'm also kind of unsure about the pointer states and, but I
think it's the interest varies, right? So, um, yeah, which I think, I think that points to attention,
like as your interest, as your point of focus shifts, like what are you pointing to? Because
like, as you look here in one direction, there's a set of variables that are there in that direction,
like this wall, that corner, this refrigerator or whatever. And then as you shift here,
your interest or attention is shifting to a new set of variables, but you still know that that other set
of variables is there that goes to the object permanence that we were just talking about before.
So like, I know that the refrigerator was in my first point of view, but it's not in my second
point of view, but I know that it's still there. Um, that, that to me kind of is how, how I think
about this, the pointer. Cool. Uh, it'll be cool for the authors to maybe unpack this one a little bit
more for us. Um, oh, okay. We did talk about the Markov kernel versus the Markov blanket. Daniel,
you, you so eloquently explained it to me.
Daniel, just one possibility is the blanket is the set of states that insulate the internal and
the external, making them conditionally independent. And then the Markov kernel could be like that
applied through time. And it's kind of like a, a REMA model. You could have like a temporal depth of an
auto regression. And then the temporal depth of the Markov kernel through time would be like,
what time steps are able to carry forward. But let's discuss that with people who know better.
Yes. Cool. Okay. Good. Um, all right. So non-communativity, uh, context switching. So
we talked about non-communativity. We talked about what commutativity means. And so non-communativity would be
the opposite of that. Um, so here they say, as emphasized by Bohr, a hundred years ago, a finite
quantum of action partitions the set of all possible quantum measurement operators into a set of
complementary non-commuting pairs, the most well-known being position and momentum. So if you're trying to
measure the position of a particle, you can't simultaneously measure the momentum of the particle
at the same time. So that's non-communativity. Um, yes. And so why does context switching matter?
Um, they say an observer, an observer, a capable of switching between non-commuting quantum reference
frames must to maintain an operable memory, implement a clock that is invariant under basis rotations
on the energy between a and B or the physical interaction between a and B. If measurements
made at clock ticks, I and J do not commute. However, the corresponding clock operations will not commute.
Um, so non-commutativity forces TA, which is time or the time step that it takes to record a memory to be unidirectional and hence memory records to be
encoded irreversibly with an accompanying expenditure of free energy. So the internal clock thus defines TA as
entropic time. I thought that was super interesting. So it's not like actual time, but it's like time that you paid entropy for, like time that entropy was expended for.
Time on the clock.
Time requiring work, right? Or, or over time. Over time. Okay.
Something to that end. All right. Uh, cool. So context switching between non-commuting quantum reference
frames, like position and momentum while holding the other quantum reference frame constant. So that's the one
that's constant is here. The one that's rough in this figure 34 or equation. What is this thing? It's a diagram. That's what it is. So in this diagram, number 34, um, these different pointer sectors, you and V could be like the different, um, non-commuting.
And then you have overlapping, but mutually communicating operators in a canonical, canonical context switch. So that's like someone could be standing, not at the train platform or on the train and be observing both of those people. I suppose different frame.
A bigger, a bigger, a bigger context. They each have their own local coherence, but it's interoperable. So it's part of a bigger umbrella, which is like the big C at the top.
Cool. Okay. Okay. Good. So that's diagram 34. If it fails to commute, then the observables are non-co-deployable.
So that's like position and momentum. Those are non-co-deployable observables. So non-commutativity in the, in diagram 34, um, has been specified in terms of non-existence of a consistently definable joint probability distribution of conditionals.
So that's like the conditional independence, right? This non-co-deployable co-deployability of observables amounts to the occurrence of intrinsic quantum contextuality in relationship to that diagram.
So this goes really back. It speaks a lot to what, um, Chris talked to us about when we did number 17.
So let's get notes on this stuff.
Yeah, for sure. Um, so they say in 4.2 below that context watching increases variational free energy by generating prediction errors.
Um, and like if you're in one context and you have a prediction and then you move to another context with the same prediction, your outcome's going to be different.
So it increases very variational free energy, um, which makes minimizing very variational free energy and complying with the FEP more difficult.
So like going from my same generative model from one context to another context to another context makes it hard, um, but can lead to radically better generative models.
So you're always updating your, your model becomes more generalized, generalizable under different contexts.
So yes, context switching poses a fundamental challenge to any classical formulation of the FEP and a fundamental explanatum.
I've not heard that before for a quantum formulation.
Um, I wonder if this provides like some evidence for us having a shared reality.
And I, I've, um, brought that up a couple of different times too here.
Cool.
It's the fact thing or expression, which is to be explained or explicated.
Nice.
Okay.
Now let's get to the paper.
What do you think, Lou?
We're finally here.
We made it.
This is the best part.
Uh, yeah.
The FEP for generic quantum systems.
Um, so all that background was to lead you here to the, um, to this place where we are now.
So how the FEP emerges in this setting.
Um, and we're going to look at its asymptotic behavior, um, considering how it addresses the fundamental problem that's posed by quantum context switches.
Whew.
All right.
We're getting there.
All right.
You want to take this one?
We're going to go into more detail so that we can get a lot more into this dot zero, but we've seen the variational free energy in the context of perceptual inference, where there's a surprisal and a divergence term that gets bounded.
So this is kind of like the snapshot question, given the incoming sensory observations, how should I update my generative model?
It's learning.
It's like a perceptual common filter.
Yes.
It doesn't have action involved.
Nice.
Um, they have this formulation of prediction error.
Um, and they, this is actually from, um, section 3.2.
It's a representation of the prediction error of system a or agent a.
So this E R E K.
So K let's go through these black ones first.
So K is the internal time clock.
So agent a's internal time clock TA.
It counts it.
It ticks it up.
So fancy B is the holographic screen.
PB is the dynamics of the interaction partner B.
Um, and then this M sub E with respect to K is the observable behavior of the holographic screen.
Fancy B localized to the sector E up to time TA equals K.
So like up to up leading up into this point.
Um, so.
And E is the observed environment.
Just to connect it to the previous formalism.
E is the observed environment.
That is it.
So here, this M A E, this is the agent A's generative model of the action of the unknown dynamics PB with respect to time, I think.
Oh yeah.
On the Markov or the Markov boundary holographic screen fancy B in sector E, the environment that we looked at.
Okay.
Which is kind of like saying you only need to have a generative model on where you're expecting to find observations.
If you're going to measure just the thermometer, you make a generative model with just a thermometer.
And that's how you get the cone, co-cone, diamond, hourglass that isn't like with extraneous or redundant or incompatible elements.
So here, this, um, equation prediction error, it's like ER sub E parentheses K.
Um, this is the agents, agent A's total reducible uncertainty about agent or system B at time TA equals K.
Okay. So, so this is like the uncertainty about another system within the environment.
That's why the system separation that we saw in figure five was important.
So if we're going to define a system, we're going to look at how other systems interact on the holographic screen.
And then we're going to think about what can we predict what that system is doing or not?
Like the environment's not doing anything because it's just sitting there.
It's the environment, but that's at any given time step snapshot.
So it is therefore an upper bound on surprise, unsurprisable analogous to F of pi that we just looked at earlier that Daniel mentioned, the upper bound on surprise.
Cool. Okay. Here we go. Getting into how the quantum does the FEP.
All right. So a generic quantum system A will act so as to minimize ER sub X for each deployable quantum reference frame F.
So a system A has different deployable quantum reference frame.
That's analogous to a sense. I have hearing, vision, taste, smell, temperature sensing, et cetera, many different deployable quantum reference frames.
And I will minimize my total reducible uncertainty at each time step for each quantum reference frame.
Yes. So there. Cool. Okay.
Okay. So a trivial agent can be viewed as executing a trivial quantum reference frame as only exercising choice of basis for writing to and reading from the holographic screen Fancy V as a whole.
And so satisfies the FEP trivially.
Okay.
Let's have a round table on what that means. We should do it.
Yeah.
4.2.
That's it. Or 40.1.
Maybe there's equation 40. Nice.
There it is.
All right. So the authors say uncertainty and prediction error and hence variational free energy is generated in the current formalism by system A's in principle ignorance of both the state of B and the dynamics P of B of its interaction partner B.
As the bits A reads from B are written by P B.
This is like the agent or system B is writing to the boundary.
So A's ability to predict the future states of its observable sectors and hence to minimize that ER sub X for each quantum reference frame X through equation 40, which we just looked at and we're going to look at it again, depends on its ability to predict the behavior of PB locally on each observable sector.
So I have to be able to predict how Daniel's going to smell, how he's going to look.
So my ability, if I'm looking at my other agents in the environment over each, what temperature he's going to be, is he going to have cold hands or cold feet or something like that?
But my ability to minimize my variational free energy over another system in the environment depends on my ability to predict their behavior writing to the environment on all of those quantum reference sectors.
Good enough. Good enough.
Okay.
An animal, for example, must employ its available senses, hence its observable sectors to predict the nutritional value of food.
Okay.
Here we go.
So this is where I go.
It gets a little fuzzy for me.
So I was good up until this point.
They say the weak interaction limit that allows separability between A and B is significant.
So HAB, which is the physical interaction between A and B, and hence the boundary, the holographic screen between A and B,
must have significantly lower dimension than the physical location of B, and hence the observable dynamics of B,
if the weak interaction limit is to hold.
And my brain is melting now, all the way down.
So, yeah.
Anyway, what do you think?
Do you have any thoughts on that, Daniel?
I'm not sure if it means that the sparse coupling has to be sufficiently sparse.
It has to be a lot lower dimension than the system.
Otherwise, it's not appropriately bottlenecked.
So there's a lower dimensional interface.
That's like sparse coupling.
It's physical interaction in the H frame, and it's the holograph slash Markov blanket with the fancy B.
But if the interaction is with the H, and that's kind of what we'll discuss.
Like, are we talking about physical interactions of quantum systems?
Are we talking about any mechanistic interaction between any mechanistic system?
Or are we talking about statistical edges, statistical interactions, like an interaction term between two different systems?
And so just what I've written down here kind of paraphrases what they said up there.
So the ability for a system A to predict the dynamics of system B depends on the dynamic complexity of the interaction between system B, which is PB, on the holographic screen.
So what is B writing to the holographic screen?
Like, what is my refrigerator writing to the holographic screen?
I would say that's a trivial system, right?
It's like outputting a little bit of heat.
It keeps my food a little bit cold most of the time.
So I can, with pretty good reliability, predict the dynamics of my refrigerator.
I have less ability to predict the dynamics of Daniel or my children, who are like total agents of chaos, right?
So, but, like, I want to minimize my uncertainty.
I'm pretty certain about what my refrigerator is doing.
I don't know what my kids are doing when I leave the room.
Yeah.
So that kind of made sense to me.
The Schrodinger's cat to Blue's children pipeline.
We just got there.
Anything else to add here, Dana?
No.
Let's...
Moving forward.
Okay.
So here is a little diagram of what it looks like for me to predict the dynamics of my refrigerator.
So this is figure 6A.
It says the trivial agent in figure 6 panel A looks like a noise source to A.
So, yes, my refrigerator is a source of noise.
It just, like, it actually literally makes noise and, you know, puts out a little bit of heat.
So it says emission of blocking radiation from a black hole provides perhaps the most pure example of such a noise source.
While the dimension inside the black hole can be arbitrarily large, the internal dynamics are uncoupled from the classical information encoded on the horizon and hence have no classical computational power.
Yes.
Okay.
Maybe my refrigerator has more computational power than a black hole.
I don't know.
Okay.
Okay.
We move on.
Here we go forward.
So the more interesting parts of A's option space for prediction are shown in panel B, C, and D, where B is nontrivial.
If B is nontrivial, it deploys at least one quantum reference frame, X of B, like so that's sector X of B, acting on sector X of B.
As discussed in section 2.5, B sectors must be mutually decoherent.
So the action of the dynamics on the sector of B is independent of action elsewhere.
It is this independence that makes prediction possible.
If X of B does not overlap any sector for A, B will appear trivial.
So if their green cone is totally removed from where the red cone is, it's a trivial thing.
Like if, you know, my kids aren't here right now, they're not immediately acting on my environment.
So they're trivial, I guess.
This made me think about like if someone was speaking a language that you didn't understand semantically, not even in the cues and in the metadata.
Like there's kind of speaking past each other, even though you're sharing a screen.
But that's like an attentional informational interpretation.
And this is in a quantum interpretation about the shared semantic frame ranging from identical to overlapping to disjoint.
So in a disjoint way, I'm trying to think of what else would be there.
So like a different language is good.
But like what about something like radiation emission?
Right. Like so something's emitting radiation, but I can't perceive that radiation.
So like the thing emitting radiation doesn't appear like it's impacting my environment at all.
So maybe something like that.
And that'd be like maybe unobserved.
The part of B, the holograph, that's not in the observed or memory sector.
Yeah, like that.
Okay, cool.
So the interesting cases are the ones in which A and B's observable sectors overlap.
In this case, intuitively, in which A and B can see each other and hence interact in the ordinary non-technical sense of that term.
In panel B, sector XB fully contains XA.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
So let's look at the whole figure now.
So we saw all the ones trivial and non-trivial.
Okay.
So A is a trivial agent.
So they're not putting out any code.
B encodes a sector that contains XA, but is bigger.
So I like to think about this as like a teacher.
So we're going to get into like teaching and learning.
So this is like a teacher that knows more than the student can pick up maybe.
In that kind of way.
So the bits on XB, but outside XA encode non-local hidden variables for A.
And then in diagram C, the sectors of XA and XB overlap.
The areas of non-overlap become noise sources.
So here it's like, you know, I can understand you when you speak English, but not when you speak Chinese.
So like when you're speaking Chinese, we have this non-overlapping frame.
Anyway, how do you think of that, Dan?
This is just speculative, but in the case of B, so we're the observer investigator A.
So in the case of frame B, there's so much information like in the linear regression data set, but quantum, that there's basically anywhere we look, we can totally get all the information.
So it looks like there's non-local hidden variables because it's like super determined.
In the case of C, the regression has like an R squared of 0.5 or something or 0.6.
And so some of it lines up semantically.
But if we, of course, had the perfect attention or the perfect observation, we would be able to make a better regression.
But then like, I'm just trying to take the linear regression, normal information framework.
And then that's where having people familiar with quantum will be really helpful.
And I hope they find this discussion and the upcoming .1 and .2 as like just the introduction of hopefully some bidirectional exchange.
Because this may be something where active inference is complementary, isomorphic, incompatible.
So let's not lose touch with the active inference thread.
And then also how is this relating to quantum?
And that's how we're going to get up in that quadrant where they both are.
Yeah.
So in D, where the sector of X is equal to the sector of, or sorry, the sector X of A is equal to the sector X of B.
So that means that the quantum reference frame is identical.
It's an identical frame.
Like we are sharing a quantum reference.
We're both standing on the platform or we're both on the train.
And so that sector A is equal to sector B.
Any variational free energy there between A and B is generated by insufficient learning.
It's not like we both can't see the train or we both can't see the platform because we're in the same place.
But so there's somebody there is doing some insufficient learning.
If this is the case, then you just simply need to sample more.
But you already have the right scope and you're not at risk of oversampling.
But it's a little bit more quantum.
Cool.
And that brings us to this beautiful formulation in equation 41.
Variational free energy equals noise plus insufficient learning.
So noise is capturing that bottom left part that we just discussed.
And insufficient is capturing the D case.
And so if it was more and more overlapping, then you want more and more sampling.
But less and less overlapping is going to require less and less learning or learning will be less and less helpful.
So how is this compatible, incompatible with the ACTIM framings that we've seen for VFE and EFE?
And then how is this compatible or similar to some of the formalisms and the framings that are really familiar to statisticians and to quantum information scientists?
And I would also like to know what teachers think.
So if you're a teacher and you're watching this, what is your take on that?
Do you minimize free energy by minimizing noise and maximizing learning or?
Yeah, like that.
Okay.
Cool.
So asymptotic behavior of the FVP.
So we have these two formulations, surprise-alone divergence, which we've seen before in a similar way many times, and then noise plus insufficient learning.
So now we want to say, how is it minimized?
How does an agent act in accordance with the FVP?
What do you want to add here?
Yeah, just they wrote, comparing equations 35 and 41, it becomes clear what this amounts to.
A system self-evidences by behaving in a way that minimizes noise while improving learning.
And so here they're juxtaposing the F of pi on surprise-alone divergence decomposition of variational free energy with this noise plus insufficient learning framing.
So we'll have time to unpack that and hopefully connect it to some systems, but it's just a very interesting way that they've reached this trade-off.
Learning requires seeking.
It's like, how do we get there?
Well, that goes back to the context switching.
Like, if you're always in the same context, like, if you're always, you know, listening to the same music, you're never going to learn any new music that someone else might know.
Like, or so you have to kind of change, change your context, maybe.
Take someone else's perspective.
But, you know, seeking what?
But we'll get there.
Yes.
Okay.
Okay.
So.
Let's also save this.
Let's save this for dot one.
But the asymptotic behavior of the FEP.
Let's just say, why does it matter?
Why are we studying asymptotic systems?
What is happening with the FEP asymptotically?
Asymptotically meaning what?
But I think that that's a large discussion about entanglement and where everything is going.
And how it relates to the principle of unitarity.
Yes.
Okay.
Cool.
Just, we'll get there in dot one.
Unitarity asymptotic behavior.
Yeah.
That's a good, and so, yeah, there's only one more slide.
Is the, how, yeah, the FEP drives, it becomes the principle of unitarity.
So, we can discuss that in dot one better.
How does it?
Does it?
Why does it matter?
Why would it matter?
Cool.
Okay.
Discussion?
Drive us home, please.
Okay.
We're just going to, we're not going to discuss any of the discussion here.
We're going to look at the summary of the results as they give it.
And then we're going to have a bunch of slides that will just be like a topic.
And then with the dot one and the dot two, we're just going to go to that topic and probably start with just reading a quote from that paragraph or hearing the authors or the participants' perspective on like each of those topics.
Cool.
Cool.
Okay.
Do you want to, you can go for the summary.
Come on.
Help me out.
Okay.
You, you, you read the three, just the three big texts at the very beginning.
But the first summary of the results that the authors say is that they can formulate this agent or information gathering and using system, not just within the classical information theory context that we've been talking about informational and strategic agents, but in the context of quantum information theory.
Point two is not just using a generic agent or information gathering using system, but specifically connecting the FEP to its quantum theoretic formulation or generic quantum systems.
Insert all the asterisks and other symbols about what that really means and about how active inference plays in, et cetera.
And then three, the part that we didn't really go into in this discussion, when formulated as a generic principle of quantum information theory, the FEP is asymptotically equivalent to the principle of unitarity.
And Ander asked in the chat, asymptotically in what parameter, just exactly to what ends in what parameter.
So that's the summary of the results, but the authors then embark on an awesome series of kind of like standalone paragraph vignettes related to a wide set of other ideas.
So for each of these ideas, I'll ask the question on the top.
And then if you want to give a thought on that topic or not.
Okay.
So the first topic is, yeah, let me answer the question.
So it says actually asymptotically perfect learning.
So that's the asymptotically perfect learning that drives to unitarity on what access.
So anyway, okay.
Go ahead.
What is observation?
That's deep.
Okay.
Several paragraphs they wrote about that.
And this quote, the idea of a metaphysically solipsistic or solipsist theory of observation is self-contradictory.
What?
But we'll discuss.
Okay.
What is an agent?
And again, we'll keep in mind classical physics, classical FEP, non-classical FEP, that where are we?
Bigger from earlier.
I'll copy that one back in.
Because this is definitely like a where are we?
Like what are the similarities and differences in the agent model for FEP and not and for quantum and not?
Any thoughts or things that you'll want to ask about this?
What is free choice?
I think that was cool.
Yeah.
So, yeah.
Yeah.
And like, do you get degrees of freedom or free choice over cognitive parameters, action parameters?
Which one do you want choice over or all them preferences?
Okay.
What is self-evidencing?
So we've talked in several other discussions about classical or Bayesian inference as self-evidencing.
Like finding oneself in likely states, expected and preferred states.
How is that different in active than other physics?
That's like going from the bottom left to the bottom right.
And then how is this different within active inference with this quantum integration and boost?
Yes.
Okay.
What of asymptotic behavior?
Yeah.
So I think here it's the asymptotically perfect learning.
Like what is a gauge theoretic perspective?
I don't even want to open that can of worms at all.
Yeah.
Also, this is like the quantum formulation.
The quantum formalism is background free.
Space is simply an observable represented by a QRF that a system may or may not deploy.
It can therefore play no ontic role in maintaining distinctions between systems.
This reflects the general role of physical 3D space and quantum field theories.
Space is there to enforce separability.
C68 for general discussion from a gauge theoretic perspective.
So like the space between is what?
I'm going to put it in the video.
I'm going to copy in a comment that Onda wrote in the live chat.
Just anyone who asks questions, you know, just put it in live chat or put it as a comment under the video or email us.
but it helps us and it's awesome questions that people ask okay we will definitely look at this
before we do the one and so you you're welcome to join us get in touch if you want to participate
live but um also like we will ask these questions if you leave them in the chat yeah okay let's go
to close out almost kind of getting their applications to biological cognition um and
then they wrote in this paper in addition to the results listed above the current framework
so the paper we've been discussing has a variety of more specifically biological consequences
some of which have been discussed already in citation 13. and here's citation 13 fields glaze
brooke levin minimal physicalism as a scale-free substrate for cognition and consciousness and
here's the sections of that paper and so it's just kind of cool to connect back to the basal
cognition computational boundaries of a self discussion that we've been having live stream
number 39 just today um and we also have uh neurons as hierarchies of quantum reference frames which i
haven't read yet um that this was just published in january of 22 i think that was co-released with
this paper so i'm i'm excited to read that work also awesome so yeah what are the biological implications
okay um quantum frames for foraging so unique explanations and predictions it predicts for
example that moving in ordinary 3d space does not require a qrf for euclidean space and hence does not
require an experience of space so like the fish could swim without knowing 3d
and then from a classical perspective okay so i guess that means non-fep or and or non-quantum
this is certainly true evidenced by place and grid cells in mammalian brains etc
and then what happens when we integrate fep in the classical well the coarse graining would then be
mandated by etc etc etc we'll explore okay then what happens if we go from classical to classical fep and then
now go from fep to quantum fep still thinking about like foraging or information seeking and processing
okay contextuality we talked about that a lot in 17.1 but just what is context environment surrounding
is this what people mean when they say set the context for the dinner party or give context for
a video that they sent what is that everyday sense of context and what is this sense of context
okay next steps so these are the last two lines of the paper and they wrote in closing we hope that we have shown to readers familiar with the fep and active inference framework that quantum effects are worth considering both theoretically and in experimental design for readers not familiar with the classical fep but literate in quantum theory or vice versa
we hope this paper has gone some way to contextualizing your qrfs in sense making
the markov blankets and their underlying holographic screens so this is like saying if you were familiar with either
quantum not fep or classical fep or classical fep or maybe bottom left neither
then this paper hopefully brought you towards that upper right corner of quantum fep
and just like the classical classical way to end an fep paper was like we expect and prefer that this reduces your uncertainty
this is like the classical quantum way to end the paper by saying we hope it's contextualized your qrf
the clever ending to a very complex paper and
it was really fun to work on this for a couple weeks leading up to these discussions and
what else would you say as we now head into the dot one and two
states is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known


We tried.
Yeah.
If you know more or would like to contribute to helping others know more about these topics,
that's what we're working on all the time in ACT and FLAP.
So if you've made it this far and you're riled up or curious about something,
then get in touch and let's try to make all of this more handleable
and able to be translated and learned and applied.
Let's try to align our quantum reference frames.
With respect to ACT-M.
What else can we say?
All right.
So see you all soon.
Thanks a lot, Blue.
Thanks also, Jason.
And thanks to everybody who will participate in the upcoming ones too.
So see you later.
Bye.
Bye.







































Thank you.

## NkJKl_yF274

All right, hello and welcome everyone.
It's March 17th, 2022.
We're here in ActInfLab livestream number 40.1, discussing a free energy principle for
generic quantum systems.
Welcome to the ActInfLab.
We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can
improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, all QRF.
And video etiquette for livestream will be hopefully following.
To learn more about ActInfLab, head over to activeinference.org.
And for the rest of ActInf stream 40.1, Blue, thanks for being the facilitator.
Sure.
So, in this stream today, our goal is to learn and discuss this paper, A Free Energy Principle
for Generic Quantum Systems by Chris Fields, Carl Christen, James Blaisbrook, and Michael
Levin.
We have both Chris and Carl on the stream with us today.
So, we maybe want to just start off briefly with doing some introductions.
So, my name is Blue Knight.
I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it off to the first author,
Chris.
Hi, good morning, and thanks for attending this discussion.
This is a paper about active inference and how to place the active inference framework in
a quantum information theoretic setting.
So, what I thought I should do to introduce it is just give a little bit of the motivation
for doing that.
Quantum information theory is an outgrowth of quantum theory that started in the 70s, or
even you could take it back to the 60s if you wanted to.
And its goal was to consider physical interactions as information exchange processes and to reformulate
quantum theory in this way.
And so, it has a very natural kind of overlap with what Carl has been doing with the free
energy principle in terms of reformulating physics, essentially all of physics and information
and decision theoretic terms.
So why quantum theory?
Why go to this theory that's often thought of as a theory only of very tiny objects that
are moving very fast.
And the reason is that it's scale free.
And conceptually quantum theory is very simple.
And it has one core hypothesis, which is the principle of unitarity.
And the principle of unitarity is simply the idea that total information is conserved.
So quantum theory is based on a conservation law, a proposed conservation law, conservation of
information.
So what going to quantum theory really forces us to do is to take seriously the project that
Carl spent a lot of time on in his particular physics paper in 2019, which is to understand
what we mean when we say that we've observed a system multiple times.
What we mean when we say we've interacted with the same object multiple times.
And it forces us to, or at least it encourages us to take that question seriously.
And it provides a number of tools for talking about that question.
We'll talk about that as we get into the paper.
But, and that's in a sense our motivations to take this very nice, quite abstract, but in
a sense, very fundamental toolkit that's based around the idea of conservation of information,
and apply it to this question of, of active inference.
So I'll let Carl pick it up from there.
Carl, thank you.
Carl, thank you.
It's a great pleasure to be here.
I have to say, I was hoping to learn more than provide a background.
So this is a great opportunity from my point of view, just to hear a conversation and participate
in terms of how this health and control scale free, background free.
And that's what I think is one of the most attractive, parsimonious benefits of taking a
quantum perspective on this.
It reminds me of the Aquinian desert landscape, a minimal assumption, which I'm always drawn
to, and apply this to some fundamental questions, which have actually been beautifully listed for
us at the top here, about things, and crucially, how things couple to other things in terms of
measurement and observation and inference.
So I'm personally delighted and hungry to learn about how simple questions about the nature of
things we observe and measure and make inference about can be cast from this fundamental, in this
fundamental, or from this fundamental perspective of quantum information theory.
Very nice.
Thank you.
James, thanks for joining us.
Would you like to introduce yourself and maybe say a few words about the paper or pick it up from there?
Oh, hello.
You may call me Jim.
Thank you.
You want a potted biography, do you?
Anyway, I'm a retired academic emeritus professor at Eastern Illinois University and adjunct associate
professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
My background is global analytic geometry and some related areas.
But in the last 16 or 17 years, I've been applying mathematical techniques to cognitive neuroscience and
foundations of quantum biology and, more recently, quantum information as it relates to the free energy principle.
Great.
Thank you.
Stephen, do you want to maybe introduce yourself and give a thought about the paper, something you liked or remembered or were curious about today?
Yeah, thank you.
Hi, I'm Stephen Sillit.
I'm based in Toronto.
I'm just doing a practice-based PhD into social topographies and community development.
I have got a background many years ago in chemistry.
I'm really curious about the way that this idea of something that's scale-free also ties to something that seems to be very specific on scale, i.e. where something that's highly contextual and highly bounded by degrees of freedom at a certain scale and then how something could be inferred that's across all sorts of scales.
So that's really something that I'm curious about on this particular piece of work.
Great.
Thanks.
Daniel, do you have any other, like, particular questions that you want to address or...?
Just looking forward to seeing the discussion and anyone who's watching live can ask a question.
So I'm curious about how also, like Stephen said, the specificity of a given experiment interfaces with general aspects of the formalism and many other things.
But we'll go.
Go ahead, Lou.
Well, do we want to maybe start there?
Do you guys want to speak to that scale deterministic aspect of the quantum FUP?
Well, I can say something here.
Any information theory will start with some state space, so some set of degrees of freedom that have some set of values.
And in the paper we restrict ourselves to finite state spaces because we're really interested in systems that only have access to finite energy.
And so finite computational resources.
So one starts with a state space, and in a sense that state space, when viewed from kind of the external perspective of the theorist who's defining it, sets the scale of the problem.
Because in defining the state space, you're saying what the values are of the degrees of freedom.
And when you say, what are the possible values, you are implicitly making some assumptions about resolution.
So, and making some assumptions about measurement.
So, for example, if we think of a canonical quantum system, which is a qubit, just one, a particle with a spin.
And we say the spin can be up or down.
Then we've made an assumption about how we can measure the spin.
And the most natural mathematical framework is a three-dimensional ball of values, or sphere of values, if you normalize them.
And that's making an assumption that we can measure the spin in any one of three directions.
And so here we have imposed some possible values on this set of degrees of freedom.
And so in a sense, we've set a scale for the problem.
Similarly, if we're talking about interactions between human beings, clearly there are lots and lots of degrees of freedom that we can think of.
But we typically think about only a tiny handful of degrees of freedom that have to do, for example, with verbal communication or visual communication, olfactory communication or some other kind of communication.
And we always impose resolution restrictions.
We can say this difference is detectable and these other differences aren't detectable.
And whenever we make a decision like that, we're setting a scale.
And when we characterize the information theory as scale-free, we're just saying that the formalism doesn't change when the scale changes.
So the formalism, the mathematical description remains exactly the same, regardless of what scales we pick by choosing the possible values of the degrees of freedom that we're talking about.
We don't change anything else about the way the theory works.
So that's all that scale-free means.
It doesn't mean that we've somehow abolished the notion of scale.
That's part of our experience.
So it's not something we're going to make go away.
It's that we haven't changed the way the math works depending on the notion of scale.
And, you know, the most notorious example of that thing that we're not doing is the historical division of the world into kind of a quantum domain, a classical domain, and a cosmological domain, where you use three entirely different theories, right?
Quantum theory, classical physics, and general relativity, to talk about what's going on.
So that's not scale-free.
There you're radically altering the mathematical description to deal with different kinds of problems.
So that's what we're not doing, trying to use the same mathematical description to deal with all problems.
I think that's a really helpful description, Chris, because so many times when we think about quantum, we think about the very, very, very small, like subatomic particles.
And so it's pretty amazing to see math that's interchangeable with my level of existence, like not just tiny little pieces of me, being used from quantum theory.
So what, is there any other math that you know of, or any other examples of math that's been interchangeable with like classical and cosmological and quantum scales ever before?
Or is this maybe the first time that's ever been done?
Well, no.
Well, no.
If you look back to classical physics in the era of Newton, or even I think the better representative is classical physics is reformulated by Laplace.
In that era, electromagnetism wasn't really understood yet.
So people were thinking about classical physics in terms of mechanical interactions and gravity.
But the idea at that point was that forces act instantaneously.
And forces act with one over r squared dependence.
That was the only force that was really understood, the force of gravity.
forces were symmetrical, right?
Newton's second law, action and reaction.
And this theory was meant to be universal.
And so if you look at the structure of that theory, as various people have pointed out,
Nicholas Geisen has written a couple of papers about this.
It's a non-local theory.
And even in Laplace's era, they realized that there was a deep issue with this theory that, you know,
if a rock rolls downhill on the moon, then that immediately affects the state of everything on Earth.
In fact, immediately affects the state of everything in the universe.
So that starts to look a lot like entanglement.
That states are not locally independent.
And that's the fundamental thing that Einstein attacked about classical physics in formulating the theory of relativity,
was to insist on non-instantaneous forces, which just means forces transmitted by some carrier, which we call light.
But light is really just a carrier of information.
It could have been anything.
It could have been neutrinos or something like that.
So what Einstein did that was most revolutionary was to impose locality on physics.
And that, in a sense, divided the world into realms that, from a formal perspective, not just a practical perspective, could be treated independently.
And so it's no surprise that Einstein hated the idea of entanglement.
Because entanglement was undoing precisely what he had done to, in his mind, repair physics.
So yeah, I mean, classical physics of the time of applause was formally a scale free theory.
That's awesome.
Thank you for the clarification there.
So Einstein, Einstein broke physics.
Stephen, did you have a question?
Yeah, just one question sort of following from that is, as someone sort of thinking about how this might play out in other ways, is it useful to think about things all the way up from the smallest, and systems all the way up down from the biggest, and classical as being when we're trying to name things as systems?
So that, because often I hear people talking systems, systems, systems only, but the use of things seems to be important as well.
And I'm wondering if we should have more thinness in our way of looking at the world.
Shall I comment on that?
Yeah, okay.
Yeah, this, I think you're raising here a really interesting question.
And when we talk about things, as Carl so beautifully emphasized in his 2019 paper, we are implicitly talking about something that has an identity, and that maintains that identity through time.
And that's a deep philosophical assumption that's nearly always implicit.
I mean, people just don't talk about that assumption very much.
And when we use the word system, we're, I think, often trying to speak a lot more loosely.
But in fact, our language doesn't let us speak more loosely.
If I talk about a system, then implicitly I'm saying, I've got a particular state space.
That's what a system is.
And if I talk about a different state space, then I'm talking about a different system.
So, let's apply that to something interesting, like embryology.
I pick a set of degrees of freedom that are meant to be the degrees of freedom of the zygote.
And I then, you know, a few days later, have a set of degrees of freedom that are the degrees of freedom of some kind of early stage embryo.
But I want to say this is the same thing as the zygote.
Well, I'm now really abusing my notation, right?
In a really serious way.
By saying that these two are the same thing, even though they have different state spaces.
So, this is a, I think this is a fundamental question for any science that bases itself on the notion of a state space.
How to talk about moving between different degrees of freedom and associating those things with some kind of evolution of a kind of meta thing that we regard as a single entity.
And this is, this is one reason that, at the beginning of this paper, we, we assume that we have some single system that we divide in two.
We draw a decompositional boundary.
And that decompositional boundary is basically arbitrary, or it's completely arbitrary.
But when we're, we're doing something like embryology, we're looking at a decompositional boundary between the thing we're interested in, the embryo, and the rest of the universe, including us.
That's getting bigger and bigger and bigger.
And so we need it, we need a way to talk about that sort of thing.
And we just, we allied that problem in this paper.
We, we talk about a fixed decomposition.
That, that divides the entire universe into two parts that we can characterize the interaction between.
But, but yes, underlying all of this is this much larger question of how we think about decompositional boundaries that are expanding.
So, with respect to some parameter that we call time, and of course that time is not anyone's observable time.
Because we're, we're trying to talk about it though, at the level of the universe as a whole.
So we, you can very quickly get into extremely deep questions.
So two things that came up there, really for me is like, okay, yeah, you're thinking about the embryo.
Suddenly that's like a system that's separate from the world.
But even like within the embryo, like where do you draw the line between the placenta and the embryo and when?
So, so like there's even some fuzzy blurring at, at the developmental scale.
And also really the notion of, of time and time irreversibility and memory and encoding was just something I found absolutely fascinating about this paper.
So, so you mentioned that the, the quantum, the free energy principle for generic quantum systems does not imply like a space time background.
Like it doesn't need a space time background to operate, but then like brought time back in, in terms of memory and encoding.
And, and I, I just wonder if, if anybody maybe wants to speak a little bit more about that or, or help us understand how and why you don't need space or time for it to work.
Hmm.
Well, I could talk about that a little bit if, if no one else wants to pick it up.
Let me go back to the first thing you said though, Blue, which was about boundaries and how hard it is, for example, to, to draw boundaries in something like embryology.
Oh, there's another deep, deep assumption that we make that the boundaries that we draw in the world are somehow ontological, right?
Objective and observer independent.
And, and, uh, quantum theory and, and many other sort of theoretical approaches remind us constantly that that's a bad assumption.
That, uh, drawing, thinking of these boundaries as ontic causes all kinds of formal problems.
So, for example, the associativity of the state space multiplication operator becomes invalid.
So you can, you have to throw out the whole vector space formalism.
Oh, so, I mean, real problems.
Oh, so, so boundaries are observer dependent in any formalism like this.
So what do we mean by this universal time?
It's a construct.
It's, it's a theoretical convenience.
And we map it onto our observable time, which is time measured by our clock.
And since we're, we're the theorists, we can say, okay, we're going to privilege our clock.
And, uh, we're going to assume that our clock is somehow universal, even though we know that that doesn't make any sense.
Um, and when we think of space time, I mean, the term background free comes from cosmology or quantum cosmology.
Um, and it's the idea that if we want to understand gravity, or if we want to understand space time as an emergent phenomenon, then we need a theoretical approach that doesn't build space time into it.
But if we think of biology, how many organisms, what fraction of organisms have anything like our experience of space?
Uh, to what extent is space part of the world of organisms that we're interested in?
And, um, to what extent is space as we see it, uh, a construct of our ability to make certain kinds of measurements?
And in a, in a strict quantum theoretic formalism, time is not an observable, but distance is.
So it's an observable like any other.
So in a, in a very strict sense, quantum theory is not a mechanical theory, because it's not really about things going on in an independent space time.
Um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um
systems I just think about relationships between things and system dynamics I just flows as if it's
like things being passed around rather than dynamical like processes so I think it's helpful
to think about state space in that way to frame systems and I'm I'm just um yeah I'm curious about
how we have to be careful about people who use systems in those other ways and don't have a
dynamical concept of something which is nonlinear being taken into account because that it seems to
be something that this approach really gives the ability to do so I wonder what your thoughts are
on that Carl would you like to say something to that
yeah I'm not sure it's going to be deeply informed um so I'm I'm as I'm listening I'm sort of trying
to translate all these beautiful ideas into a classical framework that I'm much more comfortable
with so but the last point is um from the classical perspective absolutely fundamental I mean you start
with a launch van or a random dynamical system that is just cast in terms of flow operators or movement
operators that you can complex with time if you want to but just to reinforce Chris's point you know
time and space um are both constructs and then you know they're just explanations for what well for these
flow operators so if this flow operators have a dynamics then implicitly you've got a rate of change with
respect to something which is time but uh you know that's quite a big move um and um so putting things in
terms of mappings I think is absolutely fundamental so Steve if your point was when you need to think about
systemic processes or systems from the point of view of mappings usually associated some time I get the
impression from um working with Chris and Jim that um you know there is an ordinal or a sequential aspect
so just going back to the question is where did memory get into the game and you know that there has to
be um there has to you know there can still be sequences or um you know sets of things um that has to constitute a
memory but it doesn't have to have the attribute of um of time in the sense that we would understand
a flow from the point of view of a differential equation so I'd like to hear I'd like to hear sort of
um Chris and Jim's uh comments on that while I'm talking though it um just this importance of um time as a
construct um it does strike me that you know that takes um there's a lot of heavy lifting if we just
abandon the notion of some universal or clock time in relation to what I would um from a classical perspective
um read the scale free aspect of and I'm thinking here of the renormalization group so I'd be interested
to know if that you know and I'm sure there is if there is a renormalization group or the apparatus of
the renormalization group in quantum physics but from my perspective um that that notion of having a
scale free approach is exactly um what is the uh aspiration of any um in particular the free energy
principle approach um would have when trying to account for the progressive um increase in the scale
of a system but preserving exactly the same dynamics the same lagrangians the same so again from a
classical perspective the same um the same functional forms for the the things that are conserved so you
know you know just to reiterate chris's fundamental point earlier on that um we're not talking about
um a commitment to a particular scale be it very very small or very very big what we're talking about
is a commitment to the same functional forms and the apparatus and the mathematics that underwrite the
the dynamics if you like and that's you know at any given scale and then that calls then into question
how would you get from one scale to the other um and i'm one thing that sort of um jumps out to you
when you when you look at the the renormalization group in relation to um summarizing dynamics of random
differential systems is that you get this time dilation or this you know you move from one time scale to
another time scale um so i'm i'm coming back to the point that you know when you talk about time
what scale what scale what time are you talking about are you talking about evolutionary time are you
talking about um uh sort of you know the time that um the fetus is enjoying in its mother's womb or you're
talking about the time scale appropriate for the um the fluxes of ions over your cell membrane
um so the deeper question here is that how does one temp one time relate to another the people that i
know who are interested in this issue from the point of view of the perception of time or time as a
construct um usually fall back on information rates they usually fall back on the the rate of belief
updating or the amount to which you have moved in some belief space technically statistical manifold
from a classical point of view but as soon as you say rate you say with respect to what um and then of
course you're back with oh some time which time and where you end up where you end up is well okay um i
can't talk about any absolute information rate but i can certainly talk about um the number of moves i
make at one scale per number of moves i make at another scale uh even we could be doing that in our
heads you know when we um very high scales um say from the point of view of a generative model in our in
our heads dealing with things that unfold very slowly in relation to fast food updating much closer
say to our sensory organs or um actuators um that it does make sense you know to actually talk about
how much have i moved how how far have i moved in terms of an information length um in my belief updating
in um at a higher level of a hierarchy or your higher scale in relation to the to the number of moons or
how far i have moved
um
we've got somebody chatting away from that all good um jim do you want to mute if you're uh
have background noise please
okay okay or you can just um um it'll be muted on live stream
That little response was very rambling because there are so many questions that have come
up over the past 10-20 minutes. I'd like to pass back to Chris and Jim now, though, just
to get their take on how comfortable they would be by taking the notions of, say, the
renormalization group as applied to pathological formulations of bandedianic systems and whether
that has any homolog or any currency in a truly background-free quantum formulation.
Well,
basically I think what Carl is proposing concerning the renormalization group and
van der Waals theories is something to be investigated. But I'm in consonant with Carl concerning
the aspect of memory from the informational point of view. And may I speak about the specifics of our
construction, namely the Cone Diagram, which is a distributed...
I think I'll be there.
Hello?








Hello?
Yep.
Continue, Jim. I...
Okay, you could mute or just... Yeah.
Right.
I can't help you.

Well, I can't help you.
That's all good.
Well, I know.
Well, I know.
We're going to be looking at the cone...
Cocone?
Um, maybe just Chris or Carl, you can give a first pass.
Like, what is this being shown and also how does it relate to active inference?
Oh, hello.
Okay. Welcome back.
There you are.
Continue with the Cone.
Yes, I'm going to go with local distraction.
Um, yes.
Uh, okay.
Well, you see, at the beginning of the paper, when we discussed the
um, holographic screen, which underlies the Markov blanket, you have
um, these preparation, uh, measurement operations, which feed into the diagram,
diagram 14, um, of which, um, the lower part emanating from D prime is, um, a, uh, memory
write system.
So as the, um, the top part is picking up information from the measurement and preparation,
uh, operators, um, there is a memory writes system being, um, uh, implemented, um, from the
opposite, um, direction.
Um, one thing I, I would like to say about the individual classifiers that
we haven't sort of, um, fully mentioned in the paper that an individual classifier,
uh, can be the result of, um, an algebraic operation on, on two other, uh, uh, classifiers.
Um, these algebraic operations, uh, can be of the type such as, um, uh, concurrency, um,
or, um, uh, orthocurrents.
For example, when you have a system of trains going through a system of stations,
um, uh, uh, the, uh, the classifiers in question, uh, can be, um, combined to that extent and also
by choice.
So I, I think the scope for what is happening informationally in diagram 14 is, uh, quite
significant.
Um, originally, um, choose spaces were applied to such areas as, uh, as, as concurrency and,
um, higher dimensional, uh, automata.
Um, and also, um, we, we can look at the possible, uh, possibleistic, uh, case.
And there are ways of interpreting diagram 14 in terms of the graph network too.
So, um, I know this doesn't exactly answer, uh, Carl's, uh, questions, but, um, I, I, I, I want to
say that there is the mechanism there, um, for the, uh, memory, right.
So, um, this is, uh, of course, uh, influential when, uh, you, you see that, um, active inference leads to
minimizing the variational, uh, free energy, uh, principle.
Uh, if you have any questions about those diagrams, uh, please ask me, uh, perhaps, uh,
Chris, um, can elaborate on, uh, what I'm saying.
Uh, yeah, let me make a background comment here, uh, which in a sense goes to, uh,
one reason that we're using this quantum theoretic formalism.
If we, if we think of everything in terms of, uh, a, a quantum theoretic formalism,
instead of a classical formalism, then the only place that there's any classical information
in the system is actually on the boundary between the two interacting components.
So, um, in that original, I, I don't know whether it's figure one or, or the, the, the very original
idea in the paper is that we, we have some closed system, which we can think of as the universe as a
whole, or the universe of interest as a whole, and it's in some quantum state. And if we divide it into
two and we make the assumption that the joint state after the division is separable, that we've divided
it in a place where the interaction of the system with itself is weak enough that we can think of the
two halves independently or the two components independently, then we have this natural sense
of classical information written on that boundary. And that's the sense of classical information that
one encounters in the holographic principle in cosmology. And it's, it's in that sense of classical encoding
that this boundary serves as a Markov blanket. But since the boundary is the only locus anywhere of classical
information, in this formal description, then any classical memory has to be resident on that boundary.
And this actually brings to mind a picture which was not included in this paper, but that I'm using in
a subsequent paper with Mike Levin, which really is, is just thinking of this boundary using a pie chart. And as we
pointed out in this paper, another kind of classical information is the classical free energy flow
that powers information processing. So this, this actually isn't the right picture, but...
And so one can immediately carve off a large chunk of the boundary and say,
okay, this is just thermodynamic exchange. These bits aren't useful to anybody.
They're, they're the bits that are being used burned as power. Yeah, this is a better picture for that.
And then there's a chunk of the pie chart that we can think of as perception, and another chunk of
the pie chart that we can think of as action. But then some other piece of the pie chart has to be allocated to memory.
Or there's no internal time. Right? Having an internal clock and having a memory are the same concept.
If I don't have any memory at all, then I have no awareness of the passing of time and I have no internal clock.
So when Jim talks about, in that previous Cone-Code Cone diagram, a memory-write operation, it's a memory-write operation on the boundary.
And of course, the opposite partner in the interaction. Now, my memory segment of the boundary, from my point of view,
might be my partner's perception segment of the boundary. Or might overlap with my partner's perception of the
segment of the boundary. I have no idea how my interaction partner cuts up the boundary from their point of view.
So, this is, yeah, that's what this picture sort of illustrates.
So, this question of what is the memory also becomes observer independent, which gets back to this question of time and the
relationship of time to a local clock and the relationship of a local clock to memory.
So, whenever we talk about time as observed by someone,
we're making reference to a local clock and a memory resource and, of course, an energy flow that powers that memory
resource and prevents it from decaying, uh, entropically.
So, this, I, we keep circling back to this abstraction of the universal time that parameterizes the universal dynamics.
Um, but, um, and, you know, this, this formalism, like any such formalism, requires that concept as a theoretical construct.
Um, but, um, at least it doesn't confuse it with the, the experienced time of any particular observer,
which has to be represented in this very different, in this very distinct way.
Awesome. Thanks.
So, I think that is a perfect segue into a question that was asked by Franz Kutchling in the live chat.
Um, and also Mike Levin has joined us. I don't know if he's able to talk. He says he's having some internet issues.
Mike, did you want to say hello before I ask Franz's question? If you can?
You're unmuted. Um, okay. I'll ask the question and then we'll see if Mike figures out how to unmute and say hi.
Um, so Franz asks, how does the definition of a thing that maintains its identity over time scale with time scales?
Or, over time scale with time scales. There you go. How does the definition of a thing that maintains its identity over time scale with time scales?
What? I still didn't get it. For example, I would call something a thing if it persisted for some time
with respect to my observational time scale. So, in other words, can quantum theory say something about how to set temporal observer limited boundaries of defining a thing?
There's a lot in there.
I want to say, so how is the definition of a thing?
Can I give one for a stop, Lou?
Yeah, yeah.
Um, we see many ways, um, some that are actually implicitly scale friendly or scale free, like the hierarchical parametric models in SPM, statistical parametric modeling.
That's separating like in a multi-scale experimental design from an experimentalist's perspective into signal and noise, including the combinatoric interactions in a classical parametric state space.
And there's also, um, the, uh, Bayesian identification of parameters, which also is just as was brought up, scale implies choosing what the state space is.
And so what statistical variance gets partitioned into the noise term or the kind of ripple term and what gets partitioned into the wave term, into the signal, into the regression slope, rather than the variance term.
These kinds of variance partitioning questions can be approached in a instantaneous sense, like descriptive statistics, even if it's about time series.
And, um, um, I think a theme that we're hearing brought up is that taking repeated measurements seriously brings in a whole host of essentially cognitive features, like as well as, uh, information, theoretic, um, perspective, dependence, all of these features that are, um, tucked under the rug.
Or, um, down projected onto in a special case.
If we just assume a synchronous universe, um, or a synchronous regression, it's a totally different scenario.
Um, but considering this quantum statistical background helps us deal with the cognitive modeling and also take the consequences of action into account because action is implied in the measurement preparation recording experimental active inference cycle.
It was just so subtle.
It was just so subtle in the paper where we said all inference in the scheme is active inference, but the paper was about quantum and the FEP.
Thanks.
Uh, could I bounce off what Daniel just said very quickly?
Sure.
Because, uh, I was also thinking about the nature of action.
I thought I was, um, so I thought what Daniel just mentioned there ties in with is, is if memory happens via there being some action and then the action defines the memory scale.
There's, um, so I'm, um, I think that makes, that, that, that, that starts to define a scale.
So I'm curious that if, if there's something different between the, the temporality of a thing maintaining its thingness and the sort of temporality of, um, actions by systems of things.
Because I think things can only act to maintain their thingness, but they don't, if they start doing things with others, they become a system.
So I suppose you've got where, where that action still starts to come into the equation or am I mistaken there?
Can it, can I address that briefly?
Um, yeah, I, I think a relevant,
the relevant fable here is the, the fable of the two drunks who are walking home from the bar leaning on each other.
Uh, and, uh, if they're lucky, they managed to keep each other upright.
Uh, if,
if, if, if we, if we think of
an observer in an environment,

and so we draw a boundary between
the observer and the environment,
and we think about the observer's interaction with its total environment,
then we've divided the boundary up,
as we were talking about earlier,
uh, into a pie chart where,
uh, you know,
a, a large fraction of the bits are fuel,
and so they're uninformative,
and there's a perception space,
and an action space,
and, and a memory space,
and so on.
Now let's think about what happens when the observer identifies a thing embedded in the environment.
So the observer has now segmented,
or sectored,
the,
the perception part of the space,
into a part
that includes bits that represent the state of this thing,
and the rest of the perception space,
which are bits that represent the background
that the thing is embedded in.
So,
the things environment.
Um,
and so the question becomes,
what does it mean
to say that that thing
remain,
retains its thingness,
its identity over time,
for that observer?
Um,
well that means that
that observer
is able to
maintain this distinction
between
bits that communicate information about the thing,
and bits that communicate information about the thing's environment.
So this becomes a cognitive question about the observer.
So,
it's
the question,
how does a thing
maintain its identity,
is
replaced in,
in this way
by the question,
how does an observer
of a thing
maintain
the thing's identity
for
himself,
or for itself?
How does the observer
maintain the ability
to lock in on this thing
as distinct from the environment?
movement?
And,
um,
so let's,
let's go to an example,
right?
Think about motor babbling
in an infant.
So,
here's this infant,
she's lying on her back,
uh,
she's waving her arms
and her legs around,
and,
what she's doing
in this motor babbling
is
figuring out
the relationship
between
the motor system
and the visual system.
So,
among other things,
she's figuring out
that some,
that something that she sees,
some visual stimulus,
is actually part of her body.
It's,
it's a hand.
And,
that at a certain moment,
she begins to be able to control
what this hand is doing,
uh,
using visual and motor feedback.
So,
here's,
here's a living example
of an observer,
uh,
fixing the identity
of an object.
And,
what we're trying to do here,
in a sense,
is,
use this as a,
is,
is to insist on thinking about
thinghood always,
in this observer-specific way.
So,
I noticed that Carl
just raised his hand.
So,
let me turn it over
completely to him
to carry on with that,
or contest it,
or,
or give a different perspective.
No,
I don't,
I don't want to contest it.
I want to fully endorse that.
And,
if you just,
um,
look at
the free energy principle
as classically formulated,
it is exactly,
uh,
along the lines
of the,
uh,
the thingness
being an attribute
of the observer.
So,
if you just start off
with the notion
of a Markov blanket
that stipulably defines
a thingness,
how is the Markov blanket
defined?
Well,
it's defined
by the conditional
independence
between the dynamics
on the inside
versus the outside.
But,
of course,
those dynamics
are not observable
once they're on the inside
from the outside
by definition.
So,
you're immediately
imputing
some magical,
um,
observer
that could actually
recognize
that independence
before you've even
defined what a thing is.
I just wanted to,
to,
to,
you know,
um,
in an abstract
and possibly even
philosophical way,
um,
reinforce this notion
that thingness
does,
you know,
is an attribute
of something
that could possibly
observe it,
even from the
classical perspective
of the free energy
principle predicated
on the notion
of a Markov blanket
that is in turn,
uh,
defined in terms
of conditional
independencies
or disentanglement.
Um,
that,
that,
that,
that example
of the,
um,
of motor-baviling,
I think is,
you know,
again,
a lovely,
uh,
illustration
of,
um,
observation
underwriting
thingness
and in this instance,
um,
you know,
a highly anthropomorphized
thingness,
namely selfhood,
you know,
to,
to develop
the hypothesis
or the explanation
for my holographic
screen
or my,
um,
uh,
all the,
uh,
information
on my Markov blanket
that,
uh,
a,
a plausible
parsimonious explanation
is that I am a thing,
I am a self,
I am me,
is,
is actually,
you know,
takes months
if not years
to,
to fully
actually,
uh,
you know,
arrive at
as you're an infant,
slowly discovering
that I am different
from mum,
um,
and perhaps mum
is different
from the back,
her background,
um,
ultimately,
perhaps I am
something like mum,
uh,
so,
yeah,
the,
the,
these,
uh,
the emergence
of thingness,
I think,
it is,
it is quintessentially
observer-dependent,
both mathematically
and in terms
of developmental,
uh,
psychology.
great,
thank you.
Oh,
Carl,
did you want
to add up?
Sorry.
I was trying
to lower my hand.
I'm just going.
It,
it does that by
itself,
I think.
Oh,
how clever.
How lucky,
the technology.
So,
maybe I will
put,
put this back
to Carl.
Maybe you were
talking earlier
before Jim
started talking
about the rate
of information
flow and the
rate of belief
updating.
And so,
I just wonder,
I've been curious
about this actually,
um,
just in terms
of human
information,
like,
are we really
bombarded with
more information
now than we
used to be?
Um,
and is this,
like,
influencing our
rate of cultural
change,
cultural evolution
because as a
culture,
like,
we update our
beliefs more
often.
Do you think
that these two
things are
proportional,
the rate of
information flow
and the rate
of belief
updating?
Something I've
been thinking
about.
Yes,
no,
I'm sure
that's absolutely
right.
And right,
I think,
you know,
at every scale
of analysis.
So,
you could look
at it from a
point of view
of culture
and the
availability
of information
on social
media and
globalization
as a cultural
scale.
you could
also,
I think,
bring us
back to
motor babbling.
You know,
the degree
of belief
updating
an infant
has to
do is
clearly going
to be much
greater than
somebody of
my age.
So,
you know,
time will,
a year in the
life of an
infant will not
be the same
as a year
in my life.
And,
you know,
I think that
that is a
direct reflection
of the degree
of belief
updating.
Interestingly,
that question
touches upon
the separation
of time
scales,
which I think
underwrites
everything that
we're talking
about here.
So,
just to stand
back again
and go back
to some of
Chris's
early observations
about the
remit
of the
paper in
question,
it was
really
at any
given
but not
specified
scale
where we
could assume
that
we didn't
have to worry
about the
separation
of time
scales.
From the
point of view
of a
cognitive
neuroscientist,
for example,
what we're
talking about
is inference,
where inference
in this instance
would be read
as a kind
of reading
and writing
onto this
holographic
screen,
or if you're
one of the
classical
perspective,
the updating
of active
and sensory
states on
the Markov
blanket.
But under
the assumption
that other
things that
change at a
slower time
scale are
not changing
and those
other things
might be,
for example,
at a slower
time scale,
they might
be learning.
So you've
got this
notion that
the formalism
at hand,
the reading
and writing
at hand
from the
quantum
information
theoretic
perspective
could be
a very good
metaphor for
inference
over a
short time
period
where
things are
not changing
very quickly
from the
point of view
of the
things to
be learned.
So within
a few seconds
or minutes
of the life
of the
zygote,
acknowledging
that you
could apply
the same
apparatus
and the
same
mechanics
at a
slower
time scale
that
would
account
for
the
transition
from a
zygote
to a
neonate
as it
learns.
So the
difference
between
inference
and learning
I think
is a
nice
common
sensible
example of
this
separation
of time
skills.
So when
you ask
about
cultural
information
available
I think
you're
probably
talking
about
a
scale
of
learning
and
absolutely
when we
learn
we update
our
beliefs
there will
be from
a
classical
perspective
a
statistical
manifold
that
holds
those
beliefs
and you're
literally
moving
over
that
and with
respect
to
another
scale
then
the
degree
of belief
update
and the
degree
of asking
questions
the degree
of read
writing
will
certainly
be
a
function
of the
amount
of reading
and writing
that's going
on
and I can
imagine
that
somebody
who has
access to
Wikipedia
or news
or social
media
is doing
a lot
more
read
writing
than I
was
in the
1960s.
so
Carl
you made
a
fascinating
point
about
connecting
the
motor
babbling
and taking
it into
the
informational
and the
belief
updating
domain
into
the
adult
where
we're
kind
of
motor
babbling
on
social
media
in a
way
that
has
different
dynamics
than
before
and
people
often
give
the
example
of
like
well
a
year
feels
longer
for
a
seven
year
old
because
it's
a
seventh
of
their
life
but
then
for
the
80
year
old
it's
an
80th
of
their
life
so
that
piece
of
the
pie
is
smaller
versus
bigger
and
that
is
implicitly
the
fallacy
of
the
observer
independent
time
as if
there
was
a
linear
chart
that
was
being
linearly
divided
by
some
or
experiences
or
change
or
novelty
or
continue
to
explore
and
don't
right
I'll
mute
James
oh
he's
muted
on the
live stream
so
that
rate
of
belief
updating
could
set
that
internal
kairos
that
biological
time
like
that
biological
information
geometry
and
so
it
connects
the
cognitive
sciences
and
also
the
statistical
perspectives
that
have
been
discussed
to
this
time
question
which
as
also
brought
up
earlier
does
so
much
work
in
so
called
dynamical
modeling
and
it
just
makes
me
think
about
how
there
was
a
movement
from
the
observer
independent
synchronous
into
the
relativistic
which
prepared
and
almost
like
prepared
the
partition
to
exist
so
that
all
these
other
domains
like
the
holographic
principle
could
come
into
play
so
my
question
for
any
of
the
authors
is
where
does
the
QRF
come
into
play
and
how
does
this
relate
to
discussions
of
pluralism
and
polycentrality
awesome
question
Jim did
you
want to
answer
well
I wonder
if you
can bring
up a
diagram
there
in the
paper
let's
see
yes
it's
diagram
34
there
you
have
configuration
that
relates
the
QRF
to
the
coca
cone
diagrams
and
we
say
here
that
let's
see
well
here
we
focus
on
co
deployable
observers
when
this
diagram
commutes
is
interesting
of course
when the
diagram
doesn't
commute
and then
you have
a kind
of
intrinsic
context
reality
so
I
think
what
this is
saying
is
that
there
are
certain
elements
of
information
represented
by the
logic
of the
distributed
system
in
question
that
are
kind
of
ambiguous
or
rather
they're
manifest
in
classifiers
and
infomorphisms
that
aren't
defined
or
the
co-limit
the bold
c at the
top
there
does
not
exist
so
this
is
very
useful
criteria
I
think
to
distinguish
between
sort
of
empirical
models
which
the best
part
are
based
on
co-deployable
variables
and
what
happens
when
quantum
contextuality
occurs
that is
diagram
34
doesn't
commute
so
there's
some
sort
of
discrepancy
there
in the
mechanism
of the
quantum
reference
frame
relative
to the
dynamics
of
the
Markov
blanket
or
the
holographic
screen
underlying
it
so
there is
some
kind of
distortion
in
meaning
that
results
in this
sort
of
intrinsic
contextuality
I
don't know
if that's
a satisfactory
answer
at all
but
when
this
breaks
down
I
haven't
seen
that
before
I
I'm
sorry
there's
another
local
district
it's
all
good
Chris
did you
want to
add on
to that
or make
another
comment
well
I wanted
to go
back
a little
bit
to the
basics
of what
a quantum
reference
frame is
because
this is
a
concept
that
is
both
very
familiar
and I
think
a
little
bit
unfamiliar
and
the
term
was
only
coined
back
in the
1990s
when
the
idea
of
a
quantum
measurement
was
associated
with
the
idea
of
the
units
in which
the
measurement
is
made
and
what
are
the
requirements
for
a
measurement
being
meaningful
and we're
going to get
right back
to the
same issues
we've been
talking about
with respect
to time
and
thingness
but
a
reference
frame
is
just a
way of
giving
meaning
to an
outcome
and
it's
what
allows
outcomes
to be
compared
so if
I have
an
apparatus
like
a
meter
stick
I can
go around
and measure
lengths
and as
long as
I believe
that my
meter
stick
maintains
its
identity
as long
as I
believe
that my
meter
stick
remains
the
same
thing
then I
can
compare
the
lengths
that I've
measured
but if
I don't
believe
my
meter
stick
remains
the
same
thing
then
these
length
comparisons
are
meaningless
so
the
notion
of
a
reference
frame
is
intimately
tied
up
with
this
notion
of
meaning
which
in
this
free
energy
principle
context
is
really
a
notion
of
action
ability
can
I
use
what
something
means
to
guide
my
actions
in
my
decision
making
so
this
notion
of
a
QRF
becomes
a
notion
of
giving
of
giving
an
outcome
value
that I
obtain
and
write
in
memory
comparability
with
other
outcome
values
that I
maintain
and write
in memory
and
we're
very
used
to
you know
as
human
beings
we have
this
incredibly
complicated
sensory
and
inferential
apparatus
that
involves
many
many
degrees
of
freedom
and
many
many
values
that are
distinguishable
so I
think
if we
want
to
think
about
something
like
the
role
of
reference
frames
in
perception
it's
better
to
think
in
terms
of
something
like
E.
Coli
and
so
think
of a
much
simpler
kind
of
system
that
can
measure
fewer
things
right
E.
Coli
can
measure
concentrations
of salt
and
sugars
of
various
kinds
and
those
concentrations
are
meaningful
to
it
those
concentrations
allow it
to make
decisions
because
its
internal
biochemistry
assigns
them an
actionable
meaning
so
chemotaxis
and E.
Coli
works
because
the
level
of
phosphorylation
of a
particular
chemical
remains
reasonably
constant
that's
the
reference
frame
and
concentration
levels
can be
compared
to
each
other
as long
as that
phosphorylation
state
remains
reasonably
constant
that
reference
frame
is
meaningful
!
And so
chemotaxis
makes
sense
because
E.
Coli
has
if you
will
a
slow
clock
the
phosphorylation
state
of
Qi
that
confers
meanings
upon
its
outcomes
So
now we
can
spool
back
to
what
Jim
was
saying
about
co-deployable
reference
frames
reference
frames
that
I can
use
at the
same
time
that
I can
obtain
information
from
simultaneously
have to
commute
this
is
what
Heisenberg's
uncertainty
principle
is
about
and
if
I
can't
use
them
at
the
same
time
it's
because
they
don't
commute
if
I
use
them
in
different
orders
I
get
different
answers
and
what
that
means
is
that
by
switching
reference
frames
I'm
effectively
changing
the
calibration
I'm
effectively
changing
the
meaning
that
I've
assigned
and
I
think
a
very
beautiful
place
to
see
this
is
the
paper
that
we
referenced
here
from
Cervantes
and
Zafirov
called
the
Snow
Queen
Experiment
the
paper
is
called
Snow
Queen
is
Evil
and
Beautiful
came
out a
few
years
ago
and
basically
this
paper
is
demonstrating
quantum
contextuality
and
human
decision
making
and
it's
doing
it
by
exploiting
differences
context
dependent
differences
in the
meanings
of
words
so
it's
perfectly
pointing
out
this
relationship
between
meaning
and
co-deployability
and
hence
context
dependence
in
human
cognition
so
that's
a
paper
I
very
much
recommend
reading
thank
you
so
much
Carl
did
you
want
to
comment
on
that
also
I'm
aware
that
Stephen
also
had a
question
but
just
to
follow
up
on
that
beautiful
deconstruction
this is
more of a
question
but I'm
going to
state it
as
an
observation
this
notion
of
the
QRF
as being
fundamentally
getting
measurements
right
or metrics
right
would be
understood
from the
point of
view
of
inference
technically
as
getting
an internally
consistent
metric
correct
and the
metric
we're
talking
about
is a
Fisher
information
metric
so
if you
look at
all
reading
and
writing
or
action
and
sensation
from a
classical
perspective
as
just
trying
to
minimize
some
divergence
or
some
prediction
error
what you
are saying
is that
you are
trying
to
find
an
internally
consistent
metric
in an
information
space
that
makes
sense
of
your
active
sampling
querying
the
world
so
it
just
sounded
to
me
as
if
what
Chris
was
saying
was
exactly
getting
the
measuring
stick
at least
behaving
consistently
you'll never
know whether
it's changing
its length
or not
but at least
if it
behaves
consistently
in relation
to what
you can
see
of the
world
the way
that you
can
query
that
world
actively
then
that's
good
enough
and
that
of
course
is
one
way
of
simply
stating
the
name
of
the
game
in
active
inference
is
just
to
minimize
your
prediction
error
where
you're
now
reading
prediction
error
as
a
KL
divergence
and
of
course
the
information
length
or the
amount
the
measurement
of
movement
the
metric
is
just
a
path
integral
of
infinitesimal
changes
in KL
divergence
so
it's
seen
from a
mathematical
perspective
of
information
of
information
geometries
there's
a
beautiful
link
here
between
aligning
your
QRFs
and
getting
your
generative
models
right
to make
the most
sense
in the
sense
of
minimizing
!
or making
as
internally
consistent
as
possible
all your
information
metrics
awesome
thank you
before
we go
to
Steven's
question
we
have
a
question
or
two
from
the
from
and
in
the
live
chat
he
asks
does
the
existence
of
a
holographic
screen
slash
markup
blanket
automatically
yield
a
statistical
manifold
for
the
belief
state
of
the
agent
and
is
there
a
canonical
renormalization
procedure
for a
quantum
mechanical
system
if
there
is
one
how
would
the
core
screening
translate
into
the
statistical
manifold
I
can
take
one
quack
at
that
which
is
if
I
if
I'm
core
screening
something
if
we
think
of
this
in
terms
of
QRFs
then
I'm
deploying
a
different
reference
frame
with
lower
resolution
so
the
in a
sense
what's
being
renormalized
is
my
representation
of
the
units
that I
use
to
distinguish
states
of the
world
so
if
if
I
have
a
meter
stick
that's
made
of
stainless
steel
that
has
millimeters
indicated
on it
then I
can go
around and
make
measurements
in
millimeters
but if
I
coarse
grain
to a
meter
stick
that
only
has
half
centimeters
indicated
on it
then I've
lost a
factor of
five in
resolution
I've
coarse
grained
by a
factor
of five
and so
I've
in effect
rounded
off all
my
outcome
values
and
now
my
function
of
comparing
outcome
values
is
differently
defined
because
it has
to work
at this
lower
resolution
and
if I
want to
compare
my
previous
values
to my
later
values
I
have
to
incorporate
this
explicit
roundoff
function
into
my
comparison
of
values
because
I've
changed
my
QRF
so
so
coarse
graining
which
of course
couples
to scale
changing
from the
very
beginning
of our
conversation
can be
thought of
as a
transition
from
a
very
a
QRF
with some
grain size
to a
QRF for a
similar degree
of freedom
with a
different grain
size
and that
has ripple
effects
through
everything
including
the
free
energy
cost
of
memory
right
if I'm
writing
2-bit
numbers
into
memory
then that's
a lot
less expensive
than writing
5-bit
numbers
into
memory
so
this
raises
another
aspect
of this
question
of
renormalization
which is
how does
it
influence
how can
I use
it
to
solve
the
trade-off
problems
that arise
if I'm
an organism
with a
limited
fuel supply
which of
course I
am
going
about
the
world
trying
to
gather
preferentially
gather
the
information
that's
going to
be
most
useful
to
me
at
the
lowest
possible
cost
so
again
we get
back
to
this
key
issue
in
all of
active
inference
of
balancing
of
the
risk
of
exploration
against
the
reward
of
new
information
and
course
graining
is
intimate
to
that
and
it
involves
the
choice
I
make
of
the
tools
that
I'm
going
to
use
to
make
measurements
and
how
that
choice
impacts
my
need
to
allocate
computational
resources
and energy
resources
to what
I'm
doing
to
the
complex
task
of
getting
new
information
while
at the
same
time
surviving
awesome
thanks
Daniel
did you
oh
Carl
do you
want to
speak
to that
first
perhaps
Steven
should
ask
to
what
just
said
yeah
I'll
make
a
note
and
then
Carl
it'd
be
great
to
have
your
response
and
then
Steven
to
your
question
so
to
transpose
it
into
statistical
parametric
mapping
the
true
classics
there's
a
mapping
from
the
measured
voxels
which
are
being
defined
by
the
resolution
of
the
EEG
or
the
fMRI
machine
that's
the
holograph
that's
like
what
the

experimental
apparatus
is
providing
is
the
EG
and
that
space
you know
if it's
128
channels
in the
EEG
and
they're
getting
this
sampling
right
that
is
the
state
space
that's
being
discussed
and
that's
being
transposed
or mapped
or
connected
to a
different
statistical
space
with
different
features
and
rather
than
the
voxels
there's
like
the
mapping
onto
res
else
so
Carl
that's
why
I'd
appreciate
if
this
is
true
or
not
but
those
are
the
resolution
elements
and
that
it
can
be
like
a
coarse
graining
and
in
that
stretch
meter
stick
and
different
space
there's
a lot
more
statistical
inference
options
available
that are
just
not
accessible
at
all
from
the
voxel
coarse
graining
which is
noisier
and
there's
a signal
enrichment
in the
coarse
graining
to
the
res
that's
appropriate
and then
that gets
juxtaposed
with the
contrasts
which is
the
experimental
design
of the
scientist
like you
couldn't
differentiate
A versus
B
category
if you
only
tested
A
so the
experimental
design
that's where
the statistics
actually comes
into play
and then
and then
just as
Chris said
there's
the
organism
with
limited
food
supply
and
then
there's
like
the
scientist
with
limited
time
attention
computer
storage
processor
time
funding
maybe
7 billion
people
like
there's
plausibility
and so
that's
where this
operational
co-deployment
connects with
experimental
design
and so
many of
the
patterns
and
analogies
exist in
the purely
classical
domain
of the
parametric
statistics
like SPM
in the
classical
physics
and the
flow
and the
information
flow
area
that's
coming
into play
and also
these
more
recent
in
quantum
areas
so
Carl
would love
to hear
your
thoughts
on that
yes
of course
I'm
mindful
that
Stephen
still
got his
hand
down
but
perhaps
I'll
speak
to
that
and
then
Stephen
can
ask
the
question
but
I
think
these
questions
and
Daniel
your
responses
are
touching
on
something
really
fundamental
so
just
to
answer
the
question
from
the
point
of
view
of
Markov
Blanket
yes
it
does
automatically
yield
a
statistical
manifold
or
at
least
it
looks
as
if
there
is
a
statistical
manifold
if
you
can
observe
the
behaviour
of
the
thing
that
you
are
observing
the
second
thing
question
which
we've
been
focusing
on
the
coarse
graining
I
think
that's
a
really
fundamental
thing
I
would
argue
though
not
to
conflate
too
much
the
notion
of
renormalisation
which
would
be
I
think
more
a question
of how
you get
from
one
scale
to
another
scale
with
the
notion
of
coarse
graining
which
could be
read
just
simply
as
the
degree
of
quantisation
or
choosing
the
right
resolution
element
the
right
coarse
graining
of a
given
QRF
at
any
given
scale
you
could
argue
that
you
could
contextualise
it
but
I
think
there's
a
more
fundamental
argument
here
and
that's
the
argument
that
there
will
be
from
a
statistical
perspective
an
optimal
coarse
graining
for
any
given
holographic
screen
or
exchange
over
a
Markov
blanket
and
that's
the
one
that
statistically
maximises
the
marginal
likelihood
which
you
could
if
you
like
relate
to
this
sort
of
getting
the
measurements
as
internally
consistent
as
possible
maximising
the
predictability
of the
next
measurement
you
make
that
goes
hand
in
hand
with
a
maximisation
of
the
marginal
likelihood
or
minimisation
of
the
variation
free
energy
that
is
important
to
remember
because
the
marginal
likelihood
can
always
be
expressed
as
accuracy
minus
complexity
where
complexity
scores
the
degrees
of
freedom
you're
burning
up
if you
remember
about
the
bits
on the
holographic
screen
you need
energy
to
from a
classical
perspective
represent
and
what
that
translates
to
in a
very
simple
way
in
terms
of
probability
distributions
and
functionals
is that
in maximising
the marginal

likelihood
or the
evidence
for your
aligned
or
model of
the world
complexity
you are
to
maintain
a
certain
degree
of
accuracy
trying
to
minimise
complexity
so
you're
using
as
few
degrees
of
freedom
you're
coarse
grading
to
the
extent
you
can
get
away
with
while
maintaining
an
accurate
account
of
the
of
say
the
sensory
states
or
the
perceptual
space
on your
holographic
screen
if
you
know
from
the
point
of
view
of
active
inference
just
think
about
what
would
that
sort
of
accuracy
and
complexity
look
like
in
terms
of
the
consequences
of
action
you
get
exactly
what
Chris
was
talking
about
which
was
the
expected
complexity
being
the
risk
usually
and I
mean
risk
in the
sense
of
an
economist
or
decision
theorist
it
is
literally
mathematically
the
same
thing

The
expected
accuracy
now
becomes
your
sort
of
expected
utility
or
the
expected
log
evidence
the
likelihood
the
expected
likelihood
that you
would
get
if you
committed
to this
kind
of
coarse
graining
so
this
coarse
graining
is
absolutely
fundamental
it's
really
interesting
to
go
back
to
all
the
sources
where
the
coarse
graining
starts
to
make
a
difference
and
I'm
thinking
here
coming
back
to
Daniel's
notion
of
resolution
elements
you
know
you
find
this
in
sort
of
Vena
filtering
you
find
the
match
filtering
theorem
there
is
an
optimal
level
of
smoothing
or
blurring
for
any
given
kind
of
data
about
which
you
want
to
make
an
inference
or
you
want
to
assimilate
you
see
this
in
formulations
of
universal
computation
that
themselves
are
based
upon
Solomov
induction
that
get
you
right
back
to
complexity
and
compressibility
so
you
see
it
in
the
drive
that
underwrites
all
formulations
of
universal
computation
to
maximise
compression
by
minimising
the
complexity
of your
message
passing
getting
as
efficient
and
as
simple
as
you
can
and
of
course
the
best
way
to
make
your
account
as
simple
as
possible
is
to
course
grade
it
and
I
think
you
also
see
it
in
the
different
levels
of
cognition
in
psychology
and
in
neurophysiology
in the
sense
that
the
higher
level
more
efficient
ways
in which
we
align
our
QRFs
or
optimise
our
generative
models
always
lead
you
to
a
very
course
grade
quantisation
of the
world
so
for
example
I
represent
I'm
sure
in
my
brain
on
some
neural
populations
the
fact
that
I
am
in
my
study
I
do
not
represent
that
in
terms
of
very
fine
grained
x y
z
coordinates
down
to
the
millimetre
I
represented
no
I'm
in
my
study
I
carve
the
world
at
its
joints
and
those
joints
basically
demarcate
the
kind
of course
training
I
bring
to
the
table
there
are
all
sorts
of
arguments
you
can
pursue
here
to
vindicate
this
the
very
existence
of
receptive
fields
tiling
a
sensorium
in a
way
that is
covered
by
discrete
quanticized
receptive
fields
tells you
immediately
that
the
way
the
brain
represents
stuff
on
the
inside
if
you
can
look
at
it
through
brain
imaging
is
in
this
quanticized
fashion
this
coarse
grained
fashion
and
that
coarse
grained
ness
and
the
size
and
the
deployment
and
the
organisation
of
those
receptive
fields
has
been
optimised
at
many
different
temporal
scales
!
generative
model
or
to
the
way
that
we
align
our
QRFs
to
make
sense
of
the
stuff
on
the
holographic
screen
or at
least
when
we
are
reading
from
that
sense
making
in
that
sense
Great
thank you
Stephen
did anyone
ask a
question
Yeah
thanks
no
this is
really
cool
I was
going to
come
back
a
little
bit
to
now
in
the
past
and
the
idea
that
you
mentioned
about
the
way
that
we
interface
or
the
assumptions
of
the
interface
then
changes
how
we
resolve
the
thing
and
the
background
situation
situatedness
of that
thing
so
that
could
then
also
and
this
is
the
question
in
a
way
is
how
can
that
also
because
if
the
way
that
thing
and
the
assumptions
are
made
sets
up
the
meaningful
influence
the
action
policy
selection
and the
way
things
are
thought
about
how
can
that
itself
change
the
way
the
brain
or the
way
the
organisms
look at
what
things
are
for
instance
in
the
modern
world
we
do
see
everything
as
things
we
carve
things
up
we
see
things
as
separate
like
an
individual
is
separate
whereas
if
you
go
back
to
indigenous
approaches
time
for
them
was
cyclical
or
followed
the
river
going
down
a
hill
or
so
there
was
a
complexity
focus
in a
way
it was
almost
like
the
mountain
car
problem
of
finding
the
landscape
of
meaning
rather
than
defining
the
thing
and
what
it
is
and
carving
it
so
I'm
curious
around
how
much
is
the
way
the
quantum
reference
field
translated
into
thinking
about
what
that
thing
is
and
how
that
compares
to
our
western
cognitive
frames
which
we measure
everything
because
we can
because
we can
control
our
environment
so
heavily
we can
make
things
very
accurate
whereas
in the
past
it
might
have
been
the
Kalahari
Bushmen
or
people
in
the
Amazon
that
somehow
go
with
the
landscape
of
complexity
so
that
the
way
that
that
is
understood
is
going
to
be
different
so
I'm
just
curious
about
how
you
think
about
that
ways
of
knowing
!
to
the
temporal
scales
like you
mentioned
the
cyclical
time
time
and
back to
Franz's
question
earlier
about
how
a
thing
over
time
that
stays
a
thing
over
time
scales
with
the
scale
of
the
time
or
the
cyclical
nature
of
the
time
or
it
reminds
me
back
of
when
we
had
Chris
and
Shauna
here
talking
about
flattening
time
maybe
that
was
just
Shauna's
talk
but
yeah
anyway
I don't
know
do you
guys
anybody
have
any
temporal
comments
just
that
there's
an
analogy
to
the
synchronization
of
clocks
which
is a
huge
part
of
computer
science
and
of
quantum
and
other
areas
that
question
of
synchronizing
clocks
seems
to have
some
relationship
to
cognitive
model
not
naive
congruence
in terms
of
synchronization
but
in
terms
of
time
zone
coordination
so
if
we're
in
the
same
time
zone
then
there's
a
comparability
but
for
cognitive
states
and
so
I
think
that
will
be
something
awesome
to
explore
in
next
week's
session
and
of
course
in
the
long
run
about
what
that
kind
of
semantic
and
rhetorical
and
narrative
alignment
that
isn't
congruent
but
reflects
a
broader
frame
which
actually
the
differences
within
the
frame
are
the
search
through
that
field
thanks
and
in
the
interest
of
temporal
comments
I
think
maybe
does
everyone
just
want
to
go
around
and
give
a
final
thought
and
maybe
an
idea
of
what
they
would
like
to
see
in
next
week's
discussion
and
we
will
start
with
Stephen
yeah
thanks
lots
of
interesting
things
I
suppose
I'm
curious
about
this
the
way
that
collapsing
of
the
quantum
reference
frame
might
scale
differently
or
might
the
assumptions
that
lead
to
the
collapse
could
inform
different
scales
of
interactions
and
mixing
and
blending
of
behavior
and
yeah
digesting
a lot
of stuff
that's
come up
so
yeah
thank
you
for
the
opportunity
to
talk
to
you
awesome
daniel
anything
you
want
to
see
happen
next
week
we
always
think
of
the
dot
zero
it's
kind
of
like
dropping
into
the
skate
park
or
the
bathtub
and
so
that
was
like
a
microcosm
of
all
the
threads
that
get
brought
together
and
then
in
dot
one
I
feel
like
we
opened
up
so
many
areas
of
possible
connection
and
so
I'll
just
look
forward
to
the
second
repeated
measurement
of
this
semantic
or
regime
of
attention
space
and
see
how
the
continued
interaction
and
engagement
updates
our
generative
model
past
the
dot
to
even
awesome
Carl
or Chris
do you
want to
give a
thought
about
what
you'd
like
to
unpack
in
the
next
question
should I
go first
well
Chris
thinks
of
something
very
clever
to
say
so
it's
following
on
from
Daniel
to
certain
extent
Stephen's
question
as
well
I'd
like
to
hear
about
the
principle
of
unitarity
entanglement
and
its
relationship
to
this
notion
of
synchronization
and
the
mutual
alignment
of
QRFs
between
things
that
are
coupled
so
coming
to
the
regimes
of
attention
I
think
that
could
be
a
very
transparent
link
there
in
the
sense
that
contextualizing
your
QRF
I
think
for a
cognitive
neuroscientist
would be
getting
your
attentional
set
right
and
possibly
implicit
coarse
graining
that
comes
along
with
a
particular
attentional
set
taking
that
notion
to
tending
to
others
and
synchronizing
and
communicating
and living
in a
universe
that is
also
composed
of
things
like
me
brings
some
fundamental
questions
about
classically
generalized
synchronization
quantum
theoretically
entanglement
and
enabling
that
entanglement
in the
right
kind
of
way
via
aligning
your
QRS
and
getting
the
course
graining
right
in
sympathy
with
your
partner
so
I'd
like
to
hear
about
the
principal
unitarity
entanglement
and how
it
relates
to
classical
notions
of
communication
mutual
inference
and
generalized
synchrony
well
thanks
for
stealing
what
I
was
going
to
say
I
was
also
going
to
say
how
there's
one
like
the
final
concluding
part
of
the
paper
talks
about
how
the
FEP
is
asymptotically
the
principle
of
unitarity
and
I
really
would
like
to
dive
into
that
more
and
maybe
any
potential
implications
of
that
and
now
Chris
gets
the
final
and
cleverest
word
okay
this
won't
be
clever
what
I
was
!
going
to
do

was
to
recommend
a
lovely
paper
by
Alexei
Grinbaum
that
we
refer
to
in
this
paper
and
the
closing
sentence
of that
paper
is that
physics
is really
about
languages
and
I think
this ties
in nicely
to some
of the
issues
that
Stephen
was
raising
in his
last
question
which
I
found
very
interesting
about
how
do
conceptual
schemes
evolve
at the
cultural
level
and
in
hearing
about
the
whole
issue
of
reference
frame
synchronization
or
reference
frame
alignment
and how
that
relates
to
entanglement
this
really
is a
question
about
language
and
that
paper
by
Alexei
Grinbaum
I think
makes
this
point
very
beautifully
so
that
would
be
a
nice
thing
to
look
at
at
some
point
let's
see
this
is
that's
probably
a
newer
paper
by
him
the
one
I
was
referring
to
is
titled
something
like
how
device
free
how
device
independent
methods
change
the
nature
of
physical
theory
or
something
like
that
was
published
in
studies
in
history
and
philosophy
of
science
2017
or
something
like
that
okay
anyway
thank you
very much
for
this
yeah
this
was
very
interesting
and
engaging
and
really
appreciated
everyone's
participation
and
blues
facilitation
so
we'll
look
forward
to
seeing
anyone
just
drop
in
or
out
when
works
for
you
next
week
at
the
same
time
in
number
40.2
so
till the
next
measurement
thank you
take care
to


















Thank you.

## Cgo-0UU848M

Hello everyone.
This is ActInflab livestream number 40.2 on March 24, 2022.
Welcome to the ActInflab.
We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work, hear about your QRF.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome.
We may actually have to change this to all QRF are welcome.
And we'll follow video etiquette for livestreams.
Check out activeinference.org to learn more about the activities in the lab.
Today in 40.2, we are continuing to learn and discuss this awesome paper, A Free Energy Principle for Generic Quantum Systems, by Fields, Friston, Glazebrook, and Levin.
And we're really appreciative to have several of the authors joining us today.
And in this .2, we're just going to have introductions and then jump right in to several of the notes that we left for ourselves from last time.
And see where else it goes.
Anyone can write a comment in the live chat and we'll just say hello again, pick up with some threads that were left unspooled in the .1 and see where we get in the .2 and how we continue going forward.
So I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California.
And I will pass it to Dean.
Morning.
My name is Dean.
I'm in Calgary in Canada.
My emphasis, I think, is on the practice part of active inference and seeing how it gets applied in different contexts and situations.
I'll pass it to Blue.
I am Blue Knight.
I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico.
And I will be facilitating the discussion today.
But let me pass it off to Stephen.
He's still here.
Stephen, are you here?
Oh, you're muted, Stephen.
We still don't hear you.
Okay.
Thanks, Stephen.
We'll continue on to Dave.
Dave, I don't see.
Also left.
Okay.
Okay.
Let's continue.
Let's pass it on to the authors we go.
So let's pass it to Mike first, since you have audio this time.
Mike Levin.
Yes.
Hi.
Yep.
This is Mike Levin.
I do biology at Tufts trying to understand what living systems are doing at all scales and how intelligence manifests in various unconventional embodiments across.
And they compete in and cooperate across scales to give us the amazing phenomena we see in biology.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Dave, would you like to say hello?
Introduce yourself.
Hello.

























Maybe no audio also.
Okay.
How about Carl?
Would you like to say hello?
Yes, I would.
Hello.
I'm Carl.
I'm one of the co-authors on the paper.
I'm a neuroscientist from London.
I have to confess, I'm a bit of a passenger and admirer on this paper.
So I'm here to learn as much as to answer questions.
So I'll pass it on to Chris, who's...
Chris Fields.
Hi, I'm Chris Fields.
I'm also an independent researcher working sort of on the boundaries between physics and biology and information science.
And sort of convinced that those are all three the same actual discipline.
So this is a paper that expands on that theme a little bit.
Great.
Thank you.
So I think where we left off last time was talking about how the FEP is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.
And maybe Chris, would you mind leading us off here?
And if you want to point out a specific maybe formalism or place where we should start?
I think it was the very last formalism in the paper actually.
But maybe if you would talk us through that, that would be super appreciated.
Okay.
Well, let's talk first informally just about the motivation for this idea and how it might
make sense intuitively.
And again, I'll go back to Carl's paper from 2019, Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics,
which the current paper is obviously modeled after in a certain way.
And as we discussed last time, I think, what Carl was able to show in Particular Physics was
that the idea of the very intuitive idea of a thing, of something that exists and importantly
maintains its identity as a single system over time.
And what that means is that it can be measured by some other system.
And it can be measured repeatedly and reliably over time by some other system.
So, so thingness is associated with repeated measurability.
And what Carl was able to show in Particular Physics was that if we assume that something
is a thing, then we're effectively assuming that it has a stable non-equilibrium steady state
density.
And therefore, we're assuming that it has a Markov blanket.
And therefore, we can treat it as implementing active inference, as constantly predicting its
own future existence and behaving so as to make that prediction come true, to the extent
that it can.
So, such behavior may be prevented or overcome by its environment.
So, the environment of something may cause it to cease to exist.
So, the thing could be a marble sitting on a table, and its environment could include a sledgehammer
that's about to come down on top of it and destroy its thingness.
So, as long as the environment doesn't do that, the object can continue to execute active inference
and maintain its Markov blanket by so doing.
And of course, its Markov blanket is what defines it as a separate entity, as a thing that's distinct
from its environment.
So, let's translate all of that into quantum theory.
In quantum theory, we have this notion of interaction as measurement already.
And we have a notion of interaction as information exchange already.
So, it's very natural to take this whole picture and make the notion of measurement over time precise
in this, using this quantum theoretic formalism.
quantum theory also gives us a very natural implementation of a Markov blanket, which in physics is called a holographic screen.
And holographic screens were introduced back in the 70s to talk about black holes.
But a holographic screen is just a reformulation of the concept of a Markov blanket.
It's a boundary that encodes information.
And specifically, it's a boundary between two systems that encodes all of the information that one system can have about the other.
So, it does just what a Markov blanket does.
It provides an information encoding boundary that gives the systems on the two sides of it identities for each other by distinguishing them.
And this notion of identity in quantum theory corresponds to separability.
Separability just means lack of entanglement.
So, if the joint, if you have two things or a thing in its environment, then if they're not entangled, you can talk about their states independently.
If they are entangled, then you can't talk about their states independently.
And so, the idea of thingness goes away.
Since thingness implies having some sort of conditionally independent state, right?
A nest density that can actually be written down.
So, all of this fits together rather nicely.
And so, if we go back to particular physics, the idea of active inference emerges from that paper as a fundamental underlying principle of physics.
That tells us what we mean by thing or system that's identifiable over time.
So, this becomes a very deep principle.
Deeper than Newton's laws, because Newton's laws actually talk about objects that are identifiable over time.
And the free energy principle and the idea of active inference tells us what we mean when we talk about something being identifiable over time.
So, if this is a fundamental principle of physics, then one would expect that it would have some relationship to the principle of unitarity, which is the most fundamental principle of quantum theory.
quantum theory.
And it's typically axiom one, which one writes down the axioms of quantum theory.
It was axiom one in von Neumann's formulation back in the 30s.
Or 40s, I can't remember which.
So, what's the principle of unitarity?
The principle of unitarity is just the principle that in a closed system, information is conserved.
So, information is neither created nor destroyed in a closed system.
So, it's a fundamental conservation law.
And it's exactly analogous to the principle of conservation of energy.
Right?
The conservation of energy says, in a closed system, energy is neither created nor destroyed.
It's conserved.
So, the principle of unitarity just says this for information as well as energy.
And we know that information and energy are very closely linked by Landauer's principle or by Boltzmann's definition of entropy or all of these other connections that make physics informational.
So, how does the principle of active inference relate to the principle of unitarity?
What does it say about the conservation of information?
Or what does the conservation of information tell us about the principle of active inference or the free energy principle?
Well, the first thing to note is that unitarity applies to closed systems.
So, thing-environment pairs.
And active inference characterizes what the thing is doing in response to its environment.
And, of course, it also characterizes what the environment is doing in response to the thing.
And another benefit of quantum theory is that it makes this symmetry between any system and its environment manifest.
It makes it very explicit.
It's already explicit in the free energy principle.
I mean, the Markov blanket has two sides.
And the system acting on its environment is the same as the environment sensing the system.
And in the same way that the environment acting on the system is the same as the system sensing its environment.
So, interaction, physical interaction is information exchange in both frameworks.
And it's perfectly symmetrical.
If the system remains identifiable over time, so does its environment.
If the system is limited to exist, it's environment ceases to exist.
Because its environment is defined with respect to it.
That's why we call it its environment.
So, all of these symmetries are built into both frameworks.
So, the free energy principle is fundamentally about prediction.
Right? VFE, Variational Free Energy, can be thought of as prediction error, or potential prediction error.
So, the free energy principle is about the system being able to predict the next state of its own Markov blanket.
And if it predicts the next state of its own Markov blanket perfectly, then VFE is minimized to zero.
And that's the asymptotic case. Perfect prediction.
There was a question last time about what's asymptotic in the claim that the free energy principle is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.
And the asymptotic state, as I think Blue pointed out last time, is perfect prediction.
So, and now let's translate all this to quantum theory.
And this is where the figure in the paper that shows the disk with the various triangles comes into play.
I think that's figure six, but I've actually forgotten.
Yeah, it's that one.
So, let's now introduce this idea of a QRF, which is just a little package of predictive capability.
QRF means quantum reference frame.
So, as we discussed last time, a reference frame is implemented computation that makes a measurement comparable across time.
So, a meter stick, for example, implements a computation of length.
And it allows us to compare measurements of length across time.
Because we assume that it's fixed.
And, of course, we can use a meter stick because each of us has embedded in our brains a representation of length.
In fact, we have a representation of a 3D coordinate system.
Without which, meter states would be useless.
So, we can use external reference frames like meter sticks because we have internal reference frames like our representation of 3D space and our intuitive understanding length.
That, we assume, stays fixed over time.
And that allows our measurements of length to be comparable across time for us.
So, now let's think about a QRF as a way of something that implements active inference or that enables a system to implement active inference by allowing it to compare its measurements over time.
Right? Prediction is meaningless if you can't compare your measurements over time.
So, and let's ask, what would it be like for a system to be able to perfectly predict the next state of its Markov blanket?
Well, the next state of its Markov blanket is a state that its environment has written by acting on it.
So, our question of perfect prediction is, what would it be like for a system to be able to perfectly predict the next actions of its environment?
And notice that the system isn't predicting the next state of its environment.
It doesn't know the state of its environment.
The state of its environment is on the other side of the Markov blanket.
What it's trying to predict is the next action of its environment on it, which is the only action of its environment that's relevant.
And the only action of the environments that's detectable.
So, its environment, like it, is characterized by QRFs.
Right? The situation is perfectly symmetrical between the system and its environment.
So, the question of predicting the system and its environment.
And the system can predict its environment's actions perfectly only if it and the environment exactly share their QRFs.
Because the QRF not only interprets sensation, it gives meaning to action.
So, it says what your action is going to be.
So, if I use my meter stick to cut a 2x4, my QRF, the meter stick, is guiding my action.
It's giving it meaning.
It's making it repeatable in the same way that it makes my perceptions repeatable.
And again, that's why we use these things.
We want to be able to act in repeatable ways as well as perceive in repeatable ways.
And if we can't act in repeatable ways, then again, the notion of prediction becomes meaningless.
So, perfect prediction corresponds to perfect QRF alignment.
So, the question becomes now, what does perfect QRF alignment correspond to?
And Jim Glazebrook and another colleague, Antonino Marciano, who's a physicist in Shanghai, showed in a previous paper that perfect QRF alignment between a system and its environment is only possible if the system and environment are entangled.
So, perfect QRF alignment corresponds actually to the collapse of the Markov blanket.
Because it corresponds to the collapse of separability.
Which means that the NESS is no longer well defined.
Because it's no longer a conditionally independent state.
And you can see that if you think of what perfect QRF alignment means.
It means that your actions correspond exactly to my predictions.
A conditional statement, it's an exact statement.
So, if I predict that you're going to do X, then you're going to do X.
Period.
Which means that your state is no longer independent of my state.
Your state actually depends on my state.
And my state, correspondingly, actually depends on your state.
If you predict that I'm going to do X, then I will do X.
That's what perfect prediction means.
When we translate it into this QRF-based concept.
So, perfect prediction and the collapse of separability are the same thing.
So, the asymptotic limit of the FEP, which is perfect prediction, corresponds to the collapse of separability.
Well, the collapse of separability is just entanglement.
And the principle of unitarity is the claim that any isolated system, left to its own devices, will evolve its state, which is the joint state of any two of its components, will evolve toward complete entanglement.
It will evolve toward a pure state in quantum theoretic jargon.
So, it's in this sense that the FEP is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.
It's that its asymptotic condition is the same as the condition that the principle of unitarity imposes on closed systems, i.e. on system environment combinations.
Where, whenever I say environment, I just mean everything that exists that's not the system of interest.
So, a system environment combination is always a closed system by definition.
So, that's my introduction and we can start on discussion.
That's great. Thank you. Steven, did you have a question?
Yes, you can hear me okay. Excellent.
I was just going to ask, that's really helpful. There's a lot in there, obviously.
I was going to ask, in terms of the pure unitarity, would that be what happens, say, at the electron or the kind of these normal quantum particles scales?
And as you go to scales above that, it becomes more and more approximate.
You have less of this isotropic, you know, this quality of knowing and entanglement.
Well, that's a very deep question and it's a very good question.
Let's think about the canonical entanglement experiment, the sort of Bell-EPR experiment.
So, I'll draw it with my hands here.
So, in the canonical experiment, you've got a source and it's located here in the middle of my face.
And it produces an entangled pair of something, photons or electrons or buckyballs or whatever you want.
And they travel apart at the speed of light or something very close to it.
And at some point, they encounter two symmetrically placed detectors.
And the detectors are operated by observers who are always called Alice and Bob.
And these detectors measure something.
And in the canonical experiment, they measure spin.
And what Alice and Bob each observe independently is a random distribution of spins.
And if we think of this as a two-dimensional experiment, then they either measure spin up or spin down in some coordinate systems.
So, Alice and Bob each pick a z-axis that defines up.
And with respect to their local z-axis, they see a random distribution of up and down.
Now, things get interesting when Alice and Bob later get together and compare their results.
And what they find is that whenever Alice observes up, Bob observes down and vice versa.
And so, they conclude that their results are classically correlated.
But then it gets more interesting.
Because what we allow Alice and Bob to do is constantly alter the direction that they detect the spin in with respect to their own local z-axis.
So, you can think of the spin detector as like a polarization filter.
So, like a pair of sunglasses.
And what Alice and Bob can do is randomly and independently change the tilt of their sunglasses while they do this experiment.
And in real implementations of this experiment, it was first implemented by Alan Aspect in his lab in Paris in the early 1970s.
And it has since been repeated probably hundreds of times by different groups all over the world, including the Chinese using a satellite to generate the entangled pairs and measuring them thousands of, a thousand or so kilometers apart.
So, if you remember the speed of lights, a foot per nanosecond.
So, you've got a lot of nanoseconds in there if you're a thousand kilometers apart to play with.
And the trick in this experiment is that Alice and Bob can change the direction of their detector within the time it takes for the entangled pair to get from the source to the detectors.
So, if it takes 10 nanoseconds to get from the source to the detectors, they have to be able to change their detectors within 10 nanoseconds.
So, that's why you want detectors that are far apart.
So, Alice and Bob redo the experiment changing, randomly changing the directions that they're measuring with respect to their local z-axis.
And then they get together again to compare their results.
And what they find is that if Alice observes up, Bob will observe down, even when they've been randomly and independently changing the directions of their detectors.
So, one way to put that is, if Alice decides to rotate her detector 45 degrees, then Bob's result will automatically be rotated 45 degrees.
And it's symmetrical, so vice versa.
So, that's not classical correlation.
That's classical correlation that's robust against manipulation.
So, I was discussing this with Carl a while back.
And I used this example.
If you and I are classically correlated, then we may have the same beliefs about something.
So, we might both believe that the Earth is round.
That's classical correlation.
That's classical correlation.
Now, suppose someone convinces me that the Earth is flat.
If that happens and you then believe that the Earth is flat, that's entanglement.
That's classical correlation that's robust against manipulation.
So, it's correlation, no kidding.
It's correlation that survives the environment doing something to you.
So, now let's go back to this question.
Is this an effect that only occurs in some microscopic domain?
And the answer is, it's an effect that was first described by a theory that was intended to only describe a microscopic domain.
Like quantum theory was developed to deal with nuclear atomic and nuclear physics.
So, there's this idea of the quantum world, which is very small.
But the math, of course, applies across the board.
And trying to think of quantum theory, trying to think of classical physics as a limit, a mathematical limit of quantum theory, always runs into problems.
And the problems are always that numbers go to infinity that shouldn't be infinity.
So, it's not really accurate to think of classical physics as some sort of mathematical limit like h-bar goes to zero of quantum theory.
Because if h-bar goes to zero, lots of relevant energies go to infinity.
And this has been known for a long time.
Nonetheless, it's constantly taught in this classical limit kind of framework that isn't really correct.
So, one point of doing Bell-EPR experiments at larger and larger distances is to demonstrate that quantum theory,
quantum theory is not really a microscopic theory.
So, if you think of an entangled state, an entangled state is one object.
It's not two electrons that happen to have some mysterious relationship.
It's one object that has one state.
Remember, what entanglement means is non-separability, non-independence across any decompositional boundary.
So, an entangled pair is one thing.
And what the Chinese were able to demonstrate was you can have one quantum object that's over a thousand kilometers long.
Now, that's not microscopic.
That's big.
A nice way to think about entanglement was introduced by Leonard Susskind quite a few years ago.
And Raphael Busa.
With their idea that an entangled pair is the same thing as an Einstein-Rosen bridge in space-time.
And an Einstein-Rosen bridge is a black hole and a white hole connected end to end.
Or you can think of it that way.
It's a topological connection in space-time that simply identifies two points in space-time that would otherwise be considered distinct.
So, this emphasizes that if you have an entangled pair, there's no distance inside it.
If you have two entangled electrons, for example, that are a thousand kilometers apart, as far as they're concerned, they're right next to each other.
And in fact, as far as they're concerned, they're located at exactly the same point in space-time.
And that's what this ER bridge notion emphasizes to us.
That there's really no separation here.
That the separation is an artifact of our observational capabilities.
It's not a characteristic of the entangled state.
So, entanglement actually calls into question what the idea of distance even means.
It makes it, it forces it to be relative to us.
And that's why there's all this discussion of emergent space-time in quantum gravity, in quantum cosmology.
Because if you think about things from a straight quantum theory point of view, space-time is in-observable.
It's just something, it's something that's relative to how an observation is made.
It's not an intrinsic property of anything.
It's not ontic, as they say.
So, let's go back to this question again.
If we think about entanglement, and we think about observation, and we think about entanglement as something that's observed by comparing observations made by different observers.
Right?
Neither Alice nor Bob in that experiment can detect entanglement.
They only realize that there's an entangled state when they talk to each other after they've done the experiment.
Then, this question of scale becomes a question about how observers interact.
And what observers can know about each other, and about each other's experimental apparatus.
So, when I described the entanglement experiment, I said, Alice and Bob each have their own local Z axis.
And when they get together and discuss their results, and they compare their results, then they make a very important assumption, which is the assumption that their Z axes are comparable.
So, if during the experiment, Bob's Z axis was varying at random with respect to Alice's Z axis, then their results, comparing their results would be meaningless.
Because they'd be measured with respect to completely different reference frames.
So, we have to make this assumption that they have the same Z axis.
Now, interestingly enough, that assumption by itself tells you that Alice and Bob have to be entangled.
Or their Z axes have to be entangled.
So, the idea of entanglement kind of expands to take in all aspects of the experimental situation.
As soon as one starts unearthing these assumptions that we make to talk about comparability between experiments.
So, let's reel the tape back in about half an hour.
And we see that quantum reference frames are what make experiments comparable for an observer.
It's similarity or comparability of quantum reference frames that make comparing experiments possible for two observers.
But, if the two observers exactly share their QRFs in a way that's robust against environmental manipulation, then they're entangled.
So, we've kind of come full circle here.
So, one can make this notion of entanglement as macroscopic as one likes.
And, again, this is, in a sense, why quantum gravity and quantum cosmology are interesting.
It's what drives things like the black hole information paradox, which you may have read about.
So, we're now getting into, in a sense, very fundamental physics.
How do we...
What's the relationship between entanglement and the concept of space-time?
What's the relationship between quantum theory and general relativity?
Which is, you know, the big question in physics from one point of view.
What is the real ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
quantum reference frame like incompletely aligned with my own quantum reference frame like i i mean
maybe we've all had the experience of you know predicting if i kick the ball in this way i
predict it'll go over there but like it doesn't actually go over there so like i mean we predict
and we're off our prediction is is not accurate so is it like actually a temporal separation that
that like makes that happen or or what do you think happens in those circumstances where where
my qrf appears unaligned with my own qrf
now that's also that's also a beautiful deep question and it it points to something that i think
can and should be stated as a general theorem which is uh no system can perfectly predict
can perfectly predict its own state
no system can observe its own state
its own total state
so
so that situation is
um ubiquitous and unavoidable
and uh one could phrase it by saying um
a system can have a a qrf or a meta processor as one often uses that vocabulary
that represents itself so we all have a self-representation
um
that's in a sense metacognitive uh we claim to know what we believe and things like that
um but of course those beliefs are all
one very coarse-grained uh two extremely incomplete
uh three useful for making predictions but they're often wrong
and
you know this this is uh
this point this point has had huge technological consequences i mean think back to the history of
artificial intelligence
science
right in the 70s
uh there was the the huge new wave was expert systems
and you know ai people redefine themselves as knowledge engineers and we're going to go out and
interview experts and find out how experts did things and coded up in computers and soon we'd have
you know artificial expert systems that did anything interesting
and that whole
business failed utterly
right it was a complete disaster it didn't work at all
why
well the simple explanation for why is that experts can't tell you
what they're doing
expertise isn't verbalizable
and it's not just expert piano playing is it verbalizable
you know expert systems engineering isn't verbalizable expert computer programming isn't verbalizing
uh
and that's that's just an illustration of the fact that our metaprocessors don't actually have a
complete model of the rest of us much less a model of the rest of us plus the metaprocessor
uh so it all it all comes back to this
general principle that a system can't represent itself and so it can't predict its own behavior
awesome
so between this work actually i should ask carl to comment on that tirade because he's also thought
about this an extraordinary amount
well i'll certainly make the comment that um that that was marvelous you know
i'm glad this has been recorded because this should certainly be transcribed and uh i know it's probably
um implicit in the paper but it was so beautifully articulated and clear taking us through the issues
i i i really enjoyed that um so i have loads of comments but i won't i won't waste people's time
uh going through all of them and that last issue is is um really interesting about sort of the
meta processor or the metacognitive aspects of a system being able to measure itself i mean there's
a fundamental observation there of course you know um you can't measure yourself i mean you know
the whole point of the particular physics paper was to say that you know yes there can be two kinds of
information geometries if you like um and the big move is that one system can measure i.e infer
by possessing or having a movement on in some sort of information geometry infer um belief update about
something else so at no point is there any room for it just they also start to infer about its own
inference that that that that is uh you know that's a mathematical impossibility from from the random
dynamical system perspective i'm not sure sure about the uh the quantum perspective but it sounds
as though that's also true so that begs the question um how on earth do we have the illusion um that we know
ourselves um and of course you know it's a little bit of a um a colloquial question because you're 99.9
percent of things don't actually uh think that they know themselves so unless there's a particular
phenotype particle um or species that boasts philosophers i'm pretty sure that most of the things that exist
don't have any uh any pretense to to thinking that they know themselves it's a really interesting
point to get across anecdotally you know i spend a lot of time um taking people through examples
that probably go right back to things like idea motor theory um that you know the way that we um the way
that we develop a sense of agency and think that we have a sense of agency you know is a gift an illusion
that is probably unique to only a small number of us and may not even be available to people with say severe
autism and the you know the example that i literally in the past day just written down in a didactic way
was that if you just take um vanilla active inference under a markov blanket
and then you look at particular kinds of sparsity structures where the active states of the markov blanket
or the holographic screen are hidden from the internal state so these are special kinds of systems
that have a particular sparsity where now the active states of the markov blanket are now become hidden
from the internal states and you can certainly license some entanglement um and i would um i'm going to
later ask about the relationship between entanglement and synchronization so i'll say entanglement or
synchronization of the internal states such that the internal states have beliefs about the their action
but those beliefs become beliefs about action as a hidden cause so there's absolutely no notion from the
inside that you cause that you're just representing the cause so the example i have in mind is you're watching
a little fish swimming around looking for food gobbling up little bits of particles of food and you
think oh that's a very sort of um artful fish with purpose and pragmatics and knows how to navigate its
world um but from the point of view of the fish all that is happening is that the water and the particles
are moving around it in a benevolent nurturing and fortuitous way such that the water is delivering food
particles to the fish's mouth so from the fish's point of view it has absolutely no awareness that
it is the author or the agent that's causing this synchronization with the environment so you know
the deeper question is how on earth do we have the illusion that we think we know our own our own agency
and how would and when do we develop agency and you know furthermore it's not just agency about me
its agency about other things at what point do our uh in our say early neonatal neurodevelopment do we have
these models of the world that enable us to distinguish between mother and self you know and at what point
do we align our qrs if you like with not mother but with the world um that enables us to now see mother
as an independent object so that is something else that is an agent and you know the argument would
then be well perhaps if mother is nature perhaps i am an agent and then you know that i am now the author
of my agency and my actions but that is such you know that's such a high level thing i imagine it only
pertains to you know to humans that's what that's what i said i'd love to talk about um
um the homologues of entanglement from the point of view of classical thinking perhaps i've spoken
enough at this point um just a couple things uh came came to my mind uh listening to this um
one is that uh josh bongard had this uh amazing uh paper in uh i think it was around 2006 or so where he
had these robots and these they were they started out like six-legged starfish but the the cool thing
about it was that they didn't have an internal model of what they were and or what their shape is or how
to move and they basically had to flop around and make make models of uh their own structure based on
what happened to them given various outputs that they generated and eventually they would build a a model
of what happens and they would walk around and so on and two interesting things followed one is that you
could unlike traditional robotics you could rip off one of the legs and they would very soon revise the
model and keep going in different ways so they weren't tied to that particular self-model right
they would have to discover it from scratch but it was still sort of plastic throughout their whole
lifetime and they could they could get along so they had that plasticity and the other thing is that
and um chris christoph adami wrote a nice uh kind of uh interpretation piece of this he he described
they they spent lots of um lots of time being completely inactive and basically running through
quote unquote mentally running through all the different things that they could do and what
they think was going to happen uh before they actually moved and so you got chris uh called that
dreaming you know that they would basically sort of play out uh before you know in between their
actual motions where they would go around testing and they would actually sort of play this out internally
and try to refine the model such that then when they do move they would actually make movements that
uh maximally sort of distinguish the different different possible models and so on and he thought you
know he said that you can watch them dreaming about about their shape um so and and then the other
thing i just wanted to briefly mention this this this idea of uh when and how do you recognize that
you're an agent and that actually you need to act for things to happen versus just having the environment
and do things to you i suspect that one of the things that drives it very early on is this is this notion
of stress and i don't have a particular uh i don't have a theory of why stress feels stressful but but
just on a purely functional level i think that what happens in in cells you know so very early long before
you get to humans or anything like that i think that what you get is this um this the set of mechanisms
that that evolved from things like uh stress about protein folding and so on but then then basically
scaled up to be stress about metabolics and stress about morphology and stress about behavioral issues
and and so on that basically is a is a system-wide metric of um the delta between what's going on and what
you'd like to have going on right the delta between your your set point and what's happening now and
what then i think that drives a strengthening of this uh of of the agency model because what will
happen is as you as you as you slowly learn that you can do things that reduce the stress level it kind
of solidifies this idea that it's actually at least some amount of it is up to you to make life better
and and so you then then act and then of course we know that breaks down and sort of learn helplessness
assays and so on that's that's that that that really is is very traumatic for for all kinds of
creatures that will be law human can i can i speak to that because there's some great points there
please yeah um so three really important uh things being brought to the table there um so i'm bound to
forget the third one if i start the first but i just want to so i'm coming back to blue's um question
about sort of a um qrs and alignment and that and you know one obvious answer that um what could bring
to the table is that learning is the alignment to the qrs so learning at all scales you're and we're
talking here about developmental scales for example we're talking about robots that learn to repair
themselves or learn their new qrs and if you remove a limb or a child learning to um make sense of its world
then um you could look at the slow process of alignment of the qrs the things that are invariant
over the faster time scales of at which there is classic information exchange on or in um the holographic
screen as simply um a movement from a state of um disentanglement to a state of entanglement
um as you become better and better at predicting but to become better at predicting you have to align
your qrs and you have to to align that um i think the sort of the robot example is a perfect uh a nice
illustration of that in the sense that these robots were equipped with um the ability to learn about
themselves and of course the you know the analog um in developmental psychology and indeed i would imagine
developmental neuro robotics um is motor babbling it's basically you know soliciting um outcomes
sensory outcomes in order to start to disambiguate between what did i cause that or did you cause that
you know what parts are apparently under my control but of course you know that's a very anthropomorphic
interpretation there's no minus or ionis implicit but certainly the learning of the world models and
the body models um is probably the first thing that any artifact has to contend with because you see
that in children you're shaking their rattle to to um solicit and actively solicit the conjunction of
visual motion um proprioceptive feedback from the muscles causing the movement of the mobile or the
rattle and the auditory so soliciting uh conjunctions or correlations that are explainable and predictable
in multiple modalities so you may then ask why on earth what is the imperative for that kind of behavior
what drives action to solicit this um opportunity to um learn the the correlations and the coincidences
and the conjunctions um and that brings us to the second point um um the the um these robots dreaming
tell you immediately tell you immediately that at some level they have an internal model um of the
consequences of action uh and that tells you immediately that you've got um if you wanted to
write that down from the point of view of classical active inference you've got a um a belief structure
on the inside that covers both the con covers both the external world and these hidden actions and the
actions upon the world and the consequences of those actions on the external states that's a very
sophisticated generative model to have and you're getting now into the world of planning as inference
so a thermostat doesn't have that and yet these robots do have that so it tells you that there are
two natural kinds of particles or markov blankets or separable systems um at least two kinds one of
which is more like a thermostat and one of which is more like um um a sort of um i was thinking of
sort of like an ashby um homeostat or allostat but certainly more like these sort of uh robots that can
learn about about themselves and the cue and the crucial distinction i think is that the agent has
now started to represent the consequences of its actions but without realizing it's its own actions
we still haven't got to the level of the other metacognitive i am aware kind of kind of art about
and it interestingly comes back to um what i was saying before about natural kinds where one's active
states are hidden from the internal state so they have to become inferred
you have to infer them they're not they're not they are opaque to the internal states and as soon
as you say it like that then you're naturally talking about systems that um can effectively
engage in planning as inference so they have to have plans in their heads uh in order to act which
you know corresponds to uh to the streaming and from the point of view of the uh the three of the active
inference um then you ask well what are the objective functions um or what are the principles of least
action that would um apply to these kinds of plans and when you work it through then one important
component of the um the sort of the pathogenes or the actions in question is a drive to resolve uncertainty
so we come back to this notion of the child soliciting proprioceptive extra receptive um
sensations that enable it to resolve uncertainty and this is exactly the same principle behind optimal
basic design that we design experiments that are going to resolve the uncertainty to the greatest extent
possible under our current internal models or hypotheses about how the world works and that brings me to the
third great point uh about stress uh and the the really important um um place of stress and uncertainty and
angst and not knowing what to do next or not knowing what's going to work in driving behavior because if
a large chunk of the imperatives or planned action is to maximize information gain or minimize expected
surprisal or reduce uncertainty then you can see easily now why it is situations of uncertainty and stress
that will necessarily uh cause the most um epistemic uh responses in order to drive the system or the uh
in this instance the agent um to resolve that uncertainty the final point now and this is basically
paraphrasing what mike just said if the system sees itself behaving more in times of greater uncertainty
it may now learn that and and now have the idea oh i am the kind of system or i am behaving as if i am
the kind of system that responds more when under stress and then you'll become aware of that and then
you can get into the psychiatric or psychological aspects of stress you may not if you're just a protein
you may just show a sort of um a sort of selection for selectability like response um but this you know
the i think that you know the two fundamental mechanisms the imperatives that are being fulfilled
here in accord with basic conservation laws or principles of least action from the classical perspective
um account for exactly the same kind of behavior i think the interesting thing about stress uncertainty
though is that we're not talking about um the um the content of implicit belief structures but the
the the second order statistics the uncertainty uh and that's i think you know brings a whole level
of analysis to the table because once you talk about uncertainty and representations of uncertainty
um in say internal states um then from a psychological perspective you start to talk about tension and
consciousness um from the point of view of an engineer we're talking about things like calman gain and get
getting the estimates of noise levels if you like uh correct um uh and i'm not sure what what where the if
you like the well let me ask um from a quantum theoretic point of view is uncertainty baked into that can
you can you have a stressed quantum uh quantum formulation i'll put that out there well stop talking now
yeah just uh just to answer that question um if if one if one thinks about quantum theory uh
from with a bayesian view of probability right with a kind of subjectivist notion of probability
um which i mean that point of view was really pioneered by chris fuchs and and now david merman for
example has taken it up and uh written some very good things about it um then this notion of uncertainty
reduction of becomes the explanation for why you do experiments and build theories and and uh it all becomes
very well aligned i think with with uh the idea of active inference and in fact we we wrote into that
paper at the very end some remark about uh this cubist perspective about quantum theory becoming a result
not an interpretation uh when we think of of quantum theory as in a sense a way of reformulating the idea
of active inference uh so i think they're very consistent right uh uh a stressed a stressed quantum is uh
stressed quantum system is just a system that gets uh observational outcomes that it doesn't expect
so you know we we have to think of uh such systems as having generative models and thinking about
the generative model of an electron uh is a bit of a stretch right because the electron
electron is only characterized by mass charge and angular momentum so uh it it can't really have
expectations about much right electron can have no expectations about the external electric field for
example um it can detect that it can respond to it but it can't predict it and
if we think about uh something like an electron then we can focus in on this idea that having a generative model
requires having enough memory to keep a record of the most recent observation at least the most recent one
and if you want to have a good generative model then you better have enough memory to keep a record of quite a number of observations
and it's this memory resource that really simple things like electrons don't have
so uh they're they're not great predictors
uh because they don't have the memory to allow being a great predictor
and as as both carl and mike were saying um in a sense you you have to have memory to be able to feel stress
now you have to know that your predictions were wrong so you have to remember what your predictions were
so memory becomes a really key component of the theory uh once you put it into this language
uh because the language in a sense forces you to to lay out assumptions about what the what the
computational resources that are being required are that wasn't very coherent but anyway i i just wanted
to stress the role of memory here perfect thank you carl
yeah just to um reinforce and endorse that last point um and uh just tell exactly the same story
in a much more pragmatic way from the point of view a statistician so i heard chris say there basically
that if i want to go beyond being a little electron or a thermostat and i want to now um infer the quality
of how noisy are my sensors for example my thermore senses if i'm a thermostat that will require me
becoming a little statistician and what does that mean well basically i'm going to be estimating the
standard error or the um the experimental variance there's something quite important about that you
know which which um uh comes back exactly to the computational resources and memory if you do a simple
t-test as a statistician on some experimental data you necessarily have to acquire lots of data points
and store them and of course that is just the degrees of freedom associated work with your t-test
your rf test so the degrees of freedom score the number of data points that you'll be able to
remember and you need a sufficient number in order to get a precise estimate of the uncertainty so
literally the degrees of freedom in classical statistics is literally a statistic that scores your
confidence in the estimation of the standard error which is pooled over multiple observations which is an
attempt to estimate on average if i observe with this kind of um or i i asked my questions or i wrote to
my holographic screen um i or i um solicited these sensory states um you know what would on average what
would the uncertainty be associated with it so i think it's a really important important point about the
computational resources the degrees of freedom literally in the sense of the trees of freedom associated with
your f test all the degrees of freedom you have available for the computing power to actually get
up to these second order inference machines or takes on on second order inference so and i think that is
particularly important when it comes back to mike's observation about stress and uncertainty and these
higher order ways of making sense of the world but in this instance making sense of sensations that are
accrued over time not about the content but about the reliability of the or the precision of that content so
that is a really important point awesome so that kind of oh chris go ahead
if i could just pick up on this and and take it in in yet another highly related direction it's just to
point out that that all of these resources are energetically expensive so if i'm going to devote
space in in my state space to recording memories then that's only useful if i can defend those memories
against entropy if i can keep them from decaying so i've got to consume energy to write the memories i've got
to consume energy to energy to maintain the memories and then i have to consume energy to read the memories
and consume energy to uh compare what i've read with what i see with my kind of current event sensors
so as we start adding these computational resources to systems the energy budget goes way up
and uh it's it's another kind of thing to keep in mind as we think about these in terms of embodied forms whether they're robots or organisms
that uh these these entities are extracting this free energy that they have to have to run their computations and maintain their memories and all of that from the environment
so here's this is another input that in a sense is not sensory but it's still having to flow through the markov blanket it's still having to flow through the boundary between the system and its environment
and a lot of the system's actions on its environment its expenditures of of um of its own internal energy
uh are to acquire this free energy so you know we we go out and shop for groceries make breakfast or whatever
uh that's stuff that we have to do to keep all these processes running
so it ties metabolism and cognition together in a way that they aren't often tied but that they have to be to make sense of what's going on
so um
great so just on that point um something that we had
written down as a question from last time
um and in terms of
an electron having a generative model
and discussing agency we had talked about free choice and it was brought up in the paper
several times both in terms of like any physical system having free choice
free choice if if one physical system has free choice they all have free choice they generate like
their their um noise generating things like free choice generates noise in both classical and quantum
systems and so i just was wondering if you could maybe say a few words about the difference in free choice
in an electron and the difference in between between an electron ends like a human or an animal or even a cell
um what is that difference and is that also related to memory
uh is that a question for me a general question for anyone
well i'll i'll make a couple of comments
uh
one is uh remember in talking about the canonical entanglement experiment
uh part of the description is that alice and bob can uh alter the directions of their detectors
however they want to at random independently whatever you want to call it during the experiment
so that's the free choice assumption or that's called in physics the free choice assumption
and what that assumption means
it's effectively an assumption of independence it means that there's not some common cause in the past
that determines what they're going to do as they operate their detectors
and one can reformulate
quantum theory
quantum theory
in terms of what's called super determinism
and super determinism
is the idea that
there is some common cause in the past
the first
that determines
how experimenters are going to do their experiments
and in particular determines how alice and bob are going to rotate their
detectors in this epr experiment
super determinism
uh super determinism is kind of the ultimate non-local hidden variable
uh so
it
uh
it allows you to predict exactly what entangled pairs are going to do and in fact it renders
entanglement a classical effect
right it just says
these these kind of super classical correlations
are present
because there there was no independence to begin with
everything was determined from the very beginning
and if you think about
as as mentioned last time newtonian physics is formulated by laplace
the universe
it's a super determined deterministic system
uh
so anything that happens anywhere in the universe
instantly affects what's going on everywhere else in the universe
and the most the most current formulation of that is bromium quantum mechanics where the motion of any particle
depends instantaneously on the motion of every other particle in the universe
universe
and that's how newtonian gravity worked
right before einstein imposed locality by making the speed of light finite
so all of these things are interconnected assumptions about space-time assumptions about the speed of communication
assumptions about super determinism and assumptions about
free choice
the so-called free will theorem in physics is about
or theorems there are now a couple of them
due to conway and koken
and
uh
uh
what those theorems show is that
from a formal perspective
uh
in physics if you assume that some system has free choice
so if you assume that some system
is not subject to super determinism
then you have to assume that all systems have free choice
in the sense that all systems are not subject to super determinism
so you can't limit super determinism to some little piece of the universe
and say it only applies here
uh it doesn't apply anywhere else
and in particular it doesn't apply to me
i have free choice even though nothing else does
that's mathematically inconsistent
um
so that's
that's
what
what the free choice assumption means in a
in a strict physical context
thank you very cool
even did you have a question
i was just going to ask a little bit more about the um the degrees of entanglement
and um whether that's different in terms of the observers degrees and versus the like
the mechanical nature of quantum mechanics degrees
i think you've answered that to some extent but uh
uh just just the way that that varying degrees of entanglement can be thought about and whether that
maybe ties into how the hilbert space
is is thought about at the same time
yeah this this assumption or this question touches on uh why we do everything in the paper from the
point of view of a bipartite decomposition
so we always we always decompose into a system and its environment in the paper
and there are two reasons for that
one is to keep it simple
and the other one's to enforce the marcold blanket condition
so
uh it's entirely commonplace to do physics in an open systems framework where we talk about
two systems we can call them alice and bob again that are embedded in a common environment
and in that case whenever you have a tripartite or greater some sort of multi-particle kind of
decomposition of the state space you can talk about degrees of entanglement
between different systems and you can you know cut up the state space any way you want to and
ask about the entanglement entropy of some component of it um and you and you get these ideas of of partial
or they call it non-monogamous entanglement
um and that's all well and good it's it's mathematically complicated it's conceptually complicated
but in in a sense it deeply violates the marcold blanket condition
um because in point of fact each of us is an observer
and uh our goal is to to say what does the world look like to an observer
and from alice's point of view uh bob is a decomposition of her markov blanket
right alice has to actively disambiguate uh
her incoming signals into signals that she attributes to bob as an entity
and signals that she attributes to the rest of the environment as an entity
so that's an active cognitive process on alice's part
uh that's what the markov blanket condition
that's how the markov blanket condition in a sense forces us to think
uh so uh the markov blanket condition itself uh makes us take this idea of bipartite decomposition
seriously and again you can think of this in terms of of implicit assumptions about resources
uh if you think in open systems terms and so you think of alice and bob as as
ontic entities that are that are separate from each other by a priori assumption
and separate from their environments by a priori assumption
then you systematically underestimate the amount of cognition that alice and bob have to be doing
and so you systematically underestimate their energy consumption
and so you systematically underestimate their their uncontrolled effect on the environment i.e.
generation of waste heat acquisition of free energy resources and all of that
so it's not just a philosophical difference it's a difference that leads you to make uh genuinely
alternate predictions about things like metabolic load so uh that's why we do things in this bipartite
framework to respect the markov blanket condition and to uh keep our assumptions about energy flow explicit
can we take that to the latter sections in the paper about biological cognition
what are the implications for this for biological systems
what are the implications for this for biological systems
yeah carl
well um
just to pursue that sort of thought experiment where you're trying to now
say you wanted to use active inference to simulate alice and bob observing a pair of electrons
and remembering that the pair of electrons are one thing so you now got a tripartite
uh with three markov blankets in play um and many of the issues for example um the super determinism that allows
some assumptions about the qrf alignments between bob and alice um uh to be in play um and also the discussion
of how um alice has to have uh has to contextualize sensations from bob um under a belief or an internal model that bob is indeed another markov blanket and possibly a markov blanket very much like alice
alice what you are saying is that two of these particles bob and alice have aligned
have aligned qrs that could have been aligned historically uh under the super which i never heard of before but i like the word at the super determinism
and that may be a prerequisite to understand the experiments that we were taken through uh previously when looking at the third markov blanket which would be the uh the electron um uh or the two electrons but for simplicity
um so um that from a biological perspective tells you something quite um uh quite interesting in the sense that um it starts to get to um the
if it's the case that you can basically carve up a bunch of states not in a bipartite way but in a multi-partite way and that carving is by inserting
um markov blankets um markov blankets um to define the partition and that every um if you like subset of that space now becomes internal to its own markov blanket so there are now no external states all we have in play now
are a set of internal states each equipped with their holographic screen or uh markov blanket states that are exchanging with other internal states then there's some really interesting questions about how that system will
evolve um you know evolve um you know from the point of view of the discussion we've been having
it's going to evolve and under the principle of unitarity to entanglement so it's going to from from a
classical perspective um if you allow me it's going to tend to a a a state of um uh generalized synchronization
where everything collapses onto the same synchronization manifold and everything is indistinguishable there's
perfect mutual predictability there's a communication of an elemental and fundamental saw so everything has basically
everything is singing from exactly the same hymn sheet that's the natural way of things the free energy principle is just one way of describing that natural tendency
what would that look like cognitively well it would look as if the markov blankets were trying to learn about each other and to the extent that they can act on each other
they're going to try and solicit um the kinds of outcomes that would enable them to learn about each other
so we're now going to get a situation that is driven by the imperative towards mutual predictability and entanglement
um that's an illusion uh we you know all that is actually happening is that the system is becoming entangled but it will look as if
all of these separate um um markov blankets or um sets of internal states are aligning in a mutually compatible way their qrs so they can exchange and predict each other
and if there's if you like an odd man out namely the pair of electrons um then that you know then there will be an asymmetry and there will be greater degrees of entanglement
um you know for at multiple levels for example um if they're both observing a thermostat then the thermostat's not going to be very good at learning how to align its qrs with bob and alice but you know they're all going to make the best job of it um ultimately of course with good cultural eco niche construction they'll they'll build better thermostats and become little robots and then they can all live happily and communicate
and communicate so i think that sort of the cognitive thing here comes again back to learning to live in your world as an apparent expression of the um the um inevitable progression to entanglement whereby we try to learn about each other
under the plausible hypothesis that you are like me it's not necessarily true but it's one hypothesis you can bring bring to the table you never know whether it's true or not um
but that's certainly one hypothesis that would work very nicely for alice and bob if they can develop a common language so this notion of aligning qrs between two blanketed systems particles
um that are sufficiently similar um then just simply translates into um learning uh to share the same narrative to share the same language uh in order to render um everything
mutually predictable so i know exactly what you're going to say next and you know exactly what i'm going to say next and we come now to this asymptotic limit of zero prediction error zero free energy and complete entanglement
and that would be the you're the object we'd have no ukraines or brexits or or anything if we could get there um but that would be the you know the direction of travel from a biological perspective
um just just to there are simulations of this from a purely classical uh perspective um stuff and what you'd normally do um is start off with um two systems um that uh think they have um strange attractors usually a lorenzi tractor
so they think that their dynamics um are generated by their act that their autonomous or their active states um create stuff out there that um has um uh a chaotic aspect and i i i say that explicitly just because this sort of the notion of free will and choice in the classical domain
usually reduces to sensitivity to initial conditions which strikes me as a homolog of the super determinism game
can you go right back to the beginning and um explain everything um uh and in sort of classical dynamical systems there are certain situations where you can't because you get a sensitivity to initial conditions um so that would leave space or uh free will and choice at that certainly at uh uh um you know at one level but sorry i digress the um so what you do is
you basically put sort of two chaotic systems with sensitivity to initial conditions together um but they're not identical in the first instance but if they can exchange sensory and active states or they can exchange across a shared holographic screen so we're now back to the bipartite situation then they will naturally
if you think about they can't do anything else um they will naturally come to a state of entanglement i.e in if um uh generalized synchrony and if you allow the parameters of the equations of motion that underwrite these chaotic dynamic dynamics to also maximize mutual predictability or minimize free energy then they will actually come to show an identical synchronization because they will learn to become like each other just like mike's robots
um but in this instance they're learning about the other person simply to make things predictable so then you will have a shared narrative and in principle um you should be able to evince a kind of language i i mentioned that because i know chris wanted to talk about language we wanted to talk about you know quantum physics is just basically a description of communication and language uh i don't think we're gonna have time to do that but i thought i'd slip that in anyway
i think it's interesting from this perspective that we
um we always divide our environment into entities like us and then at least one entity that's radically unlike us which we call the shared environment or the the open environment or the general environment or something like that and um so we have this sense of a
uh social grouping of similar entities uh social grouping of similar entities uh that are commonly exposed to this vastly dissimilar entity uh with which we don't share a common language uh and we're not very good at predicting uh and so on and so we always have this kind of open systems point of view
um and uh one of the um one of the um one of the um one of the um one of the um
this vastly different system with which we don't share a common language is it's our free energy source and sink
so it's where we put our waste heat and it's it's where we get our free energy for doing computation
um so i i think it's interesting to think of uh this situation of uh kind of local
synchrony or local entanglement or a local language community uh local shared predictability
uh embedded in uh this unpredictable uh chaotic uh and in a sense in principle chaotic because it's the waste heat dump
right uh we we've assumed a priori that we can't understand it because it's where we're putting
uh all of our the thermodynamic entropy that we're creating uh we we've we've put ourselves in a conceptual
bind almost automatically by being systems that that have to generate this entropy and put it somewhere
so i like this this classical to quantum correspondence very much and i i think it works very nicely
awesome mike
yeah um i want to i want to float an idea which is literally just a few days old so it may be
uh complete nonsense but i'll float it anyway because i think it's uh i think it's it's it's
relevant and i've been thinking about it this way it occurs to me that um you know this this binary
distinction between uh there are agents some of them like me some of them different maybe competitors
whatever but there there are some agents that i can communicate with or can i receive influence or
signals from and then and then there's this environment which is you know something that we
assume or i mean some some cultures of course don't assume that but but we can assume that it has very
low or zero agency meaning that it just is this sort of dumb on purposeless universe and it's on us to
sort of figure out what it's doing right so it occurs to me that that that distinction maybe shouldn't
be binary and maybe what we want to be thinking about is as an agent when you are receiving something
uh from from what you think is the outside you might want to estimate uh what is the agency on the other
end for and and you might want to do this for the following reason right and i started thinking about
this by imagining what it would be like to be in an internal partition or a chunk of a giant neural net
being trained you know you you live if if that's you you live in a very mindful universe you know you
could catch on to the fact that you know what i'm being i'm being trained for something you know the
world like there are bigger patterns here and of course it moves in inscrutable ways and everything
because i can't you know i can't sort of for i can't understand the whole pattern of what's going on
but i can definitely tell that it's rewarding me and punishing me for specific behaviors right and of
course some people do feel that way about the universe and at large that there are patterns that
uh that are not just you know not quote unquote just physics and so so the reason the reason i i
think and and this extends to you know we have supervised learning and unsupervised learning and
again we think of those as kind of binary things right is there some sort of intelligence on the
other end telling you what's right and wrong or is it just on you to abstract patterns from the
environment and the reason i think we this matters is that if if uh if if you are uh trying to learn from
the environment meaning there's only one agent involved there's right there's that's you there's
one agent and then there's this sort of unthinking universe around you then you are pretty much
guaranteed that whatever uh whatever you can manage to infer to it will be to your utility it's on you
to figure out you to learn whatever you can if there's another agent on the other side and you are
being trained right then uh what are the odds that that agent has your best interests at heart i mean
maybe but maybe not and so if this is some sort of supervised learning you have to ask yourself
what is it that i'm being trained and is it really what i what i want right there's there's another
there's it's kind of a whole thing that you can imagine evolutionarily that may be to avoid uh being
hijacked by um by by by by parasites by by you know competitors by whoever you don't really want to be
trainable too much you you want to learn but you don't really want to be trained and so maybe the
idea then is that uh what if what if and this is okay this is where you know i really haven't haven't
talked to anybody about this yet so this is again could be a very immature stuff but but what if uh
something like back propagation or whatever what if that literally hurts what if as a as a right as an early
creature having some sort of error function forced back through your channels as opposed to whatever
you were trying to generate yourself what if that's evolutionarily designed to be unpleasant and what if
uh what you're trying to do is avoid that happening you don't want to be trained you want to uh learn on
your own terms and you could sort of imagine the different layers of a feed forward artificial neural
network where the like the initial input layer that that sort of creature gets to see the world
quote unquote as it is it gets the raw inputs the next layer and certainly the layers past that you
know the ones on the right that are abstracting they're getting all kinds of propaganda filtered to
them by the early layers you know they don't get to see the real inputs they get to see whatever the
pre the prior layers think they should be seeing and and so maybe if you don't have a flat network like
this but maybe what you have is a you know more biologically you have a kind of a nested um
uh multi-scale kind of system maybe there's some sort of uh incentive for the middle layers to try to
sort of crawl leftward so that they have more raw access to the real world and not be trapped uh being
being fed by these other agents right so again you know this is all very qualitative stuff but you get
the idea that's that's kind of what uh what what what i was thinking about nice the in and then
mike if you want to chat about this this is what i was doing for about 10 years unleashing and getting
out of the lab and getting past the toy model so perhaps we should chat about this for a bit can i just
just a couple of things uh chris first of all thank you for uh i feel like i've come away with a munich
stein volume worth of of coolness for the last two weeks just listening to you explain these really
com well complicated things to me uh in ways that i can actually understand um one of the things that
i'm i'm still kind of curious about is once we let things out of the lab and we keep them in that
variability retained space and we're and we don't want to be in conflict with sort of the basic rules of
of what quantum information tells us i want to kind of go back for one second to what stephen was
kind of closing the 40.1 with and that is what do we do when we look at things in in that sort of
relational realm that a lot of um indulge indigenous cultures sort of take up and try to
find themselves within and i'm kind of gleaning to this idea that there's there's a sort of a
subject matter generalist that leads to a prediction matter expert down the road and i i talked to
carl i have it was my question to carl back in june when he was talking to us in the active inference
lab and so without getting into any kind of conflict with the quantum aspects of this um what what what
do we take out with with us when we go on a bike ride with with chris fields that's that's quantum
related that isn't in conflict with everything we've talked about today but gives us a better
confidence around the things that we might encounter and predict
what do you take on your bike chris yeah what's in your quiver yeah yeah good question um
uh
you know
once again these these theoretical frameworks
are languages
and they
their role is to shape our concepts or their they are ways of shaping our concepts
and um
i i think the the fundamental
kind of lesson of quantum theory for us is to
not take the boundaries we see
uh as literally as we're encouraged to do in
the classical world view i'll try to distinguish the classical world view from classical physics
physics
because classical physics by itself
uh again going back to someone like alplos
uh
is
a physics of of
atoms
which are which are you know sort of elemental
uh
it's not a physics of bounded macroscopic objects the boundaries even in classical physics are sort of arbitrary
and i i think that's what quantum theory is trying to tell us to
is trying to tell us that these these are boundaries that we draw on our blankets
and i think this is in a sense what
uh thinking about the fep is trying to tell us that
uh that we have to take this notion that we're
blanketed entities seriously
when we think about what we're interacting with
which is you know everything but us
is









































































quantum questions touching on the work of like ken wilbur and i think it's just so powerful about um
does someone have the whole world in their hands is that a good person is it a bad person or thing
what kind of thing is that who's on the other side of this video call who's on the other side
of that other side what's the bigger picture and it really brings it home that no it's not just about
electrons this is something that is across scales and systems so really just wanted to appreciate the
paper and hope that we continue on this line of development and i'll pass to steven
uh thanks daniel yeah i was going to tie this a little bit some of the threads with um
this challenge of having this false sense of certainty in our culture and it does feel
uncomfortable to be trained um but we do it in the west because we're confident that we've
got this expert knowledge but then we suddenly find out we don't know as much as we do know
or we think we know so that may be why bottom-up sort of organic indigenous kind of ways of being or
ways of sensing can feel more holistic so i think there might be something quite powerful in that so
i like that cred and i think that ties together with um the challenges in practice when we try to to
train up communities especially if we're working say if i've worked in rural africa
and communities there that if they don't feel connected to the the colonizing narrative it feels
very oppressive so there's you know there's a lot of good points there around where is their coherence
where there's decoherence and also where's their certainty and where there's uncertainty so thanks
this is really helpful and um i'll pass it over to blue
well i've said enough i think i'd like to hear from mike or carl or chris about where where you're
going or what you're taking away or or what what are your final thoughts about the discussion we've had
over the last couple of weeks
i mean i guess i guess the only thing i'll say is that uh to to me i i really like um this idea that
it it turns on its head this this notion that that you have this this this massive amount of uh mindless
stuff and then somehow you know a little bit of mind shows up at the end that that that kind of turns
that upside down and and if that's the case then it becomes then the scaling problem is is really really
interesting right is how how you scale you know how how biology manages to scale these things so
that they become synergistic synergistic and bigger and bigger as opposed to you know just merely a
bigger pile of rocks than than the previous pile of rocks and so that uh right so so those those
mechanisms and in particular in biology and and so you know i look at it from from cells getting
together to be organisms and solving problems in the anatomical space but but i think there we actually
have uh some pretty good um alternative although very very very similar in many ways isomorphic but
alternative stories to what happens in neuroscience to try to understand how that scaling actually works
so i'm super i'm just super super excited about that and also the role of the observer and all of this
and the idea that all of this is based on various observers observing each other and i think that makes
it it makes for a lot of progress and and fewer pseudo problems when you when you look at it that way
israeli.com
carl or chris any final thoughts
well i'll i'll just thank you guys again for putting this together i thought this was a
fascinating conversation and um you know if i'll could throw one more thing into it i i i think
conversations like this are our evidence for the kind of disciplinary
siloization that's been forced onto us by academic tradition being an artifact
and not necessarily being all that useful
thanks so much Carl we're going to leave you with the final word
ah good well it has to be a thank you doesn't it um for you lot for putting this together and and
for the brilliant uh didactic and also challenging didactic uh unpacking of some really um challenging
but I think revealing issues and also the brilliant questions um my final word will be future pointing
I'm um just taking up um taking up the sleeves of Chris's you know having unsiloed conversations
is useful just think thinking about Mike having the balls to come up with his brand new hypothesis
that's two years old it's two days of my apologies so I thought it was really interesting just a nice
example of putting things into this kind of discussion which we're all going to go and
think about so my immediate thought was um how on earth does the second layer in a variation auto
encoder or something doing back prop act um and of course it can act if it if it's a recurrent neural
network and it can select which of the um the lowest level neurons or hidden there sorry not a non-hidden
layer um units uh to listen to um and of course we come back again exactly to attention and selecting
those sources of precise information um where you've got a kind of internal action so an interesting and
silly thought but just a nice example of how talking together can excite interesting and potentially useful
or possibly silly silly thoughts but again thank you wonderful I had a great time observing
all of you um and hope to get to do more of it in the future yep we can have a dot three any time consider
40 um in the uh intermeasurement interval while our igus is digesting and uh talk to you all soon
thanks again thanks very much everyone thank you bye bye bye that's great
you
you