Hello, it's June 23rd, 2023. We're in ActInf Guest Stream 46.1 with Denise Holt. So Denise,
thank you very much for joining. We'll have your presentation first, any length of time you want,
and then we'll have a discussion about some of the topics you're bringing up,
and I'll read some comments from the live chat too. So thanks again, Denise, looking forward to
your presentation. Hi, Daniel. Thank you so much for having me today. Yeah, so let's just dive right
in. Today, I'm going to be talking about Active Inference AI and the spatial web. And for those
who are not familiar, there is a company called Versus AI, and they're basically delivering the
next generation of AI. This is beyond the current machine learning, deep learning models that we're
all so familiar with that are incredible tools, but really those are tools. They are great at
creating content, performing tasks, things like that. But they operate in a way that is
pattern matching, and they're all siloed in their ability for what they can do. They're trained on
enormous amounts of data to increase the pattern recognition and hopefully increase accurate
outputs. But that's really what they do. What Versus has created is something completely different.
And it's based on Active Inference AI. And so Active Inference AI is entirely new. And this is the AI
that will be able to get us to AGI, you know, leading to synthetic self-evolving intelligence.
So today, what I'm going to be talking about in this deck is, you know, Active Inference AI and the
spatial web and how these technologies are going to affect and change the world. We'll talk about how
Active Inference works with artificial intelligence, how the spatial web protocol enables the perception
and the belief updating of the AI, and how these technologies together enable the only AI in the
world that can run critical operations for systems or infrastructure, smart cities, you know, the planet.
So when you're talking about airports, hospitals, things like that. So yeah, so let's dive right in.
So the spatial web, what is that? So the spatial web is being called the network of everything.
Basically, it's the next evolution of the internet, and it's powered by AI. So this is taking us from
a library of pages and documents that we have in the World Wide Web. And oh my gosh, my dog is wanting
out. I'm so sorry. I have to let him out. Sorry about that. So the next evolution of the internet.
Now, you know, as I said, World Wide Web, a library of pages, documents, you know, everything is static.
The spatial web protocol, HSTP, hyperspace transaction protocol, and the programming language for the
protocol called HSML, which is hyperspace modeling language. This new protocol takes us into a library
of spaces where, you know, we have spatial domains and everything within any space can be locatable
and programmable within this new network. So, and it's just extending the protocol that we have now,
right? So same internet, just more capabilities.
Now, Dr. Carl J. Friston and the Versus AI white paper, and I'm sure a lot of you are familiar with him,
the father of active inference and the free energy principle. Now,
so Versus with Dr. Friston has developed a new type of AI that mimics the self-organized systems
of nested intelligence found in nature. And it's based on his methodologies of active inference and
the free energy principle and the spatial web protocols, which I just mentioned, which were
developed by Versus AI. In December, they put out a white paper called Designing Ecosystems of
Intelligence from First Principles. And just to back up a second, you know, Versus created the protocol,
the HSTP and the HSML, but donated it to the public because nobody can own the internet. But they needed
that in place for what they wanted to do as a company. So that framework needed to be there. So then they
also donated the protocol and the IP to the IEEE, which is one of the largest core standards bodies
that develops everything with, you know, electronics and engineering, you know, they're responsible for
the core standards around things like Bluetooth and Wi-Fi and things like that. So the core standards
have been being developed around the protocol for the last almost three years. And, and yeah,
Versus in that time has been building, you know, what they've, what they've been building, which I'll,
I'll be talking about. So what is this white paper about? It's basically about shared intelligence.
So in the white paper, they proposed cyber physical nested ecosystems of distributed intelligence,
joining humans, machines, and AI agents on a common network. So we're talking about humans as integral
participants, adaptive behavior, self-evidencing, self-organization, belief updating over several
scales, belief sharing over ensembles of agents. So we're talking about a network of intelligent agents
and collective intelligence. And then of course, the protocols, HSTP and HSML.
So the knowledge graph and digital twins, digital twins of our planet and all nested systems and entities
within them. So nested ecosystems, intelligent agents, both human and synthetic sensing and perceiving
continuously in evolving environments, making sense of changes, updating their mental model and what they
know to be true, and then acting on the new information they receive.
And in the white paper, it's also discussing a network of distributed intelligence. So this enables a
cognitive architecture made up of the collective intelligence of multiple agents that continuously
communicate, coordinate, and collaborate with each other. Individual and specialized intelligences
are all coming together on a common network. They're speaking a common language, HSML and HSTP.
It's efficient, powerful cross-communication to perform tasks, regulate systems, and address problems in real
time. And it scales up and grows in tandem with humans.
So active inference and the free energy principle.
So what exactly is active inference? Active inference is a biologically inspired approach to AI systems as a method for
understanding behavior, incorporating the brain, cognition, and behavior modeled after the design principles from
nature and from how the brain, nervous system, and the body act and react.
One of the questions that Dr. Friston asks in this paper that is an important question in reference to
active inference is, you know, with AI systems, you need to be able to understand what is it that intelligence
must be given that intelligent systems exist in a universe like ours.
So active inference is a theoretical framework that describes how agents like people, animals,
robots, or artificial systems can maintain their internal states and behavior in unison with their objectives or goals.
So what is the free energy principle?
The free energy principle is the theoretical foundation of active inference.
It proposes that organisms or agents maintain their internal states and behavior by acting in a way that
minimizes the difference between their current beliefs about the world and what they expect to be true.
So in other words, the agents try to make things more predictable by mitigating the difference between
what they expect to happen and what actually ends up happening.
And they do this by way of a continuous cycle of improving their perception by acting on the environment.
So basically, it helps to extract the signal from the noise and extract the regularities from the irregularities.
So extracting the prediction error, minimizing the prediction error.
And, you know, there are two parts to this inference cycle.
You know, there's the perceptual inference part, which minimizes the free energy by improving the internal
model to better match the sensory input.
Making Bayesian inferences about the world, the brain minimizes free energy by optimizing perception.
So through hypothesizing and observation.
In other words, the brain models the environment better, improving the perception.
Now, the active inference part minimizes the free energy by acting on the environment.
So acting on the environment to reduce the surprises, the disorder or the unpredictability.
And action can indirectly influence the observation.
So active inference, the active inference part of free energy minimization
is equal to lowering the surprise in the sensory observations by acting on the environment.
Actions can't directly change observations, but they can indirectly change them by acting on the environmental states.
So then we get to active inference, AI.
So in the context of artificial intelligence, active inference and the free energy principle
explain how agents can learn and adapt to new situations and how they can generate predictions
and plan actions based on their goals or objectives, which leads to more accurate predictions and results,
which is the real goal of AI.
Active inference, AI enables us to overcome current limitations with machine learning and deep learning
AI models providing a realistic path towards artificial general intelligence.
So, you know, the idea is that an agent can use active inference to minimize the free energy
and optimize its behavior in a way that's consistent with its objectives, which leads to more accurate AI.
So the action perception loop.
The perceptual inference and active inference unfold continuously and simultaneously,
underlying deep continuity between perception and action.
They're both sides of the same coin performing the same free energy minimization algorithm.
So the free energy can be minimized by improving the perception and then acting on the environment
in this loop that just keeps narrowing down the focus.
And then also by learning the generative model, you know, how the brain codes the environment.
So, you know, that's the side that the spatial web protocol actually helps with because it bakes context
into every person, place or thing in any space.
So that context informs the AI.
So then it's optimizing the expected precision and regulating the learning.
So thus we update the model over and over to improve our understanding of the world.
And that is what the AI does as well.
So how does it do this?
So self-optimization and self-evolution.
So active inference AI and the free energy principle through the Bayesian inference allows a neural network
to self-optimize through intake and continuous updating of new real-time sensory data while
simultaneously considering previously established outputs and determinations.
So past decisions plus the new input lead to future outcomes.
And that cycle is a self-optimization and self-evolution cycle.
So a self-evolving system evolves over time.
So current systems, current AI systems are more like a machine.
They're just neural nets that are trained to do a specific task.
But a self-evolving system is learning from moment to moment and upgrading its world model.
And thus it mimics biology while also enabling general intelligence.
So within the free energy principle, neural networks self-optimize through a set of mathematical rules
enabling next-generation artificial intelligence to efficiently learn, predict, plan, and make decisions.
So what is the spatial web protocol?
HSTP, Hyperspace Transaction Protocol.
It gives browsers the ability to link spaces with an ID for every person, place, or thing, both digital and physical.
So virtual or real.
But it's much more than a location identifier.
HSTP is also a gatekeeper.
It allows various parties the ability to agree on who, what, and where anything is in space,
who owns it, has access to it, and what can be done with it.
So HSTP gives browsers the ability to link the spaces with an ID.
Oh, did I get this in here?
So HSTP is multi-dimensional query.
So it allows for query over multiple dimensions, identifying, localizing, and updating the attributes, conditions,
excuse me, contingencies, and interrelationships of objects in space and over time.
So if it can be defined and calculated in the sphere of natural or digital science, it can be searchable through HSTP.
So HSTP is the programming language that informs the protocol.
And I like to call it the smartest contract around.
Because it's the foundational contract now for every person, place, or thing in any space in any reality.
So the only way to create a truly technologically augmented existence is to be able to consider and measure the contextual elements that affect the expression of shared information by and between all objects in space.
And this is known as computable context.
And this is what HSML, hyperspace modeling language, was made for.
And what are some of the contextual elements that can be programmed?
Location, the where, the when of anything in any space.
And, you know, you're talking about, you know, reality, the different realities, spaces, time, and channels as well.
And then activities.
So the what and the how, you know.
And this is in regards to things like rights and credentials or claims or activities.
And then when you're talking about identities, the who and the what of anything in any space, you know, you're talking about authority or domains or users or assets.
So all of these contextual elements can affect the expression of the shared information by and between anything.
So belief updating through context and sensors.
So, HSML is a cipher for context.
The spatial web, which is Web 3.0, the next evolution of the Internet, is library of spaces that contain objects, people, places, and things.
These objects do things and change over time.
The context or circumstances that govern these shifts and changes is the most important factor to consider if we're to understand how objects relate to each other, to people, and to their environments.
So the free energy principle and HSML.
The free energy principle is perfectly suited to the programming language of the spatial web.
So we'll see how we make this is known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this
Self-evidencing and belief updating. So, HSML computes context, enabling the AI's perception
to understand the real-time changing state of anything in the world, accumulating evidence
for a generative model of one's sensed world, also known as self-evidencing. So,
we're talking about multiple agents, so individual intelligences, and based on each agent's
generative world model, unique perspective, frame of reference, and nested ecosystems of these
intelligences and different levels of self-organization. So, all of this results in a
collective shared intelligence. So, Holon architecture and Markov blankets.
So, the spatial web is a Holonic structure. So, active inference, well, active inference AI within
the spatial web on the versus Cosm OS platform operates with a Holonic structure of nested spatial
domains. So, if you're not familiar with what a Holon is, a Holon is where, you know, something can be a
whole in and of itself, and yet also be a part of something greater. So, the human heart is a great
example. The human heart's made of cells. Each one of those cells, they're whole cells in and of
themselves, yet they're also part of the heart. And then the heart is a whole heart, but yet it's part
of the human body. So, you have this nested structure of whole parts that are governed by the outside part,
but still have this intrinsic governing going on within itself as well. So, each component is a whole
element part of the entire organism. They're nested entities and they're governed by the rules of the
greater influencing organism. And then they have inherited, they inherit the governing and it's
passed to the internal parts that are nested within it. And each part has its own governmental
considerations for its specific intrinsic requirements as well. So, this is how the spatial web is set up to
work as well. So, you know, when you're talking about spatial domains, you're talking about, you know,
like, for instance, you can have a, you know, a restaurant that's inside of a skyscraper building
that's inside of a city and that city is inside of a state, you know, these nested domains.
And then the active inference AI also includes the principle of Markov blankets at each level of
analysis. So, the Markov blankets define boundaries acting as partitions to mediate the interactions
between the internal and external states of the spatial domains, such as like a single unit or a region
or entire, you know, complex network. And this results in a self-organizing system. And a Markov blanket is
just a mediator between how things are attuned to each other through the free energy principle.
So, nested domains in the spatial web.
So, one good example of how this may work is, you know, if you take a factory, right? So,
you know, a factory is a part of the supply chain and has raw materials feeding into it from various
locations, like mines or, you know, anywhere. And then the factory produces finished goods that
may ship to another destination, like a warehouse, right? Like a distribution warehouse.
So, just as that factory is an object within a larger ecosystem of the supply chain,
every object within the factory belongs to its internal ecosystem, right? So, with a factory,
you've got all the internal ecosystem of what's going on in that factory, but yet,
it's still part of this global supply chain with, you know, raw materials being fed into it. And then
when it's done with what it's doing, it's feeding out to other like distribution, you know, pathways.
So, you have an internal and an external ecosystem and they simultaneously operate according to the
individual internal and external standards, the interdependencies, the interrelationships. So,
you know, this is how you can see things working within the spatial web.
So, every object within the entire spatial web network is part of an interrelated ecosystem that feeds a
continuous stream of real-time context between all points in space and time. This continual interaction
and communication stream takes note of all the nuances and changes within the relationships between all
objects and the parameters that govern them. Which leads to adaptive collective intelligence automation.
So, you have programmable spaces and, you know, within these spaces, everything within these spaces have
a digital ID and the way the spatial web is set up is it enables zero knowledge proofs between all of these entities.
So, anything inside of any space is uniquely identifiable and programmable with a digital twin of the earth
producing a model for data normalization. So, by programming context into everything in any space,
it creates this digital twin of the space. So, the spatial web becomes a digital twin of everything
from the planet to every single system, every single object within it that's on the network.
So, the contingencies and changing details, inherent qualities, circumstances for all objects and situations can
now be measured and computed, providing a basis for the AI perception, affecting all entities and their
interrelationships to each other. So, you're talking about adaptive intelligence automation, security through
geo-encoded governance, multi-network interoperability, and it enables all smart technologies to function together on a unified system.
So, you know, when you consider all of the web 3 technologies, all of the extended reality technologies, you know, AR, VR,
distributed ledger technologies. So, you have all of these technologies that are siloed and disparate.
This brings all of those technologies onto a common unified network now with a common language between them.
So, it makes all of these technologies then become interoperable. And when you're talking about smart technologies,
when you're talking about like the internet of things, there's been no common language for these internet of things to talk to each other and communicate.
So, the spatial web brings all of the internet of things onto the common network now where they become baked into this
network and informing the AI. So, all of the data being gathered by all of these sensors or cameras or, you know, the context that's baked into the protocol,
this is all of these sensors. This is all of these sensors that are now coming together that is continually updating in real time and informing the AI.
So, you have ecosystems of nested intelligence. The design of intelligent systems must begin from the physicality of information and its processing at every scale or level of organization.
So, within the spatial web, you have AI that scales up the way nature does.
Aggregating locally contextualized knowledge bases and acting across ecosystems and this maximizes efficiency.
So, this is the complete opposite of the way the machine learning models work because they're top down.
It's just massive amounts of data.
And, you know, that's what's training the machine model AI.
But there's a cutoff date. So, then that model now can only reference this historical data that it's been trained on.
And, you know, again, it's just a pattern recognition machine.
The algorithms are just to make sense of the data that it's been fed and how to recognize patterns within it.
And, you know, every time those models have to compute and try to perform an output, it requires massive amounts of energy because it still has to pull from its library.
This massive library to try to make sense of things.
Now, the way that the spatial web works with the active inference AI is you have any amount of data, you know, small amounts of data can now be made smart because you have context informing the AI.
And you have sensors that are giving it real time data inputs to let it kind of look outward and see what's happening in the world now, not, you know, referencing historical data.
So, this leads to minimizing complexity.
So, when you're talking about the machine learning versus the active inference for efficiency and accuracy, the more complex a system is, the more energy it consumes.
So, that's what I was just referring to with all this big data approach on these machine models.
Active inference and the free energy principle naturally minimize the complexity.
That's the whole idea with the free energy principle is to minimize the prediction error and use the information that it can sense, right?
So, it's taking in the senses from sensors, like the Internet of Things and cameras and things like that.
But it's also taking in what it knows about its, you know, the data at hand, right?
And it's informed to the protocol, the spatial web protocol with all of the context, all of the attributes around everything in any space or any data set.
So, you know, sensor data is noisy and ambiguous.
But HSML provides clarity with specific and precise contextual data to narrow the complexity and close the gap on the free energy.
So, more certainty means less noise.
And that equals free energy is reduced faster and lower.
So, it's a faster way to operate, more efficient.
And, you know, another point to this, which is really interesting, too, is that, you know, most of the data that exists, exists behind password walls, right?
Behind gated, within gated password areas, right?
Whether it's, you know, on the Internet and it's all the data that people have behind a password or whether you're talking about, like, an enterprise organization that has all their proprietary data that's internal, you know?
So, the awesome thing about the spatial web is that, and the active inference AI is that you can be within this network and still have all of your proprietary data gated off because the protocol allows for that security.
You know, it's gated at every touch point.
So, you can put boundaries around your particular data, but still be able to access the power of the network and the power of the active inference AI now for your proprietary data because it can take that small amount of data and make it smart.
So, this is a game changer for, you know, access to AI for any systems and any databases.
So, embodied AI.
Active inference mimics biological design, and it's, so it's like embodied AI with the ability to take action.
And this is the core engine of the spatial web.
So, what makes active inference so accurate?
Active inference is so accurate because it continually looks outward into the world, measuring the world in real time through a global network of sensors, IoT devices, cameras, robots, drones, anything that's connected within the spatial web, the digital twin network of the world.
So, this is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known
feedback loop of perception of the world and it updates the model of the world with the belief of
what it knows to be true gaining the understanding of the intricacies and inner workings of the world
so that it can make decisions and take action
and it provides ever ever evolving intelligence so the more this feedback loop plays out the ai
learns more about the world and the results of the actions taken just as a child learns about the
world as it grows and interacts with it and the more accurate this ai becomes by further updating
its understanding of the world so um it's been described to me that you know when versus launches
their cosm operating system and then you know which is going to be uh later this year uh it's going to
enable everybody to be able to build these intelligent agents on top of the network right there they have a
intelligent app store that's going to be launching with the operating system so then everybody can
make these intelligent agents the difference is these agents so when you build an app on say like
the apple store app store or google play you're building a siloed piece of software right those
apps are not aware of each other they just do whatever their function is to do the difference
is these intelligent agents that you're building on cosme are going to be aware of each other and aware
of the network so they're going to be empowered with the ai and be able to act as an agent within the
the network now it's been described to me that you know when people are first building these a these
you know intelligent agent apps um it's not going to be like this stark difference of like the power of
what it can do versus the power of what these machine models can do because they're all pretty it's
all pretty impressive right now but the difference is is if you take like uh the comparison of like a
chimpanzee and a toddler at first they seem about the same intellectually but the difference is that
toddler is going to grow it's going to grow into a full-fledged adult it's going to continue learning
whereas that chimpanzee has maxed out so um so that's going to be really interesting to watch over
the next you know a year or two is that we're going to see this active inference ai really modeling the
same way that humans learn and it's going to grow in intelligence with with this you know scores of
these intelligent agents now all working together within the network so now one of the really awesome
things about this too is that the active inference ai is explainable auditable and governable so versus ai
just published a groundbreaking industry report about a week week and a half ago called designing
explainable artificial intelligence with active inference a framework for transparent introspection
and decision making so active inference is explainable ai
now how how can this be well active inference can self-report so machine learning models they're black boxes
uh you know and and therefore they can't quantify their uncertainty they're unobservable unalterable and
unknowable basically the the way the algorithm is processing the data and coming up with its output
you you can't see what's happening you can't know how it's coming to its decision it's just this black
box that's happening and there's no way to really know what it's doing just how you know the the input and
the output so you can't explain that now one of the interesting things um you know with this call for you know
putting governance around ai is that if you have these black boxes that are not controllable and not
explainable how do you govern that so you know the only options have been to you know uh either you know
regulate the the companies that are developing these you know uh these uh tools or to just let the free
market rain now lending free market rain is a little bit tricky with ai because that can really lead to
like this ai arms race kind of a thing you know for ai domination and that that that has some risks to
you know like the human nature right so um and then the other problem with regulating the the companies
that are developing these tools is that you're asking them you're basing those regulations off them
being able to do things like you know explain how the results are coming you know uh to fruition through
their tools or holding them accountable for you know um for outputs that are you know false or you know
causing harm to anybody or you know different things like that which you really can't do that either
because what's happening within these tools is not controllable it's not auditable it's not controllable
so there's a real issue with governance around these machine model ais now with active inference ai
it is completely explainable auditable transparent and when you're talking about the the self-report
you know active inference ai is capable of introspection so this enables the intelligent agents to access
and analyze their own internal states and decision making processes so we get better understanding of
their decision making process and they have the ability to report on themselves to basically report
on how they arrived at their decisions um beliefs and belief updating are known so this this dissolves the
explainability problem of the explainability problem of the conventional ai
and then you also have programmable intelligence so versus refers to this as code as law so the act of
correcting a machine occurs within the code within the computational architecture of versus ai system
human law can now be transformed into computable law that ai can comprehend abide by and then act accordingly
within its decision making process this is a process which is fully auditable knowable and it updates in real time
and versus has been um improving this concept uh in a program called flying forward 2020 um
and this is a european drone project uh the conducted with the european union and you know there's eight or
12 different countries involved i'm i'm not sure but um basically what they've proven is that uh they can
take the the spatial web protocol the hstp and hsml and they can translate human laws all the laws around like
the airspace laws and you know laws how how they shift crossing country boundaries different things like that
um they can take those laws put them in a programmable uh you know code through the protocol that the ai
within the drone can understand and then abide by so they've they've met with great success through this
project um and they've they've proven that you know these drones can deliver medical supplies you know to a
hospital crossing borders uh into various air state air spaces you know understanding no fly zones versus fly
zones all all these things so basically human law computable that the ai can understand and abide by so
when you're talking about uh ai governance you know this the the protocol allows you to actually program law
that the the the ai can understand so then the other aspect of this too is you know humans with ai because
you know there's a lot of um there's a lot of fear baked into people uh especially in regard to all these
sci-fi scenarios that have played out in you know fictional books and and movies and things like that
but one of the great things about uh the active inference ai within the spatial web is that the ai grows
in tandem with the humans you know because you can take programmable law make it to where the the ai
understands and you've got this symbiotic relationship um between the ai and the human it's a network system
that operates in tandem with humans and then the ai is growing its intelligence in sync with the growth of
humans and the world right so it makes a controllable ai um so in uh versus white paper uh you know one of
their opening statements was that the the purpose of the white paper its denouement is a cyber physical
ecosystem of natural and synthetic sense making in which humans are an integral are integral participants
what we call shared intelligence so versus ai and the spatial web foundation offer us the framework in
which we can build an ethical and cooperative path forward for ai and human civilization and one thing
i want to read to you from the white paper that's you know specific about this um is is this so quote
we believe that developing a cyber physical network of emerging intelligence in the manner described
above not only ought to but for architectural reasons must be pursued in a way that positively values and
safeguards the individuality of people as well as potentially non-human persons the idea this idea is not new
already in the late 1990s before the widespread adoption of the internet as a communication technology
a future state of society had been hypothesized in which the intrinsic value of individuals is acknowledged
in part because knowledge is valuable and knowledge and life are inseparable that is each person has a
distinct and unique life experience and as such knows something that no one else does this resonates deeply
with our idea that every intelligence implements a generative model of its own existence the form
the form of collective intelligence that we envision can emerge only from a network of essentially unique
epistemically and experientially diverse agents this useful diversity of perspectives is a special case of
functional special specialization across the components of a complex system so you know within the the versus
white paper for this uh active inference uh uh a.i. you know they're very clear about the importance of uh of the human
experience and the various human experiences in tandem with the growth of of the the ai within the spatial web so i just
thought that was really important to uh to kind of let people know
um
so then you have accurate world models collective intelligence trained on real-time data evolves
making decisions and updating its interior model based on what is happening now not on historical data sets
active inference ai is not a language model generating words about the world
the world based on outdated knowledge it's been fed regarding the world active inference is like a biological
organism that perceives and acts on our world by generating more accurate models understandings and
beliefs about our world these ever more accurate world models enable better decisions a smarter world and this is
the true measure of intelligence
so active inference ai as the operator and this is the final section
so you have the internet of everything the days of training ai on big data will give way to an
internet of everything that deploys active inference ai throughout the network
inherently secure and accurate because it takes any point of real-time data and makes it smart through an
empowered ecosystem of interconnected ai apps that act as intelligent agents
active inference
active inference
active inference ai inside of the versus ai cosm operating system has access to the entire spatial web
with iot sensors and cameras and all context markers attached to all objects within all spaces within the network
tracking and identifying changes over time
this ai becomes an ecosystem of intelligent agents that are all interoperable over hstp
so what does this mean for the planet
active inference ai can run the planet
dan mapes who's one of the co-founders of versus he describes the spatial web with active
inference ai as a nervous system for the planet
together these technologies enable the only ai in the world that can run
critical operations for systems infrastructures smart cities and the planet so when you're thinking of
climate or traffic control or smart cities or advanced education or hospitals or airports
all of these are critical systems that need accurate functioning of the ai
you know you cannot rely on machine models who you know uh give you plausible answers plausible
outputs that sound accurate but aren't necessarily accurate because they're just trained to make it
sound appropriate appropriate and accurate are very different things so because the active inference ai
is based on real-time data actual data context that's baked into everything it's it's a
it's an accurate form of ai and it can be trusted to run these uh critical systems so it can be the operator
and then we come to sentient intelligence so this is the missing piece of the data puzzle that gets us to artificial general intelligence
intelligence we now have the world model and we now possess the ability for continuous and adaptive context
markers enabling a cognitive world a cognitive model of this world and the ability to compute awareness
so this is taking us from the artificial narrow intelligence which is what these machine models are
to potentially artificial general intelligence and then artificial super intelligence because the more the active
inference ai learns about the world uh it it can start to question and become curious about the world and you know
it's the difference between you know asking the ai agent something and then having the ai agent ask you something to clarify
what you want or what your needs are you know it's that curiosity back on you that'll take us to the artificial super intelligence
so i'm just going to close by letting you know that uh versus ai their cosm os uh is going to be launching uh at the end of the year
and uh the idea is let's create a new world together they've created the tools for anybody to create
the ai's on top of so um you know it's a huge opportunity uh they're going to be launching the beta at the end of this year if you go to my website deniseholt.us um there's a menu item where you can sign up for the beta if you'd like they're going to be selecting um you know uh
you know they're going to be selecting developers and projects to be a part of this beta so if you'd like to be considered feel free to uh
sign up there and then of course i have a podcast um and it's on youtube or any spotify apple anywhere you
find a podcast but if you'd like to learn more about this um you know that's really my role is i've just
been educating on the spatial web protocol and this active inference ai so there's a lot of information on my
website there's a lot of articles on the podcast there's just a lot of information
um so that you could learn more so i think that's it
awesome thank you thank you daniel all right i'm gonna come back on uh
uh video and then all right well thank you for the amazing presentation there's many places to begin
many uh ways to do it but again thank you again for sharing this information so my pleasure
i'll uh start but just asking live stream viewers if they want to ask anything just put it in a live
chat and then perhaps just there were so many topics that you brought up that yeah perhaps i can just
reflect on a few of the topics and just kind of summarize it as as i heard it especially where
it's different from what we've heard uh in terms of framings on other streams where we go way more
into the technical but but there are just so many great ways that you had of framing what was um
happening okay sound good yeah sounds great all right so you described active inference as biologically
based and one way that uh biologically inspired perhaps exactly but but based upon biological systems
and it made me think about the way of viewing the world in terms of its spatial connectivity and then
thinking about the world in terms of its statistical or causal connectivity and so when people think
about what would biologically inspired ai look like they might think about the actual connections
amongst the neurons in the brain or the actual connections amongst ants in the colony but that
connectivity allows solving that problem so if you want to solve some different problem or some
something else you need to learn from those structures but not copy them verbatim and so
that level of learning that we have to pull back to and the level of thinking is about the agent in
their engagement with the environment and the minimization of surprise instead of the maximization of
reward and that's a really clear path i think from what we can generalize from natural intelligence
towards how we can think about what kinds of imperatives we should design and what design principles should
be for synthetic intelligent agents absolutely yeah um okay what brought you to this presentation like what
was your way into the spatial web or how did this even come to be well so um dan mapes who's one of the
co-founders uh he's a long time friend of mine and um you know so i i knew when uh he and his co-founder
gabriel renee who's the ceo of versus um when they were starting versus back in 2016 2017 um so you know
i knew what i knew what was coming and i've been kind of watching it unfold over the last like you know
handful of years and so then last summer um you know it became really clear to me that uh you know
versus was getting close to launching to the public you know they've been working uh over the past you
know a couple of years with like fortune 500 companies with you know governments and smart
city development all over the globe they've been involved in this flying forward project you know
they've been deep into the supply chain they one of the first apps they created was an app called wayfinder
which is specifically built for um you know uh the supply chain uh and so you know watching all of
that but then knowing it's coming to uh later this year i was like okay there's a transition and you
know people need to understand what's coming because you know i've been involved in like uh you know
uh blockchain and web3 uh for the last you know handful of years and so you see all these
amazing technologies being built and all these awesome projects but one of the biggest problems
is that they're all siloed and they're the interoperability is the biggest struggle so you know to
me it's like okay you know these people need to know that's this is coming and you know the
interoperability is going to be there for you know not just within the the web3 or the blockchain
space but really all technology really you know anybody who has a business that is present on
the world wide web is going to want to evolve that presence into the spatial web just for the
the empowerment of what this ai and this interoperability is going to do for their business
um so i knew there was a um a learning curve so that's really what i set out to do was to kind of
break down that learning curve and really start to educate people about the protocol about the ai
and about what to expect all right great um few more questions again we're just starting to explore
this and so whatever you do or don't know is all good how will the open source nature of the web and
the ecosystem around active inference related technologies be secured well so so basically you
know you have to think of the cosm operating system as that's that's literally the operating system
that is going to enable people to easily build with build these intelligent agents within the spatial
web network right so you know um that allows anybody to come on this network and build these build these
intelligent agents these intelligent apps right so the beauty of it is that the protocol itself
for uh the spatial web it bakes in um security at every touch point right so you can program in um
access permissions different things like that into whatever you're building so it really becomes
individualized right you can you can gate off to where you know you have data that's proprietary
and then you have data that's allowed to be accessed by the world you can you can make it look however
you want for whatever you're building whatever your project is and what these intelligent apps then become
is it's your opportunity to share your knowledge with the world right and you can share it to whatever
extent that you that you want to you know thanks
thanks when talking about just a few terms i wrote down culture ownership authority how do differences
amongst locations and peoples play out when there are such different concepts of those mentioned terms
and many other terms that arose it might not just be something like well the drone can go 100 feet here and
10 feet here what about when there's different concepts of authority and ownership and justice
and culture right so well so that's that's one of the it's one of the beauties of the world
is that you know we all have our own uh unique um understandings our own unique um beliefs our own
unique cultural traditions um and the differing govern governing uh bodies and types of government
right so the protocol needed to be built to be able to preserve all of that you know you don't
want there to be this next evolution of technology that includes ai that becomes this dictatorship
of you know this is the way the world's going to be and this is how everybody has to operate
this preserves the uniqueness and the individuality of everybody in any area so really the way this
plays out it's going to be able to be customized for region for you know um cultures belief systems you
know um so it's like this socio-technical ability to you know safeguard and preserve traditions and
different things and mindsets so um you know really it's it's it's you know it's not going to be a
hindrance as much as it is going to be um something that you know kind of the preserves the beauty of
of individuality and so when you're talking about systems like that like you were talking about you
know it's pretty much going to be similar to where it is today you know like you know people have the
right to the right of refusal right you know even in a restaurant you know no shirt no shirt shoes no
service you know so you know there's not going to be a lot of difference with that you know and then
so when you're talking about things like drone delivery and things like that then you're going
to have other standards bodies that are making those decisions to you know make things more inclusive
rather than you know kind of silliness of you know denying people for whatever reason
oh all right i'll ask a question from the live chat bert asks thank you for the presentation
what is the limitation of implementing this vision is it getting people to use the hyperspatial language
or getting active inference working right or i'll add a secret third thing
well so so you know i i've had people say that you know ask that with me saying you know well what
what's the guarantee that anybody's going to you know uh you know take part in this new spatial web
and it's you have to think of of the way the internet has evolved right this isn't just like
this whole separate network that you're going to try to bring everybody on to it's the same network
we're already on and it's just evolving the capabilities within that network so you know when
you think of the way uh the internet started you know when you had like tcpip and the killer app was email
and then sir tim burners lee created http and html and then you had the world wide web right so it didn't
get rid of email it just enabled this whole other uh capability that now people could build websites
now instead of just sending uh you know digital messages from computer to computer you could actually
bring an audience to your web page and engage that way on like a property within the network so that's
all that's happening right now is that we're just taking the capability from this web 2 environment
that really lacks security and it lacks protection for people and their data um and it opens up a lot of
vulnerabilities because you have to all of the transactions are taking place the data is trend is is uh
transacting on a website which is the property of a centralized organization right so what this is
doing is it's decentralizing it now everything in any space becomes programmable and becomes a a spatial
domain right so now you have self-sovereign identity you have zero trust architecture you have this
ability to program 3d spaces so it's going to be a natural progression for people to come you know take
take advantage of this new uh programming language to you know be able to empower and and expand what they
can do within the network we already are on so you know the world wide web is like 40 billion computers now
now we're evolving from just computers to spaces and objects and everything within there so you know it's not
going to be a matter of people getting people to do that it's you know people are going to go wow i can do that and
you know it's going to be a natural progression um as far as the active inference ai it's going to start
working within the network and it's just going to grow so the more people are engaging uh on
you know within the spatial web network and the more people that are building these ai apps and i i
i think if we if we look at what's happened just in the first six months of this year since chat gpt came
out um with all of the you know all of the open source and everything that's been available as soon
as it got available to the public and now we can tinker with it now we can build things you've had an
explosion of development so you know with the ability to build these these um intelligent agents within
the network and do it very easily and have this interoperability within the network i just see it
as we're gonna have this explosion of development so that's of course that's my opinion but that's what
i see happening you stake your claim that's a beautiful thing i'll ask another question your answer
led perfectly to it bert asked again in the chat also is there a resource where we can learn more about
how to build a hyperspatial website so um i don't think they're i i don't think those resources are out
yet um and you know and it's not gonna be a website so um you know it's it's as soon as the cosm
operating system launches the the ai is going to become a tool for building anything so the other
side of this app store where you can build an intelligent agent is the interface the public
interface is uh an intelligent agent called gia and it stands for general intelligent agent so gia
then becomes the interface for the public of the of the network of the the spatial web so
gia is going to become your personal assistant everybody's personal assistant uh gia will be able
to uh you know act on your behalf within the the network so you know just like with um chat gpt4 and
you know how you know the ais are starting to be able to program right so within the spatial web the ai is
going to play an integral part in creating your own intelligent agents in you know doing your own um
establishing your own presences and and you know spatial domains and things like that so um i don't
have a lot of detail on how that's going to look or work but that's my general understanding of it so i
don't think there's going to be a huge learning curve when it comes to that wow all right i'll go to another
question dave asked in the chat does versus plan eventually to expand the inventory of element types
beyond the 12 mentioned in today's presentation people negotiate concerns that don't seem to fit easily in this framework
yeah so um i so i i don't know i i don't know if i can really answer that and the reason why is because i
don't i don't my technical knowledge of what's happening behind the scenes is very limited so um the answer
could be yes it could be it's already there i mean the reality is is those those 12 uh aspects are just you
know kind of a generalized you know idea of what you can program but when you're talking about you know
hstp being multi-dimensional you know and you can program in everything from like you know temperature
to you know um pressure to you know you can you can you can pro if it's programmable and definable
you know in a computational form you know you can you can bake it into you know the context around
whatever you're programming so you know in that respect it's it's pretty unlimited except for that
limitation as long as it's measurable and definable in a computational way
i'll try to restate that just how i heard it because i think it's a really important point
the 12 again this could be totally off base if i don't have any information but the 12 components
shown are kind of like fully one way of fully showing your work but when you really get down
to the last mile and the shoes on the ground you're in the realm of the particulars and the specific
measurements at which point complex cultural topics will be playing out through the minute particulars
not necessarily inheriting some stringency from a top-down ontology
if that's fair i just wanted to kind of say it that way um yeah okay you mentioned i think a few
times in the presentation the idea of realities so yeah we have our beloved cyber physical reality and what
other are the plural realities so basically when you think of being able to um you know program the
context into the spaces right then that provides you with a digital twin which automatically is giving you
this um mixed reality ability right because you know digital twin and then physical reality this is going
to open us up to this augmented existence this augmented reality existence that we all kind of envision
but the foundation hasn't been there the framework hasn't really been there um this is providing that
framework so we're gonna we're gonna see this kind of augmented uh reality you know future for us you
know where we're able to like cross you know cross through mixed realities you're gonna have the virtual
reality you're gonna have the augmented reality and then you're gonna have the physical reality and
there's there's gonna be an unlimited way of mixing that and then the other aspect of this too is when
you talk about like virtual reality and you talk about the metaverses and different you know metaverse
experiences you know i think one of the reasons why the metaverse experience has been so lackluster is
because they're siloed right now when you consider the spatial web that's going to be able to make it to
where you can jump in and out of these virtual reality spaces you can actually uh take your assets from one
space to another space because all of it then becomes interoperable over the the network so this is going
to really open up everything that we've been wanting to do is going to now be possible within this this uh
spatial web network great all right as we kind of begin to land the plane um i'll just reflect on two
or so positive aspects that that i think are part of the vision which we will of course await future
sensory observations to con to confirm reduce our surprise but in active inference what we expect is
what we prefer so if we think it's the most likely path forward then c'est la vie so the first positive
thing um is that it starts from the actual and the measurements defining things at some defined cyber
physical layer and potentially extrapolating here but earlier this week we had a guest stream with
mao and maxwell and in the quantum free energy principle approach to the brain there is a top level decision
maker within that blanket where the buck stops so that doesn't mean like that the brain is not composed of
you know as a component of part of larger compositions but within the given blanket there's a highest stop
um so instead of handing our self-sovereignizing ability and intelligence to the black box here we
can start from the actual maybe even pick up and stabilize or change what we already have so rather
than proposing just a totally different future that some scaling law is going to help us get to maybe or
maybe or maybe not we start with like what we already measure and the decisions we already make
so i very much appreciate the pragmatism what else might you reflect on that point
i i think you said it well yeah okay then the second piece was that everyone's knowledge is adding
something it might be a close sample or a distant sample on some dimension in some setting but everyone
every cognitive agent is adding non-zero information and there's a lot of technical details underneath why
that is the amount of information added might be very small for a given question but because of
differences we literally get more perspectives so we always see better with more perspectives if we have
the right integration approach so that's also very powerful and it's something that is formally true
with the math and the statistics and i think we want it to be true for our ecosystems right yeah
absolutely you know and and it's you know it's interesting because um yeah you just you want it you
want to preserve that the diversity of uh information and opinion and and you know have that accessible
for sure awesome well it will be quite the coming days probably or at least again
as expected or preferred but we'll very much look forward to you coming back on the act inf streams
as well as some technical presentations that might help our community and our institute learn more about
the details or more philosophical discussions like the whole spectrum of learning and applying and
implementing these technologies will be really important to characterize but for sure it's been incredible
to have you share this first bit is there any last words you'd like no just thank you so much for
having me uh it's been a pleasure and uh you know and i i will throw this out there you know i know there's not
a lot of information uh available out there regarding the spatial web and the active inference ai so if anybody has any
questions feel free to reach out to me you can reach me on twitter or um linkedin or you know it my blog you
know deniseholt.us uh there's plenty of ways on there to reach me so i'm happy to answer any questions anybody might have
all right thank you denise until next time thanks a lot bye
thank you





















































Thank you.