## QqEp4jtaQ2E

Hello and welcome. It's July 17th, 2023. We're here in Active Inference Math Stream
number 5.1 with Chris Bodnar on topological deep learning, graphs, complexes, and sheaves.
So thank you for joining, Chris. Looking forward to your presentation and discussion.
Yeah, thanks. Thanks all for having me. So yeah, as I was just saying, this is my PhD thesis,
which I finished a couple of months ago. It's also kind of a public online. So, you know,
if you want to go into the details, just kind of look this up on the internet and
you should be able to find it easily. Obviously, there's lots of stuff in there. So I kind of try
to give an overview today and maybe also go in a little bit more detail in certain aspects,
since there's not a lot of time to go through everything. So now I'm a Microsoft
researcher. So this is some basic old work that I did in the past and when I was at University of
Cambridge. All right. So let's get started. Right. So let's start very easily. Now I'm actually not
sure exactly what's kind of the background of the people who are watching, but in machine learning,
there's all these kind of subfield that emerged a few years ago, which is called geometric deep
learning, which is essentially looking at how to apply these kind of deep learning neural network
architectures on data, living on all sorts of, you know, kind of structures or geometries or spaces,
if you want. And this has a lot of applications, especially in the life sciences. And there's kind
of been a lot of instances of this in kind of, you know, very famous publications, I don't know,
which you see here, but, you know, just to give some examples, for instance, if you have proteins or
molecules or things like that, they usually represent it as graphs. And you kind of have some data living
on these graphs, like kind of the properties of certain atoms and so on. So, so these kind of things.
And so far, these kind of spaces or these kind of problems, learning problems, if you want,
they have been approached mostly kind of with a geometrical mindset, as the kind of name of the
of the subfield also mentions. But something that, you know, I would argue is that geometry is not
everything that you need. And there's kind of other non geometrical aspects when you are in such a
setting. And this is kind of quite obvious once you realize that the spaces that kind of show up in
in the field and in many applications, they are very heterogeneous. So as I mentioned, for instance,
you could have graphs that, you know, could represent anything in this case, it's the caffeine molecule
that you see here on the left. And you want to, you know, have some models that predict certain
properties of this molecule and so on. But for instance, you can have grids, and we see grids
all the time, and data living on grids and are referring to images, videos, they are all kind of,
you know, pixels living on a grid. And then you can have more sophisticated things, you could have some
meshes, for instance, they're all over in computer graphics, and then you could have
some sort of manifold. So for instance, if you're doing maybe weather modeling or something, you're,
you know, we live on a sphere, topologically speaking. So you might want to model your data
as living on a sphere, and so on. But nonetheless, even if these spaces are kind of geometrically kind
of heterogeneous, and some of them don't even have a geometrical structure in kind of a strict
mathematical sense, they all have what's called a topological structure, which is kind of like,
kind of a weaker kind of structure. But it's kind of more general. And I'm going to talk a bit,
in a few seconds about what that means. But in general, when you do kind of mathematical physics,
you kind of have a ladder of structures where kind of, you know, you kind of keep building on top. And
the more structure you have, the more sophisticated things you can do, and so on. And kind of at the basis of
this diagram, just the sets, just kind of a collection of elements with no kind of extra structure.
And then you kind of keep going up in this ladder, and you add stuff on top of sets, and so on.
And as I was saying, kind of most of the work is kind of focused on maybe the top levels of this
hierarchy. But it's kind of topological level, which are kind of, you know, the weakest kind of level,
you can add on top of sets has kind of been neglected to a large extent. And part of what I've been doing
in my PhD thesis was essentially looking at this kind of learning problems on these kind of spaces
from a more topological perspective, and, you know, kind of try to fill in these blanks.
So this is kind of the overview. And now, okay, so if we are to adopt this topological perspective,
well, what would that actually mean? Or how would that look like? I guess it could look in different
ways. But in what I've done in my thesis, it looks kind of like this. So we have horizontally, we kind
of have a space that could be anything, there's just kind of an abstract space, you know, it could be a
grid or things like we've seen in the previous example, and kind of vertically attached to the regions
of the space, we have data. So data is kind of this vertical component, and you kind of see these
flags kind of being, you know, kind of anchored in these regions. So that kind of signifies, you have
some data that's kind of associated with that region. So that's kind of the high level perspective. And
I'm going to make that a bit more concrete, a bit later. And there's kind of two essential things
about this picture. The first thing is locality. So the data is attached to some regions of this space,
this topological space. And in that sense, it's local. So it's kind of associated with the region.
And maybe to give a concrete example, if you kind of have a temperature sensor somewhere in space,
right, you could think of whatever that sensor is measuring is kind of a property of kind of the
immediate surrounding of, you know, around that sensor. So it's kind of describing some property
of a region in space. So that'd be kind of a concrete example. And another kind of axiom that
that we're starting with is that the space has structure. So the space has kind of, it's kind of
made up of various regions, and these regions intersect in various ways. So the, and that implicitly also
makes our data structure because the data is attached to these regions. So, so there is kind of some,
some structuring in the data. All right. So that's kind of the picture. And actually, many of these
things relate to category theory. I'm not going to go in depth into this because it's kind of
sophisticated and I'm not an expert myself in category theory, but kind of the high level here is
that category theory is kind of a nice way to translate between different structure in mathematics
and kind of, you know, discuss about properties of certain kinds of objects and translate that to some
different kinds of objects and find all these kinds of relations and connections. And a concrete example
is, for instance, if you want to study some manifolds, some surfaces, you could associate some groups to
these surfaces and then any sorts of relations between these kind of surfaces also translating
some relations about these groups or some other algebraic structures. So you could study these
manifolds by doing algebra instead of doing, you know, geometry or topology or something else.
So also in this case, this kind of manifests in the fact that we kind of translate these from
spaces to data. So kind of, because we associate the regions in a space, certain kinds of data,
this is kind of how this translation manifests in what I've just described in the previous picture.
So you could think of this as some sort of translation or mapping from, from spaces and
regions in that space to kind of data attached to that space. But yeah, I'm not going to go in a lot
of detail into this, but it's just kind of to, you know, to keep in the back of your mind that there's,
there's this stuff lurking in the background. All right. So this is, I promise this is the only math
definition I'm giving in this talk and then, and then I'll stop. But just because I'm mentioning
topological space, spaces quite often, I just wanted to kind of give this axiomatic definition,
which might sound sophisticated, but I have a picture at the end and hopefully it'll be clear.
So yeah, so what is it? So it's just a set, as I was saying, we start with sets and we put stuff on
top, right? So you start with a set, and then you also have a collection of subsets of the set,
called the open sets that need to satisfy certain axioms. So you could think of these open sets as
kind of regions of the space, very informally speaking. So something that kind of has to be
satisfied is that, well, the empty set and the set itself need to be open sets. So in some sense,
you could think of this saying the set itself is a region of that space, very informally, which,
you know, it's kind of, let's say, obvious. And then there's some kind of constraints about
intersecting and taking units of this region. So if we take the intersection of two regions,
we should get another one of these regions. And if we take a union of these regions, we should take
we should get another region. And there is some constraints again, like, okay, how big this
intersection should be, there should be finite intersections, but you could have infinite unions,
but that's a technicality. And we can just keep anyways, but to see a picture. So on the left,
you just see the set, x itself. And here I put like a potential neighborhood structure,
kind of like open set structure on this space. So we have an open set here, another open set v.
By this axiom, the intersections would also be an open set. So you see this intersection in the middle
being another open set. And then the set itself is another open set. So it's just kind of a splitting
stuff into regions kind of, you could think of it like that. All right, so this is a topological space.
And now let's add data, right? So we mentioned that we have data, and then we put, sorry, we have
a space and then we add data on top. So, so far, we've seen how a topological space looks like. Now,
let's add this kind of vertical stuff, these flags that you saw before, we just put some data on top
of these regions. And if we put data on all the regions of the space, on all the open sets, we get
these structures that in category fear, like in algebraic topology, also geography, they are called
pre-sheaves, which sounds very fancy, but all is just kind of a definition of what I was already
describing. Essentially, you have some data for each region, these, these F of, so for instance, for
region U, you have these F of U, which is kind of the data attached to region U. So you could think of
F of U, some, some set with, with describing the data that lives there in that region. But there's
also an extra thing, you have some, some sort of maps going between these kind of pieces of data.
And these are called restriction maps. And why is that? It's kind of, they provide you a way to
kind of zoom in if you want, right? Like you have, you have the data attached to the whole set X,
and then you could think, okay, how do I take this data? How do I go from this data to data on a smaller
region on X? There's kind of a way to zoom in on that data in essentially, and I'm going to show
some, some example in a second. So these are called pre-sheaves. And just to see an example, our
space here is kind of one of the simplest kind of space you could think of, it's just 1D or horizontal
line, right? It's just the real line. And then you have some regions which are just given by open
intervals on, on this, you know, on the real line. And then some pieces of data could be functions,
like continuous functions on, on those regions. So here's like some sample data on, on this first
interval. Here's another function on the second interval. Here's some data on this third interval.
And actually in this case, it happens that all these functions agree on the overlap. So where these
regions overlap, they take the same values and we can actually glue them together on a single,
in a single function over the entire region, right? So, so this is just an example of, of a pre-shift
and it's called the pre-shift of continuous functions. So our data in this case is continuous
functions and the space is just the real line. And we put these functions on top of the real line.
But it turns out because of this kind of special property that we can kind of glue data
and we uniquely get some other piece of data, right? We, we can take these three pieces. It's just
exactly like a, like a puzzle, right? We put these things, things together and we get a fourth thing,
which is kind of a single function where we just overlap these, these functions, right? And
these pre-sheaves that satisfy this kind of properties where you can kind of glue them to get
a unique piece of data. They're called sheaves. And basically the pre-shift of continuous functions
is actually a sheave. So this is kind of a way to formalize data attached to these things. It's going
to get less technical in a second. So just to give more examples. So for instance, in this way, we could
describe data on a sphere. And let's say if this data is just some vector field on a sphere. So let's say if this
is earth, right, this could be some wind vector field, right? Like if we do weather modeling or something,
you just have a vector field describing the wind on the surface of earth, right? And you might want
to do some machine learning on top of this, where this kind of vector field has a sheave structure. And
you could think of it as a sheave because, you know, if you have like some vector field on the red
region, a vector field on the yellow region, I can kind of glue them together uniquely if they overlap,
if they agree on the overlap, and we get the vector field on this bigger region. But something that's
quite nice is that even if we have a very, very different kind of space, namely a graph, which is
very different from a sphere in all points of view, we can still apply the exact same kind of axioms and
terminology and kind of definitions. And we can have a sheave over a graph. So in this way, we could have,
for instance, some features associated to the nodes of the graph, some features associated with the
edges of the graph. And there's another node which has its own features. And this is actually the exact
setting we have in graph machine learning. So this is quite nice what this kind of topological
perspective allows us to do is, you know, we kind of have a unified way of thinking if you want, about
very kind of heterogeneous spaces, and we can model on all of them, data attached to them by using this
kind of sheet terminology, and other ways as well, but I'm not going into that in this talk.
All right, so this is kind of an overview of what I've been doing in my thesis. And just to kind of dive a
bit deeper into this, I just wanted to go into one paper that we did at NeurIPS last year. Yeah, so this
was last year on what's called shift diffusion. So essentially, how can we use what I've just
described to do some useful stuff when doing machine learning on graphs. All right, and this was a
collaboration with Francesco Di Giovanni, Ben Tamberlain, Pietro Leo, my advisor, and Michael Bronstein.
Okay, so before I dive into this, I just want to give some background in case people are not familiar
with this. So the kind of favorite architecture of people doing machine learning on graphs, these days
are these things called graph neural networks, which are actually very simple kind of models. So in this
setting, you have some features. So each node in your graph will have some features. This is what is h
vector here, the node. So it's the vector h associated with node a at layer or time t, whatever. So you
have some features for each of these nodes. And what you're doing, each of, if you're at a certain node,
you want to kind of compute a new representation or a new features for this node at the next layer.
So essentially, you're learning representations. And what the graph neural networks are doing, this node will receive a message from all the other
nodes that are neighbors with this node. And this message can also be passed,
you know, can use some neural networks in there. But essentially, some processing of these features of the
neighbors. And these are aggregated into this message. So here in green, and then there's this is passed
through some update function that combines the message from the neighbors with the old representation
of this node. And it gives you a new representation at the next layer. And this happens for all the nodes,
right. So then you get some new representations for this node. And this is one layer. And then you kind
of keep repeating this for as many layers as you like. So this is kind of how you do deep learning on
graphs. It's kind of a very, very simple recipe. And most models actually vary in the way they kind of
compute these messages and in the way this update function is designed. But that's kind of the parameters
they most of these models use. Otherwise, they all kind of respect this framework and work in this
kind of particular way. And to give you maybe an example for why you would want to do this,
you might want to do node classification. This is kind of a classic problem in graph machine learning.
There are others, but I'm just going to talk about this because it's easier. So you have a graph. And
this graph has nodes that have different labels here. There's just two kinds of labels, this orange and
blue. And you have some edges between these nodes. And what you want is you want to do this kind of
message passing that I was describing to compute some representations for these nodes where you can
easily classify the blue and orange nodes. Now, something that's quite interesting is that for many
kind of graph neural networks, depending on the properties of these graphs and how these kind of
different nodes are connected, their performance might vary quite a lot. So in particular, they're
affected by this property called heterophily. So this is kind of a measure of how much opposites
attract if you want. So it has a very simple formula. Basically, you take the number of edges
between orange and blue nodes and you divide by the total number of edges. So basically, you kind of
check how many connections we have in this graph between things that are quite opposite to each other
versus connections that are between similar kind of nodes. So if you have a lot of these kind of
heterogeneous connections, then you have very high heterophily. And it turns out that many graph
networks actually struggle in that setting, it's very hard to classify things in that setting. And
intuitively, you could kind of also, you know, figure out why, because, you know, you could easily apply
to some kind of reasoning, where, you know, oh, this node looks a lot like these other nodes connected to
so they kind of must be in, you know, in the same community, if you want, or in the same label. But it's
much harder to do that when, you know, all things are kind of different from each other. And these
communities kind of don't form, right? Even visually, if you see a graph, and it has some nicely clustered
communities, you know, it's quite easy to draw a line between those and say, oh, this is a community is
another community. But if things are very mixed, then it's quite challenging. And it turns out it's also
challenging for these models, not just for kind of our intuition, right? When, you know, we would have to do this.
So this is kind of some problem where this perspective, this topological perspective I was
mentioning, will be used to, you know, do some useful stuff. Okay, so coming back to the sheaves on
graphs. And at this point, I think you can largely forget what I mentioned in the introduction. Or if
there's something you misunderstood there, you know, we kind of start from zero a bit here. So there's no
problem. So on the left, you just have a graph, which is kind of the incident structure of a graph,
I just wrote here the simplest possible graph that has two nodes V and U. And then there's an edge
between them. So this is just a graph with one edge. That's all that's going on here. And I've
just represented it by kind of in this kind of incidence structure kind of way, right? Node V is
incident to node E and node U, sorry, edge E, and node U is incident to edge E. So this is just an
incident structure. And what is kind of triangle symbol showing is just this incident structure is
just a way to symbolize this incidence relation if you want. Okay, so this is just a graph, right? And
a way we can kind of think of sheaves on graphs is just mapping these graph structures. So this is kind of
this categorical theory translation, we translate this graph into something else, which looks,
you know, very similar, the structure is kind of the same, it's just kind of the meaning of these
things change. So for each node V, we have here, this will be a vector space. So F of E is a vector space.
For each node U, we have F of U, which is another vector space. For each edge E, we have this F of E,
which is another vector space. So all nodes have their own vector spaces. And the features associated
to those nodes leaving those vector spaces. So basically, for each node, we have a vector space
of features, that's all that's going on so far. And also these arrows that these incidence relations
also translate into something. And they translate into the obvious thing linear maps. So if these are
vector spaces, then these things should be linear maps or just some matrices essentially, right? So for each
arrow, you see here, we have a matrix. And yeah, and something that I'll argue and show in a few slides is that
basically message passing is very similar on graphs is very similar with group actions in group theory.
So let me explain exactly why. So we kind of can think of what we have on the left, these arrows in from the
incidence relation, we could think of these arrows as kind of some buttons we can press. So what do I mean by that?
So if we have this node V on the left, right, and this E, now if we have some features, some feature
living in F of V, right, we could just kind of press this arrow button here. And then if we multiply this
matrix by this feature, we will get an edge feature. So it's kind of like, if you go along this arrow,
this matrix will multiply this feature and this vertex feature, and it will give you an edge feature.
So you can think of these arrows as kind of giving you some sort of actions that you can play with to
move features from vertex to edge and edge to vertex. So in this case, it's kind of a left action, right?
So this is what I'm saying, I'm taking this arrow, which is this one here, and I act on some features
of node V. So this H of V that lives here, right? And how I do that is I just take this matrix,
this matrix associated with this arrow, and I multiply this vector H of V. So just matrix times vector,
that's all, and then we get an edge feature. So this is just kind of a way to move from here to here.
So this already kind of looks a bit like message passing, right? We're kind of passing a message
from this vertex to this edge. But now we also need to pass a message from this edge to these other
vertex U. So we kind of, you know, we need to get from V to U. And we did that by passing through E.
So by doing that, we could do that by kind of going in reverse. So we could have a right action,
where instead of applying this matrix, we apply its adjoint matrix. So that's just the transpose matrix.
So instead, if we want to go from here to here, instead of applying this matrix, we apply its
transpose because we want to go the other way around. So this is, this is a, if we compose these things,
then we can move features from V to U. So this is just a way that kind of, we can apply these actions
to do message passing. And these are called shift actions or pre-shift actions. And I'm going to now
show what's kind of the relation with, between this and what we have in group theory. So one way to
represent the group is by kind of having some sort of graph, like here on the left. So we kind of have
some star object, it is just kind of a dummy thing there. But all the group structure is in these arrows,
right? So for each group element, so let's say this G is a 90 degree rotation, for instance, that's,
let's say we do have a group of rotations, just to have some concrete example, these, so this arrow
could correspond to a 90 degree rotation, we have another arrow that does the opposite minus kind
of 90 degree rotation, that's the inverse of that transformation. So this is kind of the structure
of this group. And if we have, we also do this kind of similar kind of translation, as we've just seen.
So basically, basically, we define a pre-shift on this group, we map this star to a vector space. So
the star kind of replaces the vertex we had before, now we just have a single vertex. And it's just
these arrows we have. So the star is not this vector space that you showed here in blue, right? And
now if we actually do group actions, which are kind of a very well established concept in group theory.
So essentially, well, for instance, if you want to act on this vertex, sorry, not vertex on this vector V,
right here, you have a vector in this vector space, and you want to act on it by this group
transformation G. So essentially, you want to press this arrow, so you apply some action on it.
Then what you do is, well, because of this translation, this G has been mapped to some matrix,
which is the rotation matrix, the corresponding rotation matrix. And you apply this rotation matrix
on V, and you get like a 90 degree rotation here. So this is what's going on, this kind of vertical
vector is showing the rotated vector. So this is completely analogous with what we've seen on the
previous slide. This is how kind of sheaves connect these kind of actions. So essentially, what you could
think of as message passing is same as group actions in group theory, but you just replace this group
with a graph. So it's kind of analogous to that, right? So it's just kind of a different kind of
translations, where we replace the object on the left. Now it looks like this is a graph, this is a
group, right? So but kind of the rest stays exactly the same. So you could, and this kind of gives us a
way to formalize in a way by looking in this topological perspective, to connect all these kind of
symmetries and things that have been explored quite a lot in machine learning, to message passing on
graphs, and to see one way in which in which they are related. Okay, so now you might say, okay, this
was all very sophisticated and nice. But you know, what is this going anywhere, basically? And I'm just
going to show you kind of a very short example there, there's more, but you know, the time is limited.
And something we showed is that, as I was saying in the beginning, many graph neural networks kind
of struggle in these heterophilic graphs. And what we've shown is that no matter how heterophilic or
kind of weird your graph is, you can always kind of find some shift structure, essentially kind of a
message passing neural network, that if you use sufficient layers, it will be able to disentangle the
classes of the of the nodes, right. So just to show you in this picture, what you have here on the very
far left, the colors of the nodes, they show the class. So we have three, there's three colors here,
so three classes, right. And this is kind of the graph in the beginning, and the position of the nodes
in this box denotes the features. So that's a way to kind of just to visualize the features.
And of course, the position, the 2d position is actually the 2d feature vector of each node.
And you can see in the beginning, everything is kind of super messy and entangled, right? Like,
if you want to classify these nodes, it's kind of very hard because their representations,
their initial representations are very messy and kind of intertwined. But as we stack more layers of a
particular kind of sheath or a message passing model, you see how progressively these classes get,
you know, kind of more disentangled and more disentangled at each new layer. And so kind of
these representations kind of collapsed, and they form this kind of clustering, right. And then when
you get with something like at the end, you can kind of see these three communities very clearly, and
it's extremely easy to separate. And kind of the essence behind these results was, we showed for
different kinds of problems, what sorts of sheath or message passing models you need by using the theory
to solve kind of problems. And this is quite important because it kind of shows you some important
bits and pieces in the architecture that you might want to kind of change or use in order to solve
certain kinds of problems. And we also had some sort of impossibility results. So if you use a graph
mu network of some kind, you can't solve this problem or you'll struggle to solve this problem.
And we also saw, okay, if you use some more general ones, then you might have a chance. So this is kind
of some, the, you know, high level view behind this theoretical stuff. And what we actually doing in
practice is to essentially learn these message passing functions or to learn the sheath or these matrices.
So in practice, like when someone gives you a null classification task, it's very hard to know
beforehand what exactly is the right sheath or the right message passing model to solve that task.
And what we do is actually we learn that from data. So we learn these matrices that do the message
passing. We learn them from data by passing some, using some neural networks, which are shown here in
red. And then you learn how to kind of transfer features between these vector spaces and kind of
move them around. So this is just showing how these vectors, which are features of these nodes and edges,
how they're kind of moved around by kind of going through these matrices, just some matrix multiplications.
So that's kind of the high level view behind this model. And we evaluated this on some kind of real
world heterophilic data sets where you have to classify nodes based on kind of various communities
or different kinds of labels. And these data sets going from right to left, they are getting more
heterophilic. So in some sense, more challenging for classic architectures. And our models, which are kind of
inspired by all this stuff that I mentioned, they score quite highly in these benchmarks. And at the
same time, they also revealed some or justified some various choices that other models in this space have
done, but maybe they were not so well justified, or maybe they had different kind of motivations. We also
managed to kind of show why various things they were already doing, why they made sense from the point of
view of this kind of theory. All right, well, that that's all, all I had. Yeah, thanks for listening. And yeah,
happy to chat more about this. And also have lots of backup slides in case, you know, depending on how
far we can venture off with these questions.
David Pérez, Ph.D.: Cool. Well, awesome work. Thank you for the presentation. For people who are in the
live chat, they can write some questions, but there's many things I think we could talk about. So I want to
start with reading a quote from an abstract of the paper by Van der Laar, Kudel, and De Vries, just to kind of
ground this in the active inference context and really justify why the message passing approaches that you are
describing are helping in the active inference modeling. So the paper, it's two papers, it's called
Realizing Synthetic Active Inference Agents. And they wrote, with a full message passing account of
synthetic active inference agents, it becomes possible to derive and reuse message updates across models
and move closer to industrial applications of synthetic active inference framework. So how does knowing the
message passing structure help reuse a model across different settings or facilitate the legibility of
the model?
Josef Pérez, Ph.D.: Right. So first of all, I'm not super familiar with the kind of active inference
literature. So, you know, you'll have to help me there a bit for it to anchor maybe the discussions a
bit more into that. But I think if I understand correctly, the kind of question you're getting at
is basically how can kind of message passing help us generalize, you know, in kind of various kinds of
settings or maybe, you know, from one graph to another, and things like that. And this is an kind of active
area of research how exactly this generalization is happening. But something you could notice for
is something that, for instance, was shown, like these models are quite good at, for instance, spotting
patterns, or structures, depending on how exactly you implement them. But for instance, you know, let's
say you have a triangle in your graph, or, you know, that'd be kind of the simplest structure, right? You
have a triangle, or some other kind of gadgets in your graph, like particular subgraphs, right, that
might show up in different kinds of, you know, various graphs, the graphs themselves might look
completely different from each other. But these kind of patterns might kind of be reemerging in
multiple, like local patterns, might reemerge in multiple graphs. And that could help your way to
kind of generalize, right? Like you could see, for instance, if you have clicks, they're super important
in kind of when you do social network modeling and things like that, because they kind of show this kind
of, you know, close group of friends, right, they all talk to each other. So they kind of form a click,
like everyone's connected to each other, right. And then you might be able to use that in general,
like another completely different social context, where, you know, these agents are again kind of
communicating in a similar manner or connected in a similar manner, even if the kind of overall
pattern is quite different. And it goes way beyond just kind of structural similarities, because there's
also features in there. So there's combinations of kind of structural patterns and features that,
you know, give your even more complicated patterns, right? Like you might have a triangle, but then also
two of the features in this triangle are, you know, look in a certain way and one looks in another way.
So that gives you even more kind of refinement and, you know, even kind of richer pattern detection
abilities. So you have essentially this, you know, ability to kind of spot patterns at multiple scales
as well. So you could see this happening at multiple scales, you could have patterns of patterns, right?
You could have a community, entire communities connected in various patterns and so on. And again,
it's kind of also a research question, how do you capture these hierarchical patterns and so on?
You know, in general, you have to do more message passing if you want to capture things that are further
away from each other, because otherwise they can't talk to each other, right? So yeah, I don't know if that
that actually answered your question or if I was kind of going in the right direction there.
Oh, that's great. It brings up a lot of different cool ideas, like this patterns all the way down,
but totally agree. I think we can now perhaps explore some more specific connections to active
inference because hopefully the listenership or viewership of this, it's kind of like a two-way street.
Like some people may be coming from more of your background and then learning about active
inference and generative models as a specific system of interest the first time, but also
certainly for a lot of people in the active inference space, like these methods coming from category
theory have only recently come up to, I guess, more prominence in Bayesian modeling, at least where we
are. So it's kind of, it's a cool connection to make. I think one of the biggest touch points off
the bat was like you mentioned, multiplying a matrix by a vector and interpreting that as an edge. So just
in the, in the inference part of the generative model of about sensory observations, we always talk about
the thermometer observation and an underlying hidden state temperature. So that exactly describes that case.
And that's why we can represent the active inference generative models, the perceptual parts and the
action parts in terms of matrix multiplication. It's why the MATLAB code for generative models does look
mostly like matrix multiplication and it can all be done explicitly that way. So how does that feel?
Like are there models that don't have this feature or what do we gain by having like all of our edges
defined as a pre-sheave action with a matrix and a vector in this setting of agent generative models
with perception and action? Like what? Yeah. Yeah. Any thoughts on that?
Yeah. I think essentially kind of the, the graph structure is kind of telling you these things
interact in some way. Right. So, um, there, there's some communication between these vertices, if you,
you know, if we're kind of in a, in a graph setting, right. Um, and then kind of what the sheath is
giving you or any message passing model essentially is, is expressing a way that in which way that
connection should manifest in the model or in what way that connection should be used to process
information. Um, so in this case, I was mentioning, okay, we, you have like linear maps because you
could go on the type, if your type of data are vector spaces, then you, this transformation will be
some sort of linear maps. Um, but it doesn't necessarily have to be. So for instance, it could
go to any nonlinear transformation, right? Like if, and this is what's happening in general in practice.
Um, you know, if you, if you have a neighbor, the message coming from that neighbor could be modulated
by any sort of transformation you want. So it could be linear, it could be nonlinear. It could be
something, I don't know, you, you, you can specify it basically. Uh, but essentially you could
think of this as you have a structure level telling you who should communicate to whom. Um, and then
you kind of have some semantics that is kind of shift is adding on top, uh, saying how should these
things communicate, right? Like the, the first thing is, uh, who should communicate or what should
communicate. And then the semantics we add on top essentially describe, uh, how should that communication,
uh, manifest, uh, essentially.
Very cool. I think that maps like exactly to how we talk about the sparsity of variables in the
generative model. So here, the topology of the nodes in the graph that we want to do a message passing on
are going to be describing like the agent and the environment or like the generative model that
includes perception, cognition, and action. So a lot of people have proposed different sparsity
architectures for integrated modeling of perception, cognition, action. So one example would just be
like kind of around the clock, like action influences the environment, environment influences perception,
back to cognition. You could add a self loop using our arc of blanket and different kinds of
connectivities. And that defines the sparsity topologically, which is where you showed the stack
and, and you were on the second and the third levels. Um, I think of the stack and then like what flows,
it has to be described how it actually, what that edge does. So what, what is that? What is that?
That is also being provided. Yeah, yeah, exactly. And it could even go to the extreme where,
you know, does that edge actually do anything? So for instance, if you, uh, have a matrix,
that's just the zero matrix, for instance, associated to that edge, you were just going to multiply by zero,
right? And that gives you zero and it's kind of essentially pruning that edge, right? Like I,
I can't get rid of it. I don't want that communication to happen. So there's kind of,
there's also kind of these possibility where these kinds of semantics, they override the structural
level where you say, okay, I don't need to communicate, you know, with this other agent,
person or whatever, it depends on what these vertices actually mean and in what context,
in what context you are. And then there's also the case where you could do some sort of selective
pruning where, um, this matrix depending on, um, so in, in kind of linear algebra, the matrix has a
kernel. So it's, uh, all the stuff that, that matrix sends to zero. So what, what vectors are
sent to zero, right? But not everything will be sent to zero unless you're the zero matrix.
Um, so depending on the features of the neighbors, you could also just send some of the neighbors to
zero, right? And that kind of removes those neighbors from the equation. They just kind of get,
you know, you, you're, yeah, they're not, they're not factored in anymore. So you kind of have this,
you know, it's a way to get the sparsity, I guess that, that you were also talking about,
uh, where, you know, certain only maybe a small subset of the inputs or kind of, um, yeah, only, uh, uh,
subset of the features are actually kind of doing some meaningful stuff, uh, among the neighbors
and everything else will be kind of zeroed up.
Yeah. That makes me think of the lasso regression, which tries to set most variables of having an
impact of zero so that a few hopefully important variables really pop out in the analysis, but also
there's, there's newer techniques, I guess of attention modeling and re-weighting that isn't
just like, okay, set five of them to one and then the rest, and then the rest of them to zero,
like more nuanced. Um, so I think that sparsity with the expressivity is basically the, the best
of both worlds, because you do want to have a situation where there is an edge, but the attention
being paid to it is zero. So functionally that doesn't have an update on the belief state, even
though the, in principle, the edge exists. And that's why we can model situations where like the
agent believes they have impact in the world, but actually just because the edge in principle exists
doesn't mean that it has any given impact. And so that allows like the articulation of these models
where they factorize and keeps interpretable motifs in terms of just little clusters of, uh, motifs
here in our case, describing the action perception and cognition types of systems of interest. But people,
I believe already implicitly do this, um, like they will often add an adjective and refer to X kind
of active inference. So like deep active inference with a temporal horizon, sophisticated active inference
with this kind of nesting. And those are pointing to a given feature, but of course those features
as we're hoping should be composable. And so this seems to be bringing tools that are even more general
than just action perception modeling because they're at a lower level of abstraction than like any specific
system of interest, but where this work and kind of timeless thinking around cybernetic systems
come together through the active inference generative model as a Bayes graph,
it gets very exciting.
Yeah. Yeah. And maybe it's also something worth emphasizing here is that even if this kind of
semantic level can, can get rid of some edges, right? By doing this kind of pruning, something it cannot
get rid of is the computation. So something that kind of that structural graph level, uh, forces you to do,
it kind of tells you what should you spend compute time on, right? Cause like if, even if you're going
to decide to prune an edge, you still need to decide that, which, you know, takes compute time. So you need,
still need to look at all your neighbors if you're a node, right? And, and decide what to prune or maybe
you don't prune anything or whatever, but you have to look at every edge. And one way to look at this is,
uh, the kind of the graph structure defines your computational graph or kind of a computational,
yeah, a series of computational steps you have to execute. And then the kind of the shift structure
or the message passing model actually specifies what those steps are and, you know, in what particular
way they, they look exactly. Um, and so, yeah, that, that's one point. And yeah, you also mentioned
attention and actually, yeah, I'm glad you did, cause this is actually quite related and in, in certain
ways more general than attention. And actually maybe going back to this slide, it might be a nice way to,
to see this. So here basically what happens in attention, um, instead of learning these matrices
that we learned here, uh, in attention, you learn attention coefficients here. So you just learn a
scalar. That's the attention coefficient. How much attention should I pay to essentially, well, you know,
these overall edge, let's say, um, which will be just a scalar. What we do is kind of a bit more
complicated because you just learn how do I transform these neighbors. So it's kind of a whole matrix
rather than a single scalar. Um, uh, but there's also some subtle differences, but in, in, uh, in a
follow-up work with it, we also combine this with, with attention and, and went a bit more general. And,
um, that, that also worked, uh, quite well, but the kind of underlying idea is, is, is very similar. You
want to modulate the way it transform information based on the information itself, right? So you have
this kind of one level of, um, recursivity if you want to kind of, yeah, that, that we're also alluding
to in that, you know, it happens in active inference where, okay, you're, you're, so if I'm node v, right?
My neighbor u, it has some features and based on these features, which are x u, I'm going to find
out the matrix that will be used to process x u, right? So it's kind of very recursive and it's what
happens with attention, right? Based on the features of node u, I'm going to compute an attention
coefficient that I'm going to apply to this feature of u, right? I'm going to decide based on
this feature, how much attention should I pay to it? Um, and here we decide how should I process it
more generally, uh, in a linear way. Um, so you have this kind of loopiness structure embedded in there.
Awesome. I'll, I'll bring up a few more points because I think there's, there's so many great
pieces. So Toby Sinclair Smyth, who we recently discussed his dissertation in Livestream 54,
introduced a term or at least a phrasing the compositional cognitive cartography. And so
thinking about the compositionality of cognitive systems. And I think what you're describing here
with this notion that the mappings are more general than the kind of attention mechanisms known
famously today, that those represent like a lower dimensional special case of one kind of architecture.
makes me think about how the Bayesian graph is kind of semantic in principle and can have all of these
nice categorical formalisms around them, but then, and you can even build the connector to empirical data
with a pre-sheaf and the sheaf, which may be news to even many empirical researchers doing data analysis
certainly was for me, but the message passing provides a rigorous translation from whatever
semantic model is proposed topologically to an implementation procedure that can be planned for
and executed in linear time, or at least with definable characteristics. So message passing plays a really
important part in going from like the abstract, what is possible to the implementations of any of these
actual models. And it does it in a really general way where is it accurate to say that we hope that
implementation with message passing compatible generative models will kind of roll out better
because we won't have some of the engineering challenges
changes that less reusable abstractions might carry.
It's hard to say. I think there's also certainly some limitations to this paradigm
as well. So just kind of doing this kind of message passing thing, as you were mentioning, one thing is that it kind of scales up quite easily, like linearly with the size of the graph, but that also come at the cost. So there's certain results showing this has limits in expressivity.
So if you actually want to go beyond this, for instance, you have to, instead of just looking at pairs of nodes, you have to look at tuples and these kind of high order groupings of nodes in order to kind of get higher expressivity. There's all sorts of techniques to do that.
But yeah, and there's always this kind of tension between being more expressive and being efficient that will always be there in any sort of algorithm or method.
So it's kind of hard to say. I mean, it's definitely, we can definitely say this is kind of not the ultimate solution, let's say, if you want to do things, message passing in itself, you know, but, you know, maybe doing some sort of computations on graphs, you know, could be.
Maybe also something that's kind of missing a bit in kind of the graph ML setting is, you know, the context where, you know, your graph is, you assume your graph is known.
And, you know, you need to have some graph structure, at least a sensible way to construct it, right.
But for many kind of more, I don't know, like, more, how should I phrase that?
I guess for less clearly defined things, like, okay, if I'm an agent doing perception in the real world or something, right, like, if I'm trying to create a graph of the world, you know, like, what's an object?
What do I create? What do I create a node for, right?
If I want to have, like, one node per object, and there's some connections between objects and things like that, just, I know, it's like some wild example that comes to mind.
I don't know if you actually want to do that, but let's say you want, right, then there's also, like, all these kind of blurry things, like, what's an object and what's not an object?
Like, what's kind of somewhere in between, maybe, you know, is that a node?
Is that, so it's kind of like, what I'm trying to say that the graph structure is kind of very discreet, right?
Like, it's kind of the node is either there or it's not there, and edge is there or it's not there.
But then the world is kind of very fuzzy, right?
So if you use graphs as a model for your world, then there probably has to be some decision to be made somewhere about these kind of fuzzy concepts.
Do they actually translate in a concrete graph entity, like an object, an edge, or whatever, or not, based on, you know, some kind of inference procedure?
And I don't know if we did that or not, as kind of humans, as kind of as intelligent agents, but that's, you know, kind of some interesting thing to think about.
Maybe you could also, well, maybe one way to solve that is also kind of stuff like soft edges and things like that.
And in some way, you know, if you have attention coefficients, it's a bit like that, you know, like if an edge has a weight of 0.001 or something, it's almost like not being there, but, you know, it's still kind of there.
So it's, you know, it's a bit of a soft graph architecture.
But so I guess at the edge level, you can implement this softness, but I think it's a bit harder at kind of the node level, right?
Like how do you kind of model a node that's kind of there and not there?
Yeah, there's just some random thoughts.
That's very interesting about the fuzzy object identification and kind of similarities and differences between nodes and edges,
even though in some ways they have some similarities to or interoperabilities to.
One other point of contact was like an underlying hidden space that we understand topologically that projects a vector space at it from different places.
So that could be a vector of thermometer readings.
And we want to have a smooth path within the homeostatic range defined up to a boundary point.
Not saying that that's the structure of the world, but a structure of a very heuristic and simple model might be to aim for continuity
and have a defined hidden state space that has continuity underneath and is able to emit vectors.
So that kind of brings some of these classifier type discussions that you brought up
and like the kind of fundamental impossibility of geometric classification because you are going to end up with gray zones.
Whereas even if it takes a bitwise description, you can separate the network.
So that gives an actual completeness measure and that allows measures like, I mean, amount of computational resources
or in a more like statistically principled way, like the Bayesian information criterion.
So how many nodes should we have?
We should be on some trade-off front in some modeling space.
I don't know what to tell you.
It's a map, not the territory.
And that's because that's more justifiable.
And so even lifelike organisms might want to self-evidence staying emitting from a living state.
And so that provides a really simple graphical architecture to cybernetic systems.
And then Active Inference explores a lot of different, more specific motifs
within that broader blanket persistence picture and the path of least action.
So that's what enables the physics in that space and why these methods, which as far as I understand,
are often used in quantum mechanics, are being able to come together with Active Inference this way.
Yeah, something that comes to mind when you mentioned this, I think there's also like a recent avenue of research in this area where people,
and it's again kind of generated by the fact that you don't know the graph beforehand many times,
And I think kind of the old school approach was, well, you construct it based on some rules, right?
Like you're going to say, oh, this, I don't know, some things are similar.
I'm going to put an edge between them and you define similar in whatever way you like and so on.
And there was this kind of recent trend where what you try to do is kind of latent graph inference,
or some people call it manifold learning.
If you think of the graph as some sort of manifold, but this kind of very informally speaking.
And essentially what you would do is like you would map whatever you try to learn,
the raw observations into some latent space.
And that's where you actually construct the graph.
You construct the graph in the latent space rather than kind of in the raw space.
So that might be kind of a way to deal with buzziness as well, right?
Like, because then I guess you might lose some of these kind of very concrete one-to-one mappings
because you might learn some node in the latent space that maybe corresponds to three or four concepts
kind of mixed together.
And, you know, there's all these kind of nice experiments with neurons in deep networks kind of visualized.
And, you know, they learn maybe a kind of a mixture of concepts.
Like, if you see what actually, you know, activates that neuron is actually, you know, maybe a few classes
or different kinds of things.
It's not necessarily a single thing.
So it could be something very similar here where you have some very entangled representations
that are kind of distilled in this latent graph.
And then, you know, at least in concept space, even if you're kind of in the latent space,
that's still like kind of a very, you know, clear combinatorial structure
with respect to kind of your raw observations,
that structure kind of can still kind of encode the fuzziness of the world to some degree
because you have this kind of mixture of concepts that got distilled in the same node
or things like that.
Or maybe some concepts could be represented by multiple nodes,
depending on, you know, in what way you see these concepts.
There might be all sorts of variations per concept or points of view and so on.
So I think, you know, kind of latent graph inference could be, you know,
quite an interesting way maybe to address some of these issues we were discussing.
Although I think it kind of died off a bit in the recent year,
at least as far as I've seen, there were a few, you know,
slightly fewer papers on the topic.
Well, certainly the agents proposed latent structure of the world,
the causal structure of the world is just mapped out a territory.
And so it enables maybe some of those core screenings.
Could you go to the slide where there was a mapping between a smooth sphere
and then a regular geometric shape?
Yeah.
Let's see.
In this one?
Yeah.
Just wanted to make one point and see if you had any comments.
At the heart of some of the relationships that you're describing
and where you pulled back to in terms of generalization,
helps us understand this relationship between the sphere and the geometry.
And one place that that and the implications for data processing
and all of the computational science areas is if you are preserving
or learning or analyzing geometry, but not topology,
or the other way around,
you might get these different like data set aberrations.
Like you might have the topology of the coffee cup,
but it looks like something totally different.
And so what we would really want to do would be understand the relationship
between geometry and topology.
Because if we could understand it in principle,
like you have it on the left side,
and then in practice with the data scheme on the right side,
or insert your own left and right side there,
then we'd be able to do data analysis in a way that respected slash preserved
both the topology and the geometry.
So it's like two compatible perspectives that have their different like strengths
and weaknesses and heuristics.
And so understanding that relationship between geometry and topology
and the implicit spaces that geometry requires and so on,
that has tremendous use.
And just in closing reminds me of Buckminster Fuller's Synergetics,
which uses a close packing architecture
and a tetrahedron centric model of coordinates
to find more continuity between surface area and volume
and between the smooth surfaces and the great circles on them
and like the points of connectivity on shapes.
So I think it's an incredibly deep area
and really has fundamental impact in active inference.
Helps us think about our models in this way,
kind of like the inflated balloon and with the fuzziness
and the architecture and the finiteness.
It really brings a lot to active inference.
And so I appreciate you sharing the work with us today
and continuing to work in this way.
Thanks a lot.
Any last thoughts?
Yeah, I think, yeah, what you mentioned,
I think it's been all over my thesis,
this kind of tension between topology and geometry.
And maybe what I want to emphasize is that,
you know, I'm not saying kind of the previous perspective
of looking maybe more geometrically at things was wrong in any way.
And on the contrary, actually,
there's lots of interesting places where these things intersect,
even in kind of this sheath paper I briefly went through.
Like if you actually read the paper,
there's a lot of beautiful intersections.
Actually, my main collaborator, Francesco,
he's a differential geometer.
So he actually had lots of kind of inputs from that side.
And indeed, I think, you know,
we should try to use all these kind of layers of structure,
you know, in the best way possible for all our methods.
Awesome.
All right.
Thank you.
Until next time.
Thanks for having me.
Bye.




























































Thank you.