## z9ZCjd2rqGY

SPEAKER_01:
There we go.

Hello and welcome, everyone.

It is Tuesday, April 6, 2021, and it is Active Inference livestream series that we're going to be kicking off with Jon Boyk here.

This is going to be really interesting because we're going to have three discussions with Jon and I and interactive Jamboards.

for people who are working with us live or asynchronously.

And then we're gonna be having two group discussions later.

So it's gonna be a really interesting look through a really rich worldview and hopefully a paradigm that we can be starting to think about enacting or learning more about what it might look like in reality.

So let's just get right into this interesting set of topics.

I'm Daniel and I'm a postdoc in California.

And I'll pass it to John just to introduce himself and this series.

Thanks for coming on, John.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Daniel.

I appreciate it.

I'm happy to be here with you, actually.

So we're going to talk in this series about a series of papers that I just published in the journal Sustainability.

That series is titled Science-Driven Societal Transformation.

And it covers a lot of material.

All three papers are kind of lengthy, so that's one of the reasons that we wanted to kind of have some time together, talk out loud, and cover some of the main points.

I am a data science by training, just as a little background, actually PhD in cancer biology, essentially.

And also, I'm a courtesy faculty at Oregon State University.

So this series of papers is published under my affiliation with OSU.

And they just came out at the end of last year and this spring.

All right, so I think the jam board has links, I won't bother to give the links to them.

There's also a little short survey, a short summary paper in science x that the link is there.

So you can also check that out.

And I would like to say that for for additional information, you can go to the project web page, which is French principled societies project.org.

And there you'd find links for all the papers and a bunch of other material.

Also a live simulation model you could play with too.


SPEAKER_01:
John, let me just ask about the three paper format, because like three first author papers in sequence, it's kind of a, there has to be a story there.

So just how did it come to be?


SPEAKER_00:
The story is I'm verbose.

No, there's more to it than that.

You know,

I had some ideas in mind.

I mean, obviously, that's what the series is about.

But I had some ideas in mind of what transformation might look like and how we might get there.

But I think the ideas are fairly unusual.

And I didn't want to just put them in a short paper because without background,

I think that the ideas could have been easily misinterpreted or misunderstood.

So I felt it necessary to explain the background in more detail about what the proposal actually is and what the concept is.

The whole series as a whole is kind of a proposal for an R&D project, a science-driven R&D project aimed at societal transformation.

But it's a little bit more than that, actually.

It's a way to think about transformation, a context for how we might go about societal transformation and what that looks like and why we would even want to bother with the concept in the first place.

So it just was too much to fit in one paper.

And I had originally written it, put it all in one paper, and then I could see that wasn't going to work out.

It was going to be way too long.

So I split it up.

And I'm very happy that the journal Sustainability was willing to publish this.

They were quite interested.

So, so that all worked out really quite well.

And maybe I should say to this work represents about 10 years of my efforts.

This is kind of the, in a sense, the culmination of 10 years of my thinking on this topic.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, really interesting, and I'm sure we'll hear more about some of those threads.

So just the first slide on this Jamboard, which people are welcome to join if they're watching live or if they're looking at the replay.

The first slide is capturing how we're gonna go through these three parts of the triptych, the paper series,

in order at this same time slot 3 p.m pacific for the next three weeks and then we're going to be having those group discussions so we're going to kind of pour over these papers but who knows maybe take a few tangents as well and this principledsocietiesproject.org website is where more information can be found so let's just maybe start with a little background before we jump into the paper on just what

collaborative dialogue has to do with all of this?

Why are we structuring it this way and experimenting with it this way?

And just how does dialogue fit in, in specific or in general to what you're talking about and thinking about?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, you know, as I mentioned, the series is kind of a R&D proposal for an R&D project.

And while it's important that the concept as a whole move forward, at least it's important to me, and funding, you know, we secure some funding for this project so it can move forward.

Perhaps the biggest thing that has to happen is just the concept, a few concepts, a few primary concepts that I talk about.

Just getting those concepts articulated out to the science world and to the public.

That may be, you know, if I die and that's all that ever happens from this, just that those concepts become talked about more frequently in the public discussion, then I probably have done my job.

Obviously, I hope it goes a little further than that, but that's the place to start, and maybe that's the most important thing.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Where would just citizen science or participatory science dialogue with really inclusive participation play a role in the R&D programs of the future in what you're kind of thinking about?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so...

I frame this R&D program, it's conceptual at the time, it's not funded yet.

I'm hoping that we can secure funds.

But I frame it as a partnership between this global science community and local communities.

So dialogue with the public and within the science community and among interested stakeholders is extremely important in this.

To me, science has a role in such an R&D program because science is really where we would turn to answer some really difficult questions.

Like if you wanted to build a simulation model of how the environmental or

environmental or economic outcomes might be given, you know, A, B, C, and D, well, then, you know, that's a technical, those are technical questions.

If you're asking how can we measure, what kind of metrics are reasonable for environmental and social well-being, those are largely scientific questions.

You know, the math can be complicated, for example.

But the questions of what do we want?

What do people want?

How do they want to live their lives in society?

Those are questions for the public and for communities especially.

The intention of the R&D program is not to develop

one-size-fits-all solution, you know, to trial it in a local community and then spread it everywhere.

That's not at all the idea.

The idea is that this is an ongoing learning process, a true partnership between local communities and the science community.

And there would be just a million sorts of, you know, experiments that one might run.

to improve the kinds of societal systems that we have, or that we're, you know, that we're proposing.

Develop a new system, try it out, see how it works, gather data, you know, do another experiment, all within the partnership with local communities at the local community level.

I think maybe, since I know this stuff so well, I think that maybe I'm already jumping ahead of some concepts that this all might become clear as we talk a little bit more.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

Well, this slide was just to show that there's a bunch of questions that could almost apply to every stage of this model and to every stage of this conversation.

Like, what are we doing here?

What is our goal here?

What are the next steps?

And how is active inference coming into play?

Not that active inference good, not active inference bad.

We're going to go a little bit deeper than that.

But what does this have to do with actually having impact will be something that will be cool because what we're talking about is really new syntheses of the theoretical and the applied.

So that means that we're always like looking to staple across the divide in new ways with the questions that we're asking and the teams that we're working on, the projects and everything.

So maybe we can go to the fourth slide and to kind of frame this research line.

What is the issue?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, yeah.

So obviously the word transformation is in the title of the series.

So, you know, the general topic is societal transformation.

And that term alone is a little bit, you know, people have different ideas of what societal transformation means.

So I want to make a few things clear.

Especially in the second paper, I make the distinction between reform and transformation.

And by reform, I mean anything that would improve our governance system, improve our economic system, improve our legal system.

One example might be levying taxes on the wealthy or something, and then using those fees to provide medical services or something.

or altering how long a representative can be in Congress, in the legislature, or something like that, or ways to vote, or things like that.

Really, those are all what I would consider reforms.

And I'm interested in a different question.

I'm interested in the question, out of all conceivable ways to organize the societal systems, and by societal systems, I really focus on a few of them, governance systems, economic systems, legal systems, educational systems, and I think maybe one or two others.

I view those systems as the cognitive architecture of a society.

That is, that's how society thinks through those systems.

It learns, it adapts, it decides, and evolves kind of through that kind of cognitive architecture.

And my question is, out of all possible conceivable ways

For example, out of all conceivable economic systems, what ones might be best for demonstrably showing that they excel at improving or maintaining social environmental well-being?

So even there, we have the concept of a fitness coming into this.

That is, out of all conceivable systems, which are the most fit for purpose?

And now soon we can talk about what purpose might be.

But that is a new question.

That is a question that's hardly been asked in the history.

And I think maybe it's only now that science has the tools and the theoretical understandings that maybe this is right.

Maybe it is time that we can talk about the purpose of a society and how fit a given system design might be.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting because in active inference land, we're really familiar with talking about policy selection, but we're coming at it from the angle of model policy or simulations policy.

But that kind of question about policy setting and then sensemaking, again, maybe different groups use kind of different terms, but all that sensemaking and problem solving has been siloed.

and the fact that there's not uh connection and common frameworks to bridge as you're placing it in one integrated brain like societal systems as a cognitive architecture that's not going to work if the different sections are not

properly having their within and between connections working and we're seeing all these different sectors all these little regions of the brain health governance political legal justice education scientific analytical economic financial monetary you could go to a news site and on any given day see all of these things changing

So very prescient to think about how the total system is going to be changing and finding new stable states.

Otherwise it's going to be just on a spiral, probably not in the right direction.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

As it seems to be, unfortunately.

Yeah.

Yes, so the idea is, can we design societal systems, like economic and other systems, such that the set of them, the set that is the cognitive architecture for society, can we design them so that they are serving the same purpose, that they are integrated, not separate systems?

I think you were sort of referring to that a second ago.

But the idea here is an integrated set of systems that serve a common purpose and for which a fitness evaluation, a fitness score can be made.


SPEAKER_01:
Is that something that we're going to return to is like, how do we define common purpose?

How do we make this?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, we're going to get, we're going to get, we're going to get into that.

We're just sort of doing some warmups here.

There's, you know, unfortunately there's the, I mean, maybe somebody might do, it might help to read this whole series twice because the first time you are like getting just

the kind of the big picture context thing like oh what's this what's this what's this then maybe on the second time around is a little more clear like ah this fits in that's just talked about in the first paper but it really fits in in the third paper nice so there's just so many there's just so many concepts here it's a little uh it's a little chaotic at first as we cover some of these things


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

But the framing of the problem is not dissimilar than any number of other perspectives.

It really synthesizes a lot.

And there's a ton of scholarship in the paper.

So really, I would recommend reading it before imagining that it does or doesn't say something.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, please.


SPEAKER_01:
I get that a lot.

yeah oh you must you must have meant this but i'm not done with the paper just fyi um here on slide five there's the science x link that people could click to and what is this about or what was this um showing


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is just a short little summary article that Science X published of mine.

And maybe I don't want to be boring, but I might want to talk about these seven points.


SPEAKER_01:
These seven points on the right there are actually a summary of... Sounds awesome because people who might like to read it or hear it, both modalities, and you're really going to unpack it in a new way.

So no worries about even stating it the way you stated it.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, good.

All right.

So these are the seven main thrusts of the series.

So this is the spoiler alert.

So number one, societal transformation is necessary if we're to avoid catastrophe and maintain and improve social and ecological well-being.

That's the starting.

That's where this whole thing starts.

That transformation is necessary.

Number two, one kind of societal transformation is a science-driven transformation.

You can imagine all kinds of, there could be war, revolution could be a type of transformation.

And I'm not talking about revolution here.

I'm talking about a science-driven, evidence-based development of and migration to fundamentally new systems.

So we're talking about de novo design from scratch.

So we're not improving capitalism, for example, or representative democracy.

We're looking at conceivable de novo designs that might be fit or among the most fit of all possible designs.

Number three is if I were a genius, which I'm not, but if I were a genius and I came up with the greatest plan that we could rearrange society according to this design,

If there were no way to, practical way to implement that, then I would have been wasting my time.

So a big part of this series is actually, especially paper number two, is really focused on what is a, how could this actually be done in the real world?

How can you do this?

So I claim at least that there is a viable and affordable way to go about transformation that within a reasonable span of time,

and I consider 50 year program here to be a reasonable span of time, transformation could spread to near global levels.

So, you know, we're talking about a concerted effort over a long period of time to reach a global scale change, but that does not mean that no change happens until the 49th year.

It means that change happens exponentially fast

So maybe in the first few years, there's not a lot going on, but it goes exponentially fast from there.

And those communities, local communities that participate in this R&D program would obviously be the first to reap the benefits.

Number four, and this is maybe one of the key worldview aspects of this.

Paper number one is all about worldview.

The proposed program views society as a cognitive organism and its societal systems as a cognitive architecture.

So that, if indeed society is a cognitive organism and our systems are part of the cognitive architecture, that already lends itself to ideas of how you might measure fitness.

We're starting to get an idea of what is a system supposed to do.

So we'll be getting more into that today.

Number five, the intrinsic purpose of a society.

Obviously, if we're going to build a new system, we have to know what is a new system supposed to do?

Like, what is an economic system supposed to do?

What is a governance system supposed to do?

What is the purpose of them?

So purpose is also a big part of the worldview in the first paper.

And one of the points of the fifth point is that the intrinsic purpose of a society, of societal cognition, and thus also of societal systems, is to achieve and sustainably maintain social and ecological viability and vitality, broadly defined.

If you're listening carefully and you're of the active inference persuasion, you'll already see active inference in here.

When we talk about sustainably maintain, that means anticipation of the future.

All right.

I also say here the cognition is largely focused on reducing the uncertainty that our intrinsic purpose will be successfully fulfilled now and in the expected future.

So again, we have a concept from active inference that is uncertainty.

The cognitive view opens up many new opportunities for research, and I feel like this view is really critical if we are to truly have some kind of optimally beneficial societal systems.

And number seven, the last one, this proposed R&D program, like I already mentioned, it's conceptual now, but it represents a partnership between local communities and the global science community.

And neither of those are monolithic.

The global science community is however you might want to envision it.

a hundred labs or a thousand labs around the world or individual researchers or groups of researcher teams, interdisciplinary teams at one institution, teams across institutions.

That is really who I'm speaking.

In this series, I'm speaking to the science world and I'm suggesting or offering or hoping that the science community might find this perspective interesting and see the benefits that would be, the scientific benefits that would come of this, the research gains that would come of this

the possibilities that would come with this, and get engaged.

So it's kind of like I'm asking the science community to get engaged in this problem.

And in a particular kind of way, in what some people have called a second, well, the phrase escapes me in the moment.

I forget what the...

What is the title there?

I'm going to just call it second order science, but I think there's a slightly different phrase.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting.

I remember reading this.

Second order, yeah.

Yeah, second order science.

So what is second order science?

And I'm sure we're going to, again, go into it in this fractal convo, but what is second order science and how does everyone play a role in it?


SPEAKER_00:
Right, so traditional science would be first order science is the scientist is removed

from the experiment, is an observer to the experiment.

Maybe the scientist sets up the experiment, but then steps back and watches the results unfold and just observes the results and then does statistics or whatever on the results and records the knowledge gain.

The aim of that is to build knowledge.

And that's wonderful and fantastic and terribly useful and important.

And that is mostly what science has done over the last few hundred years or so.

Second order science is a little bit different.

It is the science, I would say, that is really appropriate for today, for our problems today.

In second order science, the aim is to change the system.

It's more about unfoldment of an experiment rather than getting to the end, a certain goal of an experiment.

The scientist is part of the experiment.

It's reflective in nature.

It's intrinsically reflective.

And it really represents a partnership between the science world and the stakeholders.

So it's a little bit more like engineering in a sense.

has more of a flavor of engineering in that there's a group of stakeholders who want some, you know, want something to happen.

And the science world is engaged in building that.

But it's part of it's like a, you know, series of learning together, and reflecting on what is important and what is a value.

So it's very much value driven, which, which is unlike first order science is not particularly value driven.

So the the, the aim is to change and is value driven.

And the science scientists are part of the experiment.


SPEAKER_02:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_01:
really interesting.

That reminds me of working for the first time really closely with someone outside of academia, and then their insistence to include stakeholders in the conversation very early.

And that was something that I didn't see as a practice around me in academia.

So I didn't see it as an affordance.

I didn't see it as an opportunity in my projects.

And then when I kind of was like, well, I could contact

anyone early on potentially and maybe even include them in the project that's um then you realize how closely clustered all of the current communication and research is in development on not that axis so it really just casts a stark light on how a lot of these information uh

projects have been organized.

And so it's really interesting.

And as you pointed out, like there still is a role for the first order of science because it's sometimes you need to make the measurement like first order cybernetics, the thermometer, we need to keep the temperature range.

Second order, is it the right thermometer?

Third order, should we even be tracking a thermometer?

There's a space for all of it.


SPEAKER_00:
What do we really want?

What do we really value?

Yeah.

And maybe I should just inject here, too, that if the science world is going to be involved in a value question,

It really just has to be like transparent, out front, like this is what we're doing, as opposed to more, you know, obtuse.

We're actually making value statements, but we're sort of hiding them in first order science language, you know, so it just has to be transparent.

This is what we're doing.

This is what it's about.

We're learning together.

We're evolving solutions to real problems that humanity has.

And everything is like transparent and clear and above board.

And if it's done that way, then it's, I think, could be extremely useful.

And it is just what the world needs, actually, because there are serious, serious, as we'll talk about, you know, like overwhelmingly serious problems that we face.

I don't know how or if we can solve them.

And if we're not engaging, you know, the scientific world, some of the brightest minds on the planet, if we're not engaging them,

then, you know, we're not going to get the kind of solutions that might be, you know, I mean, we're better off engaging the science world in these questions, along with communities, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Because that Yep, I was talking to you.


SPEAKER_00:
No, no, that's fine.

That's fine.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

Okay.

Just one short on that is it's actually a really respectful way for science to approach this question of like, we'll be ready as scientists or as systems thinkers or as modelers, we'll come to the table of policy and value discussion when we have a transparent model that's actually going to be adding value rather than potentially being a vector for some

non-transparent force to have undue influence on discussions that really matter so it's it's um i hope this conversation helps people rethink how science could be involved in these policy discussions because those are going to be the exact terms that we're going to be talking through so right right and when we talk about the second paper we'll get more we'll talk a little bit more about uh second order science and its role and there's citations there for anyone that's that's interested

Nice.

So here we go to number six.

Why transform?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So, um, I mean, I, I'm, I'm guessing that, uh, for your audience, you know, the, the, the, the, the, your audience probably has a general sense of things are not good.

You know, things are not moving in the right direction.

And I think maybe lots of the public has the sense that things are not good, not moving in the right direction.

And climate change is certainly part of that.

On the ecological theme, climate change and biodiversity loss are perhaps two of the biggest challenges that humanity faces now and over the next, say, 1,000 years or something.

But our problems go deeper than that.

It's not just that the temperature is warming.

It's not just that the birds are dying and the insects are dying.

It also has to do with social issues, poverty, for example, financial instability, and all the social problems that climate change and biodiversity loss and other things are going to bring.

Already with COVID, I think, the split between the rich and the poor in the world is getting even larger than it was, and it was already disgustingly large.

um there's a question of power you know why do why why does it in a sense if we think of money as a voting tool why is it that a billionaire has a billion times more power to decide what society should be like than i do you know like there's questions like that there's just fairness questions of fairness

There's questions of decision-making.

Who actually makes decisions?

Like how much of society is involved when society makes a decision?

There's all these questions.

And all of them can be, I think, addressed together in an R&D program like this.

And we have to address them.

I don't think there's a...

an option of not transforming.

So voices for transforming, for some kind of bold transformation, are getting louder and louder, both in academia, at the global scope, global policymakers at the UN and other folks like that, just within the general public, even within some municipalities, city-states, local governments, and even the national governments.

there is a rising chorus of voices saying we need to transform and we need to go big and we need to change things kind of radically somehow so that we can get what we want.

So 50 years from now, my children can be enjoying a better world, not a dying world.

Now, that doesn't mean that I'm going to jump just a little bit ahead here.

That doesn't mean that everyone thinks that transformation is necessary.

Lots of people don't.

Lots of people would just as soon keep everything just the way it is.

Or they just haven't thought about it maybe or whatever.

So I just want to make clear that I'm not

You know, it's fine.

People, you know, people can fall wherever they fall on the spectrum.

But the paper, the NDR&D program is really aimed at that percent of the, you know, the population and the science population that is interested in bold change.

And it doesn't really...

need, the R&D program really doesn't need the rest of the world to even engage or pay attention to this.

The R&D program is designed to be successful even if a small slice of the population participates.

So that was a long story to say that we face severe social and ecological risks, and they're getting worse.

I do want to mention one more, that kind of secondary risks that we will be facing more of

Already we have forced migration problems, people fleeing lack of economic opportunity and fleeing violence and things like that.

But you can imagine that if that's happening today and climate change hasn't really even hit yet and biodiversity loss really hasn't even hit badly yet, or at least this hasn't hit widespread badly,

Where are we going to be in 10 years?

There's going to be millions.

I read a paper, and I'm sorry I don't remember the citation, but I read a paper that said that possibly a third of the global population could be migrants in the future, in the coming decades.

I mean, that's billions of people have to go somewhere.

And we are not prepared at all, like in America or really anywhere, we're not prepared to absorb those people, bring them into some kind of productive, engaged society where we're all working together and cooperating to address the needs of society.

We're not anywhere near that.

And maybe I'll mention one more, too, because it's one that people don't usually think of.

But even if there's no catastrophe, even if things plug along as they're going and there's no mass die-off of humans or anything like that, the population is set to decline.

I don't know when the peak is supposed to come, but the peak is supposed to come within the next 10, 20 years or so.

After that the world population will start to decline, how is how is this growth capitalism model growth space capitalism model, how is that going to function when the world is shrinking.

You know so there's there's just there's there's there's short term issues there's long term issues.

there, there's just, I would say overwhelming evidence that what we're doing is not sustainable on any level.

And if we don't do something, it's going to lead to to even greater catastrophe.


SPEAKER_01:
I have a few questions.

One just from the chat.

They wrote the science community here seems to be referring to the natural rather than the social sciences.

So it seems more like this is about STEM and technology.

So maybe where do the social sciences fit into this


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, in the second paper, I give a laundry list of fields, scientific fields, that I think could really contribute to this project.

And it's essentially A to Z, from anthropology to zoology, like really every branch.

And not only every branch of science, but art, media.

There would be room for every kind

branch of this human endeavor to get involved with this thing agriculture and psychology and public health and you know sociology and all that would just be like at the moment you know as i said this is not a funded

program.

But if it were funded, I anticipate that either the organization would act as a clearinghouse for funding for proposals or there would be some kind of mechanism set up to distribute funds or I'm not sure exactly how that would work.

But it would be my hope that funds are distributed to literally every branch of science and then beyond science.

to, like I said, to art and to literature and to, you know, all of that stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, then let me ask one more question on this slide.

So the communities that are likely to institute, for example, the flood prevention, some sustainable strategy, they're going to be in a flood area or they're where the sea levels are changing, for example.

So when we think about cognitive architectures, what kinds of individuals or teams or communities or systems cognitively are like the early canary in the coal mine that you think are ready to transform or somebody who might hear something about a system they're involved in and think, actually, yeah, that sounds like my organization or self might be at this sort of transition point.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

If one looks around on the web and elsewhere, there are numerous kind of experiments going on in a variety of things, in new forms of representative democracy, new forms of decision-making, new forms of economies in the sense of local digital currencies and things like that.

I think all of those are,

excellent resource to draw from.

of the task is then is to take these ideas, these ideas that are springing up all over and integrate them in a way that is functional, you know, can serve a community.

Initially, maybe the community is small, just a few thousand, but the idea is that it would grow over time, exponentially grow to who knows, you know, hundreds of thousands, millions, I don't know.

So how can you take all those ideas and actually make them work?

Sometimes I liken it to, you know, you might tinker in the garage with an airplane.

You know, you might build a two-seater in the garage, and that's totally cool.

You know, you can, you know, maybe what the Wright brothers did or something.

That's fantastic.

But I'm really interested in building a jumbo jet that takes, you know, 500 passengers at a time in an hour and a half from New York to London or whatever and doesn't fall in the ocean, you know.

So how do you do that?

How do you build an integrated system that is safe, that is resilient, that has metrics that you can monitor progress, that has

good anticipation so you know where you're going tomorrow.

Where is this going?

What's going to happen tomorrow?

And sort of what's going to happen to me?

That's part of the question.

So I think the challenge is to take all these ideas that are popping up all over, some really great ideas,

and then to integrate them into a coherent whole that spans every one of the, I think maybe is it six systems that I talk about, so that they're not designed in silos.

We're not just building a new economic system.

We're not just building a new educational system.

We're building a cognitive architecture that includes all of those.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome response.

Awesome response.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, we're moving slowly.

It's totally fine.

So this slide, this again is the topic of why transform, and we only got the first paragraph so far.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, nice.

Okay, we'll stay on six.

We got a ways to go on six.

We can continue on.

You can just summarize in one sentence or however you want to do it, but up to you.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, very well, I'll try to go a little quick through the rest.

Most of that discussion on is on humanity faces severe social and ecological risks.

The next one is our systems are dysfunctional, as is, and I would say that is evidenced by the fact that we are under extreme threat.

Like, you know, what kind of sensible, healthy

puts themselves on an alleged hanging by their fingertips I mean like that's not something's wrong you know like you don't do that a competent cognitively competent society does not push itself to what it could literally be the the early stage extinction of

You know, there's something deeply wrong, deeply dysfunctional that we find ourselves in the situation that we're now in.

And we can do far better.

We must do far better, obviously, if we're going to thrive and survive.

And not only that, but as we talk about purpose, we actually long.

It would make us deeply.

Deeply happy to do better, to solve problems, to be more engaged with a healthy society, to really feel like there's a deep cooperation happening in society.

That would, you know, our hearts would burst, you know, of joy, sort of.

We would be happier if we were a part of a society like that.

It's very stressful.

We were designed by, you know, evolution.

Through evolution, we have become, we were, really, every organism, as we'll talk about in a minute, is a problem-solving organism.

And if it can't solve problems, there's like a, you know, like fundamentally going against the grain of what it means to be an organism.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

All right.

Good.


SPEAKER_00:
Shall we go on to the next one?


SPEAKER_01:
You can go to the third part or do you want to go to slide seven?


SPEAKER_00:
What is the third part?

Well, I was kind of the, I think that was about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Let's go to slide seven.

So John, what is this series?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'm glad you asked.

Oh, I have a script.

Don't worry.

So as I've mentioned already, the series really is a proposal for an R&D program aimed at the de novo development of new societal systems.

And it's also a way to context and a way to think about what transformation might mean.

So it is a long-term project, like a 50-year project.

It would be dangerous to change society radically overnight.

So this is a long-term project for long-term benefit.

And then early communities that become involved early in that process would, of course, see benefits quite early.

And there are, I already mentioned that we cover six primary societal systems.

So that's the cognitive architecture.

Once again, they are economic, governance, legal, public health, and what I call analytical forecasting and education.

And any one of those can be broken down further, like economic really also includes a monetary system and the financial system and things like that.

So six primary societal systems.

The idea is out of all conceivable designs, what might work best?

The whole project is based on three underlying propositions.

The papers are and the project.

First is that a society of any scale, and I don't mean society as in millions or billions of people, I mean society as in a thousand people, like a sub-city, a community that is not even a whole city, just a group of like-minded people who are willing to give this a field trial a go.

A society of any scale can be viewed as a super organism.

So that's kind of fundamental.

Everything really, really works from there.

We are together.

We are not just individuals connected.

We are a whole.

Society is a whole.

And it's a whole with the environment and its wider sphere.

So as we'll talk about today, even the idea of an individual is, it's okay to talk about individuals is fine, but it's kind of like a arbitrary thing.

An individual could be an individual cell or an individual person or an individual species or an individual ecosystem, but it's all deeply,

embedded and enmeshed, entwined with the whole.

So a society can be viewed as a superorganism.

A society's complete set of systems, as we've already said, the six big systems I've mentioned, can be viewed as a cognitive architecture.

It's the means by which a society learns, decides, adapts.

And this society's efforts, this is the third underlying position, the society's efforts to learn, decide, and adapt, and be viewed as being driven by an intrinsic purpose.

And that's really key also, because it's not just that we're learning, deciding, and adapting willy-nilly.

I mean, maybe it seems that way in the world.

In a sense, we're so dysfunctional, it kind of is willy-nilly.

But what really matters is that we learn, decide, and adapt in relation to whatever intrinsic purpose we actually have as a society, as individuals in a society.

It's that.

It's, as I will use the term maybe several times today, it's solving problems that matter, that really matter.

That's what we're after.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Well, on this super organism point, as someone who studied ants and still studies the eusocial insects, this kind of multi-scale thinking is really fun.

It's just always such an interesting question.

What level does purpose exist at?

So is it that purpose exists at every level, like the cell, the nestmate, the colony, the colony and its symbiont, and its predator prey, and the microbes in the niche, and then where you draw the sort of qualia, like philosophy lines.

It's a whole debate.

It's a whole thing.

Yeah, it is.

It's rich.

It is rich, but then also there's these systems...

kind of systems mapping approach that albeit coldly does sidestep those questions and i think part of the humanism is about how to bring these multi-scale questions and multi-scale perspectives which are basically neutral tools because one's preference vector and active inference could be to lose money i mean then i guess you know good job but

We have to have the preference vector.

And then what will be interesting to draw out, I think, in these discussions will be just like you said, with the transparency of the values.

What does it look like to actually specify values within a model based framework and take the bold step from just like I trust my models and I'm a fan of liberty to I trust my model about liberty and I'm willing to let that model

drive for a little bit with respect to my decisions so that's really like such an interesting handoff and that's also new and related to technology that's evolving so like you're bringing a lot of ideas together i hope people are you know listening to it and finding it exciting or maybe we'll just jump ahead a little bit here


SPEAKER_00:
is as far as a preference vector, I took pains not to suggest a preference vector of any kind in this series.

It wouldn't be very useful for me to do that, for one thing.

But for those listeners who are active inference fans, having only

preference vector is, is maybe I should say, having a having a check off list, like, you know, there should be this level of education, there should be this level of health, people should live this long.

And so we have our fitness, and we're gonna, we've decided in advance, even before the system is running, we've now have a list of things we're going to check off, we're going to score each one.

We're going to come up with some kind of integrated fitness score from that.

And that's how we're going to move forward.

We're always going to refer to this fitness model and this fitness vector and these kind of hard-coded values for what's good and what's bad.

So in the world of artificial intelligence and in the world of active inference, that really doesn't go very far.

That doesn't work.

That doesn't work very well.

Because what happens is you didn't think ahead.

Something happens tomorrow, and whoever came up with that list of those values or that model didn't really include the fact that maybe spaceships from Mars were going to land and cause a new disruption, and we have to deal with that problem now, too, before we deal with anything else.

So that wasn't in the plan, and now what do we do?

So there's...

Right, so this is really where active inference plays into, that's one way that active inference plays into this, is how do you evaluate and act in a world that is full of uncertainties?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

The unknown unknown.

Maybe the unknown unknown is the temperature dynamics, but you know it's going to be temperature.

And so how can you plan for what you know it will be in a distributional sense and make stabilization on that?


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right.

So you realize, you know, already you realize maybe that this is not a proposal to build a, say, like a model of, you know, like how society makes decisions.

You know, that's not it.

It is, what is the process by which society cognates?

And what kind of infrastructure and tools and mechanics can we use that would facilitate that?

But it's not to build a thing.

It's to realize that we are engaged moment to moment in a cognitive process, society as individuals are.

And how can we do that together as a society so that we're, you know, we balance exploration with exploitation, you know, so that we learn about our environment, we grow, we learn, we explore, we make good decisions based on available evidence and based on knowledge, based on cultural knowledge, you know, like all those things.

Right.

So, so this is a, this is the, the, the, the, you know, I think organisms are a process.

They're not a thing anyway, right?

Cognition is a process and societal decision-making is a process and really society is a process.

You know, there's, there's not too many things in this world.

There's mostly processes, living processes, intelligent processes.

So that's the hope.

That's where this is trying to go is to like, with that in mind, with that broad understanding or broad concept in mind, how do we think about

You know, how we come together as a society, how we cooperate, how we coordinate, how we make decisions, how we learn, how we explore, what do we monitor, what kind of information do we seek, you know, what kind of experiments do we do, all that kind of stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Do you want to go to that?

Seeks answers to two questions?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah, yeah.

That's the last one on the slide.

So the two questions that we hopefully would try to answer with this R&D program is, and one of this I already mentioned, but out of all conceivable designs for societal systems.

So this isn't about capitalism versus socialism or something like that.

I would think there's an unlimited

potential we're creative we're creative people there would be a million varieties of of societal systems and integrated societal systems that we might come up with and some of those probably would work very well and some of them probably would work very poorly um so among those what what might be among the best and not the the single best that's not the purpose either it's not just to find one thing that works is to find like a

you know, more of a variety, a process of things, a mishmash of things that communities can choose to implement that, you know, works well for them and that suits them and that works well for their neighbors and works well for the whole, really.

Second question is, of course, the kicker is not only what systems might be best, but how would you possibly implement them?

What viable way is there to implement new system designs?

Otherwise, what's the purpose?

This isn't just an academic excursion.

This is like, let's change the world.

And that has to be practical and has to be viable.

So those are the two questions.

What might be best and how do we get there?


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, it really does, I think, read like you've turned it over a lot and communicated with a lot of people about it.

So yeah, we can go to eight.


SPEAKER_00:
Should we go to the next one?

Yep.

Slide eight.

OK, so let's suppose your listeners are with me and we kind of agree like, OK, yes, transformation is necessary.

And again, I want to emphasize I'm not talking about reform.

I'm not talking about a softer, better capitalism.

I'm not talking about improved voter registration or any of those things.

I'm talking about de novo, starting over from scratch, what might be best.

And if it turns out that the old systems were better than anything that humanity can come up with, well, you know, that's the answer.

I can't imagine that's true because the old systems were never designed in any kind of, you know, thoughtful science driven, you know, process to test, to explore and to come up with fitness.

Like what is the, you know, we don't even have a fitness for our current society, much less a fitness for societal designs.

I mean, we have the GDP, but that's a terrible, terrible limited fitness metric.

Okay, so suppose you're with me suppose we're we're on board we we want to do this de novo design thing where do we start what's the what's what where do we even get off the ground on this and I suggest that the way to do it is through first address worldview.

from worldview, once we understand what the worldview is, what a reasonable, useful worldview will be for this project, then purpose derives, worldview begets purpose.

Once you understand what it is you want, what you value, what do you value?

Once you understand what you value, then you can say, well, I value A, and therefore the purpose is to

have a manifest in society, for example.

So once you have purpose, then you can think about what metrics, how would you measure?

So here's a new design.

Is it fit for purpose?

Does it fulfill its purpose?

That's the question.

and then metrics go with some kind of fitness evaluation and then finally last of all of those would be the design okay we know what we know what we value we know what this thing is supposed to do we know what the purpose is we know that a tractor is supposed to you know plow the ground or something we know what this is supposed to do we know how to measure success and uh now

Finally, then let's talk about design.

What are the specifics and mechanics, and how does that happen?

And the series is really kind of laid out this way.

The first paper really talks about worldview and purpose.

The second paper talks about more of the mechanics of things, like viability, how would you make this thing viable, things like that.

And then the very last paper that's subtitled design.

Okay, so that's how we, and maybe I will just mention here that I put metrics before design because we might have some ideas, getting back to that preference vector, we might have some ideas like we would like people not to die at 30.

We would like people to mostly live to a ripe old age and have enough water to drink and food to eat and all that kind of stuff.

So, you know, what kind of design once now that we have metrics to measure that kind of stuff, longevity and nutrition and things, what kind of designs would help us to reach those targets, you know?

So that's one reason why design why metrics comes before design.

Okay, so now we can start to jump into the, you know, now we start to jump into this topic of worldview, the very first one, worldview and purpose.

And I think we're on page 10 maybe of the first paper so far.

We've still got a long ways to go.

Nice.

OK, so what I've tried to do in the main theme of this first paper is I've tried to lay out a worldview that is cognizant of, that reflects some of the latest developments in science and in a variety of fields in science.

And those fields would be like complex systems science,

cognitive science, evolutionary biology, you know, a few fields like that, information theory and a few things like that.

I've tried to outline a worldview that makes sense from that leading edge of science.

And I would say too that science has gone through really kind of a revolution.

It's kind of like there's the pre-1950s slash 60s science, and then there's what we have today.

And there's enormous jumps, enormous leaps in understanding that have happened

just in the last, say, 50 years or so.

And some of those leaps, the ramifications are only now being felt.

Some of the concepts are a distinct shift from where we were in the pre-1960s or pre-1970s or so.

And obviously, we see the changes in our lifetime.

I was watching an old show on TV the other day, and somebody put money in a payphone.

They put a quarter in a payphone to make a telephone call.

And it's like, OK, well, that's history.

So there's all these technologies that I grew up with that don't even exist anymore.

They've been replaced by entirely new frameworks.

And that's the speed of that evolution is exponential.

So it's tremendous changes happening very quickly.

And the task of the program


SPEAKER_01:
Oh yeah, just one point on that would be, potentially because you're taking such a broad perspective with complex system science and evolutionary bio, you might say that society has always been a cognitive architecture.

But if you had asked in 1500, is society a cognitive architecture?

You'd be like, well, no, I mean, you have agriculture, you have this, you have this, you have that.

Whereas now if you tell people, hey, telecoms are...

they run through everything and the internet of things, the internet of people, like all this sort of stuff.

And you tell people, actually, it's a multi-scale cognitive architecture.

Humans are in the loop and our algorithms are never independent from us.

They're in feedback with us.

It's like, yeah, that was what the mainstream was telling me.

So actually it's a total alignment point because it reflects how rapidly things are changing.

That it's just undeniably obvious that the communication infrastructure is the system that we're engineering.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

Right.

Absolutely.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Communications have mind-blowing changes in communications, and that brings mind-blowing changes in outlook.

But I want to emphasize a few points to this worldview that, you know, it's not just that everything is connected.

Like, you know, I know what a complex system is.

It just means everything is connected and we're all kind of whole and blah, blah, blah.

Okay.

Fine.

But even for people who are in that ilk, who understand the basic concept there,

there's ideas that have come out in the last decade or so that are even pushing that boundary.

And I just want to highlight a few concepts here.

And I think active inference really is like, in a sense, a culmination of some of these ideas or an embodiment of some of these ideas.

The main thing I want to say is that life is intelligent and whole.

So it's not just that everything's connected.

It's that everything is intelligent.

Everything is, you know, life is an intelligent information processing thing.

Everything is intelligent.

adapting learning deciding whether we're talking about everything is cognitive you know and cognition really implies information and information processing so whether we're talking about a slime mold

or a human, there's in everything, in plants, in bacteria, in mold, in anything that has any life at all that can be considered alive is intelligent and is learning and reacting, not just reacting, but learning, reacting, and also deciding and acting and remembering and all those things.

And you might ask, well, that's impossible.

bacteria doesn't have a brain.

It can't be cognitive, but it is cognitive.

But we just have to relax how we define cognition.

On the slide, I have

little thing there that every organism is cognitive in the sense that it displays capacities typically associated with human cognition such as sensing learning problem-solving memory storage and recall anticipation anticipations is key to everything and attention is key to everything so every organism does that plants and everything else and it doesn't require a central nervous system

And I might add to this that not only is every organism cognitive, but essentially every organism is cooperative too.

Those cooperation and cognition go hand in hand because

Any intelligent organism, any organism that can act to better its viability is going to cooperate in meaningful ways with other organisms and other species and things like that.


SPEAKER_01:
nice point because um there's cost to communication whether it's exactly whether it's the cost of making the pheromone or just the time which is super finite or attention fundamentally and so costly interactions through time the game theory are either to exploit and stabilize which is fragile or to succeed together


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

And succeeding together, cooperation is like everywhere.

Once you understand what you're looking for, it's in the biologic world, it's like everywhere.

So this idea that we're, you know, one person against all or, you know, we're a dog-eat-dog universe.

I mean, it's, you know, in a certain sense, it's true.

Obviously, tigers eat, you know, whatever they eat, zebras or whatever.

I mean, that happens, yes, of course, but in the larger picture and over multiple timescales, not just in five minutes, but over evolutionary timescales and developmental timescales and everything, the cooperation is really the rule for the most part.

And if any listener needs proof of that, just think of your body.

I mean, there's about a trillion, some trillion, some cells

are enormously harmonious like your blood pumps every day or you know this is a this is like a miracle I don't want to use the word miracle because I want to get into whatever that might imply but it is amazing awe-inspiring

The depth of cooperation just in our own bodies is like evolution must prefer cooperation or else there would never be such a complex pattern of cooperation as we see just in one human body.


SPEAKER_01:
Just to give one example from the bees, so from a species I study, it's almost like a sparring type of cooperation because when it was discovered that there were some workers with developed ovaries, there was a whole story about cheating and policing and about altruism and this equation says this and that equation says that.

And then when you take a step back, it's like the colony having a distribution of ovary activation may be more ecologically resilient.

so um i as an evolutionary biologist never think well my interpretation of what would be lovey-dovey in this system must be how it works because that's so clearly not true it's just to say that there are interesting dynamics within and between levels and in the long run cooperation and stable cooperation and like learning to adapt to your niche

is a winning strategy in a way that locking down just isn't but unfortunately under high um stress and uh high uncertainty conditions simple strategies can become rife so that's sort of a failure mode of a population so that's what i understand also like you know what you're saying yeah no it's uh nice if a if a species can avoid uh highly stressful situations because that's


SPEAKER_00:
often things don't go well, once you get to that point, you know, things can go awry.


SPEAKER_01:
What's that?

Do you want to go to nine or stay on eight?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah, I think let's go to nine.

Let's move ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Perfect.

What is the individual?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so why in the world would I, why would we ask this question?

And why would I spend, you know, multiple pages in this paper even discussing, like, of course we know what an individual is, right?

Or maybe not.

Like, that actually turns out to be a difficult question.

What is an individual?

And it's important to this discussion of societal systems because who are we

What is the purpose of a societal system?

Who is it supposed to serve?

So you have to ask, really.

It's good to ask.

If we're going to build a societal system, who is it that it's supposed to service?

Who are we?

What do we want?

It's part of figuring out what do we want?

What do we value?

Who are we?

Start there, I would say.

So we've already kind of touched on these themes, but this idea of rugged individualism, you know, like from a certain perspective and a certain, you know, from a limited sort of time frame perspective, sure, there's rugged individualism that exists, right?

And it can be useful in certain situations.

But by and large, that's not what life is doing.

You know, that's not what...

it's really even difficult to say, if I'm a rugged individual, where do I actually start and where do I end?

Where is me?

Even physically, it's hard to say, because this physical me is really,

I think more bacterial cells than it is human cells, right?

So like I'm a sieve, I'm a process through which things are flowing through, I'm a ecosystem myself with bacteria and viruses and human cells and all of those components are necessary for me to survive today and for humans to survive over eons.

We're like a mix.

We're a bag of human-like things and bacterial-like things and viral-like things.

And we're porous.

And we're part of the carbon cycle.

And we're part of the nitrogen cycle.

And then when you say, OK, well, how could you be a rugged individual when you're really this porous smorgasbord of things?

Right, so there was an interesting paper that came out, I cite it in paper number one, that was looking at this question of what is an individual, and they were looking at it from an information theory standpoint.

So they came up with this theory.

uh and i think do they have a name for it yeah uh information theory of individuality and they say base it's done at the bottom of the slide there and they say basically that uh you know an individual is a process just what's what we've been talking about before that propagates information from the past into the future

So that, you know, implies information flow and implies a cognitive process.

It implies the anticipation of the future and implies action.

And this thing that is an individual, it is not like it is a layered hierarchical individual.

It's like you can draw a circle around anything, you know, in a certain sense and call it an individual under, you know, with certain values.

uh definitions you know if you want to define what its markov blanket is but uh but you know we are we are we are our cells are individuals our tissues liver say is an individual um human is an individual a family is an individual you know and it just keeps expanding outward from there the society is an individual

So none of those have any kind of inherent preference levels.

There's no preference to any of those levels.

Everything's an individual, layered, interacting, overlapping individuals.

And the idea of an individual is just, where do you want to draw your circle?

And then you can talk about an individual at whatever level you want.

yeah so so that's all about information so it's all about processing information right and that's and so society is an individual and we are part of society and we're talking about societal systems and so at that level that seems to be our level of focus here at that level we can talk about society as an organism as a cognitive organism that is

propagating information from the past into the future.

And from an active inference standpoint, we can say, under the, you know, under the fitness score, whatever word you might want to use for that of reducing uncertainty.

So we act to reduce uncertainty, right?


SPEAKER_01:
One interesting point on the ant colony again, it's the example I'm coming from, is the 1911 paper by William Morton Wheeler is called the ant colony as an organism, not a super organism, because super organism implies that nestmate would be the true organism.

And that's assuming that insect with a six legged version is now the whole super organism.

Oh, well, the ant colony is society.

That whole frame is actually the shadow of what the evolutionary reality is, which is that the ant colony is an organism.

not a super organism and the answer tissues and so which level we prioritize or do we say no there's no a priori level ant is just i'm not even going to say there's anything out there called ants it's it's you how you're thinking about it or do we get lost or are we going to find a ladder in that multi-scale


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, well, the latter is active inference because it doesn't say, active inference doesn't say make an internal model of the world that is accurate, that accurately captures all the details of the world, of the universe.

That's not what the mind does.

That's not the point.

The point is to act.

under uncertainty, given some useful model of the world, act under uncertainty so that your fitness score improves

And by fitness score here, we essentially mean anticipated uncertainty.

So I would very much like to have some certainty that I'm going to be alive tomorrow.

And if it's freezing outside and I don't have a coat on, that becomes iffy.

So I'm going to be happy if I'm going to go find a coat because it is going to reduce my uncertainty about survival over the next 24 hours.

But you can expand that outward.

Right?

All organisms are acting under uncertainty.

And we can think from that perspective as a society of what are we doing and how do we measure success?

Well, we're measuring success by acting under uncertainty and then paying attention to what happens.

And then acting the same or differently or, you know, some other way or somehow then choosing to act again in this cycle of act, you know, act, process, act, process, act, process, you know, model, act, model, act, model.


SPEAKER_01:
That reminds me, of course, of the OODA, Observe, Orient, Decide, Act model and other sort of cyclic models of action and perception.

And then I would say that active inference provides a few nice little benefits over other phrasings of action and perception, qualitative and philosophical ones like inactivism, as well as quantitative ones like cybernetics and other kinds of control theory.

So I totally agree.

This is nice stuff and nice.

We can carry on if you want.

Do you want to go to 10?

Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

10.

Let's go to 10.

So everybody's listening.

You can ask questions in the live chat or you can join us in the Jamboard and flip over to slide 10.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'm thoroughly enjoying this conversation, but is it true that we have about a half hour left of it?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, we have 35.


SPEAKER_00:
Is it going that fast?


SPEAKER_01:
I believe so.

We can slice slides or move slides to another day.

So however you want to do it.

I'll try to go for a few more minutes afterwards.


SPEAKER_00:
Try to go a little quicker.

But there's so many things to say, you know, this, you know, it's one thing to read the paper and written, you know, kind of written in a, in a, in a sort of scientific terminology.

And, you know, it's, but it, but it doesn't really convey the feeling, you know, like, you have to kind of think about what is the feeling of this whole project.

And we can do that better in a conversation, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
agreed.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so, so, so then, you know, we're on this topic of what is what is our worldview?

What do we value?

And what is our purpose?

And then we've come to this question, then, okay, so who the heck are we, then we know we're, we're, and not only who are we, but who are we building these systems for?

You know, what, what is

what should societal systems serve who or what should societal systems serve and the only reasonable answer that you can come up with is that societal systems should serve the the extended self like not just the body not just the family not just the

you know, the thousand people in a society or the 10,000 or a million or whatever, but their environment, the society next door that they're engaged with and cooperating with and coordinating with, the society across the planet that they're sharing information with and learning together with.

And so it's the whole that we, our metrics as we, as later as we come to metrics, those metrics have to represent

both the cognitive process, how are we cognating?

How well are we cognating?

Are we functionally cognating?

And are we achieving, through that cognition, are we achieving the kinds of aims that is serving the whole?

Is the environment improving?

Is the quality of air improving?

Is the quality of life improving for individuals?

Yes, so we are, so this in a nutshell, this is the worldview in a way.

We are intimate with our greater world.

We are individuals, but of the nested overlapping variety, individual cells, bodies, groups, communities, ecologies, nations, and all of civilization.

We're not separate in any absolute sense, and there's no privileged level or scale to any of that.

nor are we passive bystanders in this unfolding.

This evolution is not just a chance thing, like by chance somebody does this one day and then evolution goes on another avenue.

No, there are...

There are opportunities in the environment that we can react to that lend themselves to providing information or providing gain of benefit of some kind.

And we are driven.

We are consciously creating.

And, you know, even a really great societal system, the integrated societal systems would be consciously creating, acting, cognating, acting, cognating, consciously creating it towards some goal.

And that goal then has to be, you know, the maintaining of vitality for the extended self.

All right, so that comes the slide.

That's the topic of slide 11.

And what is our purpose?

So over on the right there, I just want to reemphasize, we are anticipatory.

We are cognitive.

We are problem solvers.

We are a we.

And then I have below that, I am a we.

I am intimately connected with this.

I'm everyone in that sense, you know?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, well, yeah, the Whitman, you know, I contain multitudes and also Gilbert et al have a paper called We Were Never Individuals, kind of on that wavelength that you were talking about with the sort of distributed systems all the way down approach.

And also Dennis Noble, no privilege level of biological causality.

Similar, basically realization that multi-scale perspective, complexity science basically entails either the choice of a priori level,

like saying it is multi-scale and humans are the best scale or gaia is the scale or quantum is the right scale that's a claim as well as it being a claim actually there's no privileged level of causality so that's the sort of table as it's set


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right, right, right, right.

And you know what?

It's not that really this entire project, you could say in like a sentence, you could say that this whole project is to help us be who we are more, be more

honestly who we are more real to who we are right it's not the it's not to to have people behave in some unusual way or some ultra altruistic way or anything like that it is to it is to have it is to be more more ourselves more fully ourselves more completely ourselves and then all of these pages all these things we're talking about is who that self is who are we really


SPEAKER_01:
And it's about the adjacent possible for who we are.

Who we are is not an essence that is, there's seven seals and it's being unlocked.

It's actually something that's being drawn out through inactive realization in the niche, through niche modification, through stigmergy,

through becoming and and then the adjacent possible is where the imagination and the planning comes into play and if people are hesitant to talk about the adjacent possible for who we could be just think about chess it's the adjacent possible with a strategy on the board and we're talking about the adjacent strategy possible for who we could be in terms of our strategy for you know all these recursive layers our strategy for how we think of ourselves and all these other things you're talking about


SPEAKER_00:
Absolutely, absolutely.

And then ultimately serving the kind of fitness purpose of, you know, if we take action A, is that going to reduce our uncertainty about those things that really matter, you know, that are the key variables, you know?

okay so uh so uh you know this is maybe a summary now we we've we've talked about about about who we are and i just want to say a few words then we have a purpose and uh from like a biological i call it an intrinsic purpose but like from evolution by being the fact that we are a part of life we have a purpose because all organisms possess this

sense-making capability, causal powers.

And the intrinsic purpose of an organism is to achieve and maintain vitality, a sustainable flourishing of self, which can include that extended self.

And we do that by sensing and evaluating states of the world and ourselves and implementing appropriate actions that

are based on anticipation.

We anticipate what will happen if we do or don't take an action, and we choose, if we're functional, we choose those actions that can serve our intrinsic purpose of remaining vital into the future.

So anticipating vitality.

And that obviously implies some kind of modeling of the world.

Anticipation implies some kind of modeling of the world.

So that's an organism's intrinsic purpose, and then society, by, you know, by...

uh you know that's necessarily shares a similar related intrinsic purpose which is to achieve and maintain vitality maintain and maintain it by maintain i mean anticipate into the future maintain uh vitality which is accomplished through cognition and cooperation so the self that we must keep vital is the extended self

And it follows that the intrinsic purpose of societal systems, like financial systems and other, is to serve the intrinsic purpose of society.

So now we know, or we don't know.

I'm just putting this out as my take on it.

But this is what I'm offering as a concept for the world to chew on.

And obviously, I'm getting these ideas.

I'm not coming up with all these ideas myself.

I'm digesting them.

hundreds of other papers that have been put into this kind of summary in a way.

So that's, we need to, our purpose is to remain vital into the future.

And when we talk about the self that remains vital, it's the larger self.

All right, so slide 20.

Or 12?

Or excuse me, 12.

Yep.

Yes, slightly off.

uh so there's a lot of discussion about complex systems you know we've been discussing complex systems and i just want to make a couple of points here because uh commonly some it is not uncommon that someone will say a complex system well that just means that it's liable to fall apart at any moment you know it's just too complex it's going to crash uh but and that that obviously can happen you know systems can collapse quite quite true

But obviously, life would not be doing very well if the evolution builds complexity in species and organisms and ecosystems.

Life would have a rough go of it.

if it was so fragile that complexity became a burden and then you reach a certain level of complexity and then you fall apart.

That's not really, I don't think, I mean, that can happen, but useful complexity doesn't make you fall apart.

actually just does the opposite.

It serves what we've been talking about all along, and that's problem solving.

So we are anticipatory organisms.

We are problem solving organisms.

It's our nature.

Most of what the human brain does is to solve problems of one kind or another, social problems, physical problems, whatever.

and maneuver in the world in a useful way.

And complexity is what allows that.

There's a number of studies that I cite here that show that as an organism, even as a robot, faces more difficult pressures from its environment, it complexifies.

And complexifies by complexity, then it implies a greater number of parts

coordinating or cooperating in some way to solve this new challenge.

And obviously, as a human, we're very complex.

We have complex needs.

We can think not just what's going to happen in the next millisecond, but we can think about what's going to happen in 100 years.

I mean, part of this project is to think about what might be happening over the next 100 years or even 1,000 years.

So as an organism complexifies, it at least potentially becomes better adapted to solving more complex problems.

And from that sense, you could almost equate complexity with problem-solving capacity, at least in a general sense.


SPEAKER_01:
And then I talked about that just reminds me of in the free energy calculations that we have gone over in various papers.

It's like accuracy is the modeling imperative.

And then complexity is tolerated to the extent it facilitates accurate modeling.

So if you get the one parameter model and you got 99% and it's adequate and it's good, then you're good to go.

And you're going to go for simplicity and,

But then what you're saying is actually the appearance and the hallmark of complexity in the world.

It means that that organism has the need to solve problems at a given level of counterfactual depth or inference skill or temporal depth, temporal thickness.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

Exactly.

Exactly.

Yeah.

That's, that's it.

Yeah.

Yeah, so I talk in this kind of middle of the paper now, I talk about a few ideas, good regulators, requisite variety, self-organized criticality, and then the free energy principle from active inference.

And maybe I'll just try to briefly mention what those ideas mean for people who aren't familiar.

and so good regular really came from the good regular theorem or whatever it's called really came from cybernetics ash ash ashby yeah

a lot his law of requisite variety and the it's the concept is that a organism or a you know system must be must be a model of that which it but that needs to control so so I am humans are a model of a

their niche, their physical niche, the gravity.

Our bones are a model of gravity.

Our complex problems that we face of maneuvering through the world with our senses and our sensitivities and our

you know, vulnerabilities, we have to be complex enough ourselves to handle a complex environment.

So that's just another way of saying that systems complexify in order to handle, you know, adequately handle their environment.

And part of that complexity then is having enough dials.

You know, the system has to have enough dials and enough levers and enough movement opportunities to control that which they need to control.

So a good controller has a similar variety to that which controls.

That's the requisite variety part.


SPEAKER_01:
And I just add the technology allows us to sort of play with that.

For example, someone driving a car with the affordances of just their arms and degenerative model of the road can be driving in very challenging situations.

So this doesn't mean that you need to have the road inside of your head or need to be the road to drive on the road.

It's a statement about how action oriented systems choose actions.


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right.

And maybe I'll just mention that that plays out on all timescales, right?

So the immediate mechanistic timescale, the developmental timescale, you know, the evolutionary timescale and everything in between.

Right, because think of an organism that only once every century has to deal with a one-year drought or something.

Well, somewhere in the mechanics of that organism has to be a little piece that is capable of digging down into the dirt and just hanging out for a whole year or whatever without water.

Even though that only happens once in a total blue moon, you know, like like we have to have this We have to have this flexibility within us even for those extremely rare but deadly, you know, potentially deadly scenarios and situations that we might face Okay, so complexity essentially you can almost equate it with problem-solving capacity and again the world

Slide 13.


SPEAKER_01:
Slide 13.

Help organize criticality.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so maybe I want to just kind of back up for a moment and just say like,

Again, what is the purpose of going through this stuff?

I mean, it's useful, sure.

If you want to build some new system, it's nice to know what the purpose of it is, obviously.

But these ideas that we're talking about, and self-organized criticality is one of them.

these ideas can not only serve this larger context of understanding what it is we're trying to do here what is what what are we building what is this purpose how do we measure success you know it can have immediate uh input or immediate influence on uh how a design might happen and and this self-organized criticality is is one example of that so it's not just we're not just in the theoretical philosophical

set here, we're, we're also talking nuts and bolts, like, okay, so what might designs be like, we have to think in our, as we're going through the series, you know, we can think in our head, okay, that's interesting.

What kind of designs might reflect that concept?

and uh we'll go into an example here with self-organized criticality so the idea there is uh that was coined by back back bak in 87 the term self-organized criticality and it's it's really not a controversial that that living systems and and many most systems in life complex systems organize in some way but

The idea of self-organized criticality is that the organism itself is adjusting, is keeping some kind of adjustment to maintain a critical state.

And by critical state, I mean a state on the, like you can think of a saddle point.

So if you drop a model on a saddle, it's going to not stay there.

It's going to, you

it's going to change one way or the other.

A critical state is like that threshold where things are about to change from one way to another way.

It turns out with work in information theory and other fields in recent years, it turns out that processing, whether you're talking about a computer or some other machine or a brain,

Turns out that processing is kind of optimal in a sense when the system is at this critical state and some people call it on the edge of chaos because things can easily change.

And sometimes it's, you can think of that threshold as a threshold of a critical state.

You can think of it as a threshold between exploration and exploitation.

Like, should I go find a new,

planet for humans to live on, or should I fix the systems on this planet first?

How do we balance exploration of the new versus using the information we have to improve what we already have?

So you can think of that as exploitation trade-off, stability, agility trade-off.

Do we remain stable and use ideas from the old in the past, or do we

Are we more agile and we're more flexible and we bring in new ideas?

So it's like you can call it an old new trade-off.

But whatever trade-off you want to call it, it's this sitting at the edge of going one way or the other, maximally flexible of going one way or the other.

And it's at that threshold, that level, that point, the kind of that region of criticality that information processing seems to be maximal.

So it's no wonder then that the human brain is organized in such a way to be living on this threshold between agility and stability.

And now here's an example of that from like a real world example.

So a system that is at a critical state is going to be maximally sensitive to input.

So that means that just when that marble is sitting on the saddle, just a little bump to that saddle from one little corner of its universe, like just one little

organism bumps it and maybe that marble rolls one way or the other, right?

So that one little input had a major impact on how the whole thing moves its trajectory into the future, right?

But isn't that kind of what we have in mind for democracy?

I mean, don't we want everyone to have access of engaging into the decision-making processes of a society

and have every voice heard in at least in the sense that there's the possibility that just my voice, just me doing my participation in this system might actually ripple through the system and have a, you know, a real effect, a useful effect.

I mean, I think like maybe self-organized criticality can help to inform us

The concept of self-organized criticality can help to inform us of what do we want from democracy or a decision-making process.


SPEAKER_01:
You know, that just makes me think about different landslides.

And that's something that criticality theory and catastrophe theory has been used to study.

And instead of cascading failure, we can think about cascading neighborhood cleanups.

So a bunch of people just say...

Today, just for an hour, I feel like doing a little cleanup and all of a sudden one person puts up the flag and then it's cascading locally in some just unspecified way.

But all of a sudden you're getting this distribution with a ton of small little meetups and then several really large sweeping changes.

But the total number of people cleaning up is higher because you offered the affordance and the ability for the affordance to sort of propagate.


SPEAKER_00:
That's right.

That's right.

We're talking about a propagation of a propagation of information, a propagation of action, and the possibility that even, you know, just one or a few individuals could start a little chain chain reaction that actually does affect in a positive way society.

Now, it's a little too, it's almost too bad that sandpiles were the original, you know, topic of this

self-organized criticality because as you point out it's not really about things falling apart it's about it's about if you think of it again if you think of a complex system as a system more capable of solving more challenging problems then more often you can think of self-organized criticality as a way to propagate information when it is really needed when the system needs to change then information is


SPEAKER_01:
you know it ingests information from its world from its senses and can act accordingly we we just um submitted an abstract with criticality and active inference and one of the points was actually the existence of self-organized criticality implies a far from equilibrium system that's actively pumping energy in that's right passive system that's not locked and loaded you don't get that kind of a non-linear response when you poke it it just stays there


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right, right, right.

And I think maybe we won't have time to go into it right now, but also the idea of criticality is a little bit at the center of structural organization of society in the active inference theme.

Like, how is it that organisms and life and other

systems then you know form structures well they form structures so that as you were just saying they form structures so that they can maximally cognate and those that happens to be structures that are existing in some sense near critical thresholds so and that and also as you mentioned that of course takes energy you know it takes energy to make that happen you have to eat food to think you know right nice 14.

Okay, so now finally, we get to Active Inference, all this discussion, and we're finally getting to the point here, right?

Welcome to Active Inference Lab.

So I had already touched on some of this before, but it would

You know, today, if you're going to develop a really good AI system, and you're going to have a robot saying the robot has to act in some environment, it's pretty well understood that if you program that robot to, you give it a, I mean, traditionally, you'll give it a fitness function or some kind of valuation.

And it's, for example, it's good if it, you know, you lose points if you fall through a trap door and you get points if you, you know, whatever, find a piece of cake or something.

Well, that's fine for extremely simple universes that your robot might work in.

But as soon as you get beyond, as soon as you get to any kind of more realistic universe that your robot has to work in, that pre-programming concept just kind of falls apart.

It would require the practitioner to think ahead of all the things that the robot might encounter and then how to value those situations in certain ways.

And that is really what active inference offers is a kind of a cognitive understanding or a mechanism by which an organism will, where it's fitness score is in a sense,

involves both achieving goals and exploring its world for epistemic gain.

So that's how we would like to program the robot in a sense.

so that it can learn on the fly from its experiences.

It can alter its actions and goals as it becomes clear, as it gathers more information from its universe, as it meets new situations that were never

never conceived of by the programmer, that through an active inference or an active inference-like mechanism, it can learn and explore and critically balance exploration with exploitation.

And then we come right back to that whole concept of criticality.

So what you would really like your robot to do is remain at that critical phase between exploring what's out there and making use and goal-directed behavior of what's in front of it.

And that's how you could program this robot to act in the world and be pretty good at it if you build it well.

So that's what the systems of a society can help a society to do.

it's worth talking about building new systems i think it would not be wise to say this checklist of like we wanted this level of education we want to want this you know to react this way in this situation react this way in the situation and this level of uh you know whatever money and this level of this and this level of that uh while those kinds of preferences can be a useful start

Society has to be alive in its moment, you know, in the moment that society is alive, it's cognating, it's actively, you know, comparing what it's the result of its actions to the model that is in its head.

And so active inference offers this way to balance exploration and, you know,

exploitation and remain critical and remain optimally cognitive, right?

So that's part of it.

And then part of it, I mean, and for me, the idea of the embodied, you know, the three, four E's.


SPEAKER_01:
Embodied, inactive, extended, uncultured, ABCDs, a whole book of adjectives, actually.


SPEAKER_00:
They sell that.

yeah the you know the this is what i really am attracted to in active inferences in a sense it's kind of a simple concept it's not really very complicated you know if you've studied bayesian uh uh theory at all it's kind of straight you know in a way it's kind of straightforward but the the you know the way friston has connected the dots and and and and uh extended that into the bigger picture of life kind of it it to me it is uh

It is rich.

There's a lot yet to be learned and gained and explored in this umbrella of active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so we're getting close to the end here.


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know if maybe we should call it quits or... You know, we could either go a few minutes over to just walk through these last few slides, or we could just do whatever you'd like to do.


SPEAKER_00:
You know, I think because I can see now, I'm not very good at walking fast.

I'm too verbose.


SPEAKER_01:
You know, it goes through a lot.

It goes through a lot.

So I think it's actually good to sometimes just take these little side paths.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, well, maybe this, you know, leaving it at active inference, maybe that's a good stopping point.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, then maybe to kind of close on that active inference note, you know, we are the active inference lab.

And so we always think about these sessions as a two directional highway.

There's people who are in the active inference community who are being exposed to some new ideas.

And then there's people who are being drawn in by these other things that you're bringing up, which are so pressing as far as the issues, as well as

systems that influence everyone like governance information, maybe this is the first time they're hearing about active inference.

So it's sort of like, we're on the cliffhanger.

And maybe when we come back next week, we can really do a little recap, and then start in with where is active inference coming into play?

How are we going to make it specific?

How are we going to include people in this process?

What would it look like to do?

It's a really nice spot, I think, to kind of pause.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, sounds good.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

So we will hang out again 3 p.m.

on April 13th Pacific time.

And that will be the second of the three sessions.

So thanks again for joining, John.

This is like an awesome discussion.

And I hope people read the papers and we can share this first YouTube link and invite people for next week's session, which will be, yeah, at the time stated.

So thanks, everyone.

See you later.

Thanks.

## MlvyehPDQXg

SPEAKER_02:
okay hello everyone welcome to the active inference lab to an active inference live stream with john boyk this is going to be great it's our second of these interactive discussions on the sequence of papers that john has written

And today we're going to be hearing about motivation and strategy as well as active inference, of course, a lot.

So I'm Daniel Friedman.

I'm a postdoc in California, and I'm going to pass it to John to introduce himself, lead us into this second discussion while I share the Jamboard link with our live participants.

So, John, thanks again for coming on and please take it away.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Daniel, thanks for having me on again.

This is great.

All right.

So my name is John Boyk.

I'm a courtesy faculty at Oregon State University Environmental Sciences graduate program.

And we're here in this series of talks.

This is the second in the series to talk about the series of three papers that I recently published in the journal Sustainability.

The topic is societal transformation, in particular, the de novo development of new societal

and so on.

And last week, as maybe you can see on the Jamboard now, last week we started with the first part, which was on worldview.

The topic, the title is Science-Driven Societal Transformation Part One, Worldview.

And we didn't actually get through that, so we're going to pick up a few tail end ideas there and then hopefully start on the second paper, Part Two, which is subtitled Motivation and Strategy.

encourage people to download the papers.

They're open access, so everyone can get them for free.

Page two, perhaps?

Yep.

Okay.

So just for more information about the project, about the links for the papers, for other links, there's a bunch of

little articles that you could look at if you're interested.

There's also an interactive model.

You could go to the Principled Societies Project website, and the address is given there.

So further information, if you need it, you can find it there.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Three?


SPEAKER_02:
All right, three.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

All right, so we didn't get through the first, through the paper all the way in our first talk.

So there's a few things that I'd like to catch up on before we move on to paper part two.

We touched on active inference in our last talk, but we didn't really get around to discussing it.

So I want to say a few words about active inference itself, a little bit of a description about it for those who are not familiar.

And then we have the topics of cooperation and communication and the concept that complex organisms have complex needs.

And then on to some practical implications, and this is really the main thing I wanted to finish up with, is that in part one, I provide some kind of high-level sort of abstract concepts.

And I would imagine that the reader in certain places might be wondering, why are we discussing this?

What does this have to do with actually building new societal systems?

So I want to talk about

a little bit of the practical implications of all of this kind of abstract, all these abstract notions that we've been working with.

So I would like to just recall just a few ideas from our last talk.

And one is that, I claim at least, that a society has an intrinsic purpose.

And by intrinsic purpose, I really mean a biological purpose

eons of evolution.

And that intrinsic purpose is the same purpose that every living organism has.

So every living organism has this purpose, whether that's a bacteria or a human.

And then I also claim that society is an organism that can be seen as an organism, can be viewed as an organism.

And a society has the same intrinsic purpose.

So if our task is to develop new

are we and who are we building this for?

And what is the purpose of if we were to build a new societal system, new economic system, for example, what would be the purpose?

And if we know the purpose, then we can take the remaining, the next step and say, okay, we know what an economic system is supposed to do.

We know what a governance system is supposed to do.

So is this new design, design A, design B, is it fit for purpose?

That's the concept is that if we're going to design new societal systems de novo from scratch, then we ought to have an idea of what they are supposed to do and then how we might measure their fitness.

So that we can determine, did we, did we create something that is fit for purpose and which one of these options, which one of these designs might be more fit for purpose than others.

All right.

So that's, that's kind of where we're going here.

And, uh, so the, the, uh, I claim that the intrinsic purpose of a society and organism, any organism or any organism is to achieve and maintain vitality, which is accomplished through, uh, largely through cognition and cooperation.

And so to maintain and achieve vitality for who?

And that who I claim is the extended self.

So the extent this, all of us are enmeshed in our world, enmeshed in our environment, enmeshed in a society with each other.

And if we're speaking of a body, then the extended self is those

interactions with this necessary and vital interactions with the rest of the world.

So the extended self then is the self that extends to other people to, to societies to other societies to the environment, the local environment, the global environment, the biosphere.

So then in that sense, then if our purpose is to achieve and maintain vitality,

Our purpose is to achieve, achieve and maintain vitality for that larger extended self that really goes all the way to the biosphere where all of life is in this together.

All of life is connected in one.

And and all of life is doing this thing, doing this thing of acting to achieve and maintain vitality.

And over eons of evolution, we get this amazing

world of life and whales and Sequoia trees and ecosystems and all these T trees talking to fungi in the ground and plants talking to each other and beads doing their thing with flowers and each other.

And I mean, it's just like amazing coordination and communication and cooperation happening between species and within a species and within a

all of ourselves.

So I would say that if we're going to create a better society or create new systems that lead to a better society, then the task will be to fulfill our intrinsic purpose, which in a way means to simply get with the program.

That is, get with the program of what all of life is doing around us.

Just align with what life is doing.

And then we will, you know, we'd be off to a good start if we can do that.

All right, so that's the purpose.

And then at the bottom of that slide, I just highlight the word wisdom because it is reasonable.

You know, we think of wise action as something that is, you know, widely beneficial and

action that is aware of the needs of others and is useful action.

But that is what we're talking about.

We're talking about

of of taking actions that help to fulfill our intrinsic purpose and really by definition i would say that would be wise actions so in that sense we're aiming at a wisdom society a society where wisdom is valued and discussed and sought after and you know and and hopefully one in which uh individuals and groups and others institutions that act

Okay, so I do ask the question there at the bottom, can wisdom be rigorously defined?

Now, often it's a term that is just generically applied to actions that some people feel are useful or appear to be useful.

But if we're going to build new societal systems and we're going to have some sense of,

fitness for these systems, and the systems are in some way supposed to help us to act with wisdom and to facilitate action with wisdom, then perhaps there is some way actually to rigorously define wisdom or to know when actions are wise.

And I would say then that leads us right into the concept of active inference.

Because

active inference, we might say that actions that reduce uncertainty and maintain, you know, reduce expected uncertainty about our thriving or survival or survival into the future, those are beneficial actions.

And then again, by definition, they're wise actions.

So there might be some way to actually talk about wisdom in the same sentence as fitness.


SPEAKER_02:
the two concepts two concepts concepts must be closely related okay john can i ask i have two things i wrote down so one was cognition and when we talk about multi-scale cognition especially with a computational or a modeling bent it's easy to get caught up with cognition being a really mechanical process but i liked how you brought it to wisdom

And so it's like, if we're gonna be a cognitive system or if that's a framework we're taking, are we gonna be calculators and just do zero through nine calculations or will there be wisdom in the system?

And that kind of brings me to the question, which is clarifying wisdom is a big opportunity, but also there are risks and uncertainties.

So here in 2021, looking forward potentially to some type of wisdom transformation,

what can we cling to and how can we follow wisdom?

Because it sounds like a great idea, but then how will we know it in the mist?


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right.

Okay, so I'll talk to your first point first.

Excellent.

So I want to emphasize that we're not talking about building a society of robotic, you know, linear thinking, logical thinking.

organisms you know that's not really what humans are anyway that's what no organisms are you know we every organism has uh you know some degree of complexity of of its of itself and uh humans are very complex and we'll talk about the complexity of human needs in a moment but this it's life is not all about logic

And it is partly about, you know, a good share of it is about heart and intuition and all the other emotion and all the other aspects that come to play in what it means to be human.

So I'll repeat something I had said earlier too, is, you know, if we are to build better societal systems, better societies, those would be societies that would help us

Help us be true to ourselves more, true to our hearts more, true to our deepest longings more.

So I'm certainly not talking about building a society of people doing logic or computational logic or something like that.

It's not at all what this is about.

This is about being more human, more ourselves, more capable of making wise decisions, right?


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
And I think some of these ideas from over that have been developed, say in the last 10 years of science, ideas from complex systems science, ideas from cognitive science, ideas from active inference, ideas from evolutionary biology and some others, we're in a much better position today to be talking about how might we do this?

How might we build systems that actually recognize the full


SPEAKER_02:
human the full society the full the full interactions and then and then help provide guidance of how that how that might best be done right yeah just one quick point on that is people have talked about general systems theory and about how we could simulate or choose utilitarian outcomes or all these different ideas that have been percolating for truly thousands of years in many cultures

What's different?

Well, in your pocket, there's something that can simulate not the universe, but it can do calculations that complement human abilities in a really potentially beneficial way.

That's different.

It's on a continuum with other extended cognitive elements like books and communications, telecommunications, media, and things like that.

But we're in a computational and a conceptual phase that's totally novel.

And so we need to consider classical critiques like it can't be done, it won't be done amidst the truly ongoing changes.


SPEAKER_00:
That's right.

Exponentially expanding critiques.

capacities for computation.

But your point is very well taken.

Again, I do not mean that we're going to have computers deciding our every action.

That's not at all what I'm talking about.

I'm talking about becoming more human and using the tools that we have available to extend our computation and help us to understand better the complexities of the world around us.

Right, so this is humans taking advantage of all the tools they have to become more themselves and better and wiser and better decision-making, better decision-makers.

Okay, so that's what we're gonna cover today, this first part, and then we'll move on to part two.

All right, next slide.


SPEAKER_02:
All right, four.


SPEAKER_00:
So this is a slide on active inference.

And I just want to, again, for those who maybe are not too familiar with the concept, I want to give a kind of a brief overview.


SPEAKER_02:
Excellent.


SPEAKER_00:
Carl Friston, obviously, is one of the main forces behind this concept.

He's been working on it for well over a decade now.

There's a little image there on the left of the slide that I'll just say a few words about.

So we can talk about two components to the universe, the universe at large, and then some individual that is, in some sense, separate from the universe.

Right?

is something that is that can be demarcated from the rest of its background so for the moment we'll say there's we're going to draw a circle around the individual and then the rest of the world is going to be outside that circle so the rest of the universe has hidden states it has a you could say it has kind of a gym in a sense a generative model of how it works how it functions when it is when it has

is acted upon by an individual.

It responds in some way.

In a sense, it has a model to do that.

And the individual has a model of what the individual, how it understands the larger picture.

Now, obviously, the universe is bigger than a human mind.

So there is no way that a human mind is ever going to understand every little detail about the universe.

That's impossible.

So a human then, or really any individual, is faced with this problem of trying to act in a universe that is far more complex, far more complicated, and dangerous at times.

So how do you act under uncertainty?

That's the problem of humans and other organisms.

How do you make good decisions under uncertainty?

And that's certainly the problem for society too.

So, uh, a, uh, when we talk about separating the individual from the rest of the universe, we're talking statistically, we're talking about independence from the rest of the universe.

And in this line of thinking, uh, that independence is granted by what's called a Markov blanket.

So the individual knows its own beliefs or it has its own beliefs.

And it can choose actions and it can receive sensations from the world.

So it can act and it can observe the result of its actions.

and then the universe on the other half universe is impacted by actions and then changes in some way has some dynamics and then that leads to sensations for the individual and then the individual receives those sensations so we have kind of a circular pattern going on here where the uh the individual acts

say it this way, the individual receives sensations after some action, receives sensations from the universe.

And then it can do really one of two things.

It can alter its beliefs about the world.

Maybe the sensations tell the individual that it was wrong in some way.

So maybe one option then is for the individual to update its beliefs about the world.

That's new here.

Or it can take some kind of action.

to better fit its experience to how it understands the world.

So if I'm cold, if my sensation is being cold, my action might be to put on a coat so that I don't freeze to death.

I can bring the world, try to align the world with what I expect the world to, what I expect of myself, what I expect of my own condition, and how I expect the world to act.

So that's kind of the two options we have available.

We can update our understanding and beliefs about the world, and we can choose actions.

So that's really the gist of what that picture is.

And then over on the right-hand side, I have a few equations that sort of puts that into kind of a formulative way.

So the first one that was just

But the concept is that because I'm an individual and because I don't, I can't actually know what the generative process of the universe is.

I can only know my sensations and my actions.

I would like to reduce the surprise that appears.

Like I don't, you know, it's surprising to me if I'm cold and sick and hungry and

I don't want those kinds of surprises.

I want some certainty about me existing into the future.

But the trouble is, I don't know what the world's model is.

So I have to essentially create my own version of it.

That's the density Q in this model.

I'm going to create my best guess as to how the universe works.

And the universe has the density P in this equation.

And I'm going to do something actually that is not really common in data science.

So if any data scientists are listening, you ought to be probably very familiar with these concepts already.

This is a variational inference.

So it's a technique widely used in data science to

solve problems and that's the central idea is you have some complicated density P and you don't really know how to deal with it.

So you instead choose a much simpler density Q that is better behaved and then you work with that.

And the whole idea is if you bring Q closer and closer to P,

then you'll be closer and closer to actually having a model, a real model of the world.

So just in that term for the elbow, the evidence lower bound, it's called in data science, there's a KL term, a KL divergence term, and that just simply means that term will go to zero as P and Q come closer.

And the other term there, log P,

Uh, that is really, uh, just, uh, the negative of that is called surprise.

So, uh, um, you, the agent, uh, would like to reduce the surprise that it, it, uh, uh, recognizes experiences and, uh, and doing, and one way to do that is to, uh, is to also bring the,

the densities P and Q closer.

So you get a good model of the universe and you act in a way that is consistent with your understanding of the universe and you update your beliefs as necessary to have a better model of the universe.

And if you do all of that, your surprise about how the universe acts and your surprise about maintaining yourself into the future will be reduced.

So that functional is called a free energy functional, and the whole concept in active inference is to use this action updating, observing from the universe what the sensations are, and then going in a circle and updating an action, and updating an action, updating an action observation, updating an action observation.

The idea is to reduce dysfunctional free energy.

And that, Friston would say, claims that this is what all organisms are doing.

This is what life is doing.

And if this doing so leads to really all the structural diversity that we

in our universe the ecologies and ecosystems and organisms and cooperating cells within a human body and all of that is has become what it has become through a process through this free energy minimization process so in a sense if we wanted to somehow talk rigorously about wisdom

It would be in some sense, at least from this perspective, it would be wise actions and learning activities and explorations.

Wisdom is the kind of equivalent to reducing expected free energy.

I just want to make just a few other notes.

So what we really want to do is reduce expected free energy.

Like what will happen, you know, a tiger is running at me, I could run, I could fight, I could jump on a car, I could jump in a car, I could do all these things.

I have these options, paths, these paths I could take, these decisions I could take.

Which of them is going to be best for me in the long run?

Or in the short run.

And so that requires expectations of free energy over possible decisions in the future.

And that becomes quite complicated.

None of that is really in this slide, but I do want to realize that that's there.


SPEAKER_02:
John, I wanna lock in two really key points that you touched on here and then ask a question.

So the first thing you said on this slide is active inference is about the reduction of uncertainty.

So that's in direct contrast with the human as an economic maximizer or an optimizer of the reward, or that we're trying to do some sort of optimization, maximization on an outcome.

It's a process based reduction of uncertainty that Active Inference highlights.

And so, of course, you're highlighting the outcomes that we want to see.

Those are our values, our preferences and our predictions, we hope.

But we're going about it with a process based and uncertainty reduction based lens rather than simply like numbers going to go up.

We got to get there.

So that's the richness.

of just, if nothing else, all the critiques of active environments aside, to focus on the process and the reduction of uncertainty is really powerful.

And the second lock-in is you immediately went from the reduction of uncertainty to collective behavior.

And it's like, there's things that the brain knows that a neuron doesn't, like how to speak English.

And there's things the colony knows and does that the ant nest mate doesn't.

So part of this is about realizing, well, there's things surely society knows with all of our diversity and all of our different skills that an individual doesn't.

So what does it look like to take that seriously that the cognitive systems are not just nested internally?

Like, well, the brain, the brain region, the neural circuit, the neuron, the organelle.

Yeah, you can go down, but you can go out and it's not just a cope.

And so what that looks like is a really important point.

So the two things there, reduction of uncertainty with active inference and multi-scale cognitive systems, and it's really important points.

Good, or can I ask the question?


SPEAKER_00:
No, excellent, excellent.

Yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm just trying to catch up because you say a lot of awesome points in each of these breakdowns.

And the question is really...

What kinds, this is on the Jamboard, what kinds of social processes or data are promising for active inference modeling?

Let's just say now, maybe in the future we'll license other deployments, but right now, like what kind of data would you be curious to collect or find out about?

We may talk about it later in the economic or social context, but what kind of data types are we thinking about making active inference models of?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah okay so to answer that question I'm going to ask that question in about two more slides so I'm going to ask that very question to you and to the viewers out there but I can give you just one example okay we can come back to it but go for an example yeah I'll give one example because I also want to emphasize something else that you also

that if we're talking about expected uncertainty that implies that we are anticipatory so I just want to underline that every organism is anticipatory every organism is doing this reducing free energy and you know from this view and that requires anticipation of what the future will be and so

So anticipation, or you might call it forecasting, forecasting is central to our well-being, our continued existence.

I'm forecasting that if I see a tiger coming towards me, that I'm going to be its lunch if I don't do something.

So if we don't think clearly about what's going to happen next,

then cognition is there is no hardly any cognition.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah just one one short comment on that is anticipation and anticipatory systems has been discussed in many other contexts like cybernetics and active inference helps us walk from this very simple beginning you said okay there's an inside and outside if you don't have that you know need to think a little bit more clearly about the system or something like that but we can start with the simplest and then we can build it out to the sophisticated affective inference with the affective charge and all these other modern models

But we're starting with this loop, which is why we always come back to these kinds of figures and why it's really important that you're making it at this level.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

Good.

So just so we can ask the question, all right, if the situation is, you know, tell me, like, what kinds of things would us want to be good at forecasting?

Actually, I'll ask this question in a few slides so we don't have to go too far into it now, but let's just take, say, governance or leaders, political leaders.

If a political leader is good at understanding what's coming next, what the future is going to be, then great.

Then the political leader can say, hey, we better do something because

if we don't this thing is going to happen right but as a society today do we actually remember those predictions do we in any way like you know score accuracy of people's predictions or the predictions of science or the predictions of organizations is there like how does society today remember remember that predictions have been made and now the future is has

evolved and come about and how, who was good at, who was good at anticipating the future, who, who excels, uh, uh, what, what, what, what organization or political group or whatever, who who's been really good at understanding what's going to come next.

Right.

So that's just, I'll just leave that open question because it gets the mind working out that you can think of all kinds of ways that we don't do a good job of

of remembering and anticipating today.


SPEAKER_02:
just to ask a question from the chat um someone wrote does john use active inference mathematical framework in his work for merely descriptive purposes so potentially as opposed to generative or like real-time decision making so where does where are you right now or where do you want to be with uh respect to using active inference to describe simulate make decision support etc right right yeah a good question so uh and maybe maybe the


SPEAKER_00:
So the series has just been published.

The series proposes a R&D program that society could undertake.

And it is conceptual at the moment.

The whole program is conceptual.

It's not been funded.

I mean, you're

In a sense, you're looking at it.

This is it.

It's the three papers and our conversation and whatever other people have to add to this.

This is where we're at.

We're obviously focusing or I'm focusing now on the big picture conceptual ideas because that has to happen before you actually get into the nuts and bolts.

How do we use this?

But I would guess and I would expect that if this project moves forward, then at some point we'll be talking about the numerous ways that society uses information and how it remembers and how it anticipates and what models might be used for different kinds of anticipation and, you know, how do the nuts and bolts of

And I hope we get a chance to go there.

That would be fantastic.


SPEAKER_02:
We'll lay it out as likely, and then we'll make it happen.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
There we go.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So that's that slide.

Let's go on to the next.


SPEAKER_02:
Sounds good.

Five.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And maybe two before we move off the last slide.

I do want to say that Active Inference has this wonderful part of it that I'm very attracted to,

And that is that it provides a way for an organism acting in its environment to play it by ear, to learn as it goes, to have a process of learning and a goal for learning and action that can evolve over time, right?

So if we were going to program an active inference robot, we would not be

do that, five points.

Now, find a way to act in the world where you maximize the number of points you can get.

It's not really like that.

And the world is, in a real setting, the world is far too complex for someone to pre-program how many points you get for certain activities or reaching certain goals, right?

So an intelligent agent has to be able to alter its understanding of the world

and its goals at the same time.

And we'll talk about this again.

But to balance exploitation of what it knows already, to use what it knows about the current situation, and exploration, jumping into new

new unknowns, considering new proposals, considering new rearrangements.

So active inference and really the structural development and evolution of all of life and ecosystems and cells and communications between organisms and all of that is kind of built on this balance between exploitation and exploration.

um you could even think of that in terms of like in modern day society to a degree you could even think of it in terms of liberal political versus conservative political in their best sense that is you know conservative political might be more more interested in relying on tradition and exploiting the current knowledge and perhaps a liberal might be more interested in exploring new ideas and

and taking leaps into the unknown to learn something new and do something better, to improve a process, to change a process.

So decision making is very much a balance between those two exploitation, exploration, and active inference provides a mechanism by which that can occur quite naturally.

and i won't even go into detail to say that an action model and reducing uncertainty on that helps you act in unknown unknowns i think it's something exactly unknown unknowns that's correct yeah of which there are plenty all right now slide five uh uh this is i guess this is following up on active inference just a bit um and i think we've talked on most of these things uh the um

Yeah, I think we have.

Great.

The whole point is to resolve expected uncertainty.

Great.

Okay, good.

Next slide.

Six.

All right.

I just want to touch just a few ideas on cooperation and communication.

Actually, cooperation and communication go hand in hand.

They may have even evolved together possibly.

So cooperation really is almost the rule in our world.

Life cooperates in so many ways, so many ways.

And the more we study it, the more we realize how deep the cooperation is within a species, between species, between trees and fungus, within ecosystems, between ecosystems.

it's just cooperation is everywhere and as i said last in our last show if you want evidence of it that is if you want mind-blowing evidence of cooperation to just think of your own body the trillion or so cells that are cooperating to for you to be what you are right so um it's a cooperation exists everywhere and it is

nearly impossible without communication.

Like, you cannot cooperate with someone if you don't communicate.

And the richer the communication, at least potentially, the richer the cooperation.

And obviously, by cooperation, I mean, by communication, I mean honest communication.

Dishonest communication is hardly communication, right?

So we're talking

Um, so it's interesting though, that, you know, like to take your body, for example, you have all these trillion cells and they don't have to cooperate.

I mean, there's, you know, they can not cooperate and sometimes they don't cooperate with each other and they can act independently to some degree.

Right.

So there's always throughout the universe, there's this tension between, uh, what cooperation provides

and what the individual you know what the individual might want to how it might want to behave if it were just left to its own to its own right so why would anything cooperate and and the kind of the big picture answered that question is because it reduces expected uncertainty it's again it reduces free energy so

by cooperation, an organism can assure itself of survival.

It can make its survival easier.

It can make communication easier.

It can, you know, have all these benefits, right?

So nevertheless, every given moment is this, there's this tenuous balance between, you know, do I continue to cooperate in this sphere or not?

And who is, and at what,

to what extent do I cooperate?

Do I cooperate within my family and or in my community and or in my society and or between societies?

At what level am I interested in cooperating?

And the

know the answer the general answer that question is i am interested in cooperating at every level in which uncertain my uncertainty is reduced my my vitality is ensured my uncertainty is reduced right so across the layers across scales but we do see this examples of when cooperation fails and one example that i like to

transform cells start to not cooperate with their milieu, with their tissues, with their environment.

So my question for listeners is, so we have an idea of what cooperation means, and then what is the opposite of cooperation?

Like you might think,

Okay.

Well, the opposite of cooperation is selfishness.

And I would, I would suggest, you know, maybe in certain circumstances that seems pretty clear, but in a more general sense, maybe that's not the opposite of cooperation, right?

Maybe, maybe there's almost always cooperation and what changes is the extent of self of the agent or, you know, the organism that's that, that has taken the action.

For example,

Cancer cells cooperate with, you know, they cooperate with each other at least.

So, um, and they, and they might cooperate within their, you know, within their very small tumor milieu.

There's a lot of communication that happens between cancer cells.

Once a cancer forms, there's tremendous communication that goes on between cancer cells.

So maybe it's not, maybe it's not so useful for us to think of cooperation versus selfishness.

but rather cooperation as a scale, scales of cooperation in extent.

Like, am I cooperating with my immediate family, or am I cooperating with societies that are far-flung and halfway across the world, right?

To the degree that we understand ourself

to be extended, we are cooperating with ourself.

I mean, you have to understand that, right?

If I understand that I am part of this environment, this ecology, then any actions I take to benefit the ecology are actions that I take to benefit myself, right?

So if my sense of self is extended out to the world,

to the, or to the degree that it's extended up to the world.

I am interested in cooperating with myself to better myself, to reduce my overall uncertainty.

Right?

So cancer perhaps is, it's not really a matter of being selfish, perhaps like I can't, you know, people say cancers are really selfish.

They're just gonna, they're just gonna, um, um, you know, only pay attention to what's good for them.

Yeah, but they're cooperating.

They're cooperating with a smaller group.

And because they're cooperating with a smaller group and because their extent of self is reduced, their capacity for cognition is reduced.

And, you know, we're talking, we're just kind of anthropomorphic here, but, you know, they would have, a small tumor would have a more difficult time understanding the long-term effects, their long-term effects, because their cognitive apparatus

is to a small set of cells versus the human body, which has the full cooperation of the brain and the feet and the hands and the understanding and the capacity to use your mouth to ask others what's going to happen next, right?

So the more you extend into the world and are cooperating with the world, the larger your cognitive capacity, the larger your problem-solving capacity, and the better you will be at

understanding in the long term, you know, the outcomes of your actions and how that's going to affect your own, you know, how it's going to affect you as an individual and you as an extended self.

Okay.

So I got a little off there, but you know, I'm just saying cooperation is everywhere and it's all about communication and shared computational capacity and shared decision-making the

potential for more

cognitive capacity and better decision-making.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

The only point I'd make here as a ant researcher and have thought about conflict and cooperation across scales is that it's really a story we're telling about a certain outcome.

Like when the white blood cell eats a cancer cell, is that altruism at the higher level?

Is it a conflict at the lower level?

So it's a scale dependent and it's often a perspectival narrative that we're telling about what cooperation is.

And it's just like yin and yang.

There's a compliment between what we call cooperation and communication.

They're like the good guy and the bad guy.

They come into existence when we have fitness and free energy to dissipate.

So we need a story that allows us to act

in that gray zone instead of um getting fatalistic about competition or getting utopian about cooperation because this is not going to be necessarily a smooth and lovey-dovey ride with cooperation nor is it in the body so it's like a very nice nuanced way and that's why we fall back to active inference rather than an ism or a specific metaphor of choice like the selfish gene


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right.

Excellent.

Yeah.

And just to just to underline that this project is not about asking people to behave like super altruistically or something like that, or to cooperate, you know, beyond what would be natural, that that would never work, it would fail, it would fail, because that's not what that's not how it works.

That's not how what life is doing.

That's not how life is working.

So you know, we just really just need to be be

set up our systems, set up our processes, set up our societal decision making, you know, ways we go about making decisions, and just align ourselves with what we actually are and what life is actually doing.

And that means that there is a continual conflict between cooperation and

you know, not cooperation, between kind of an individualism and a more cooperative stance.

That's just like there's an ongoing conflict between exploitation and exploration, between, you know, conservative and liberal, between old information, the value of old information and the value of new information.

This is a, all of this is a dance, it's a dynamic dance, right?

So, but there is a sweet

place to hover a sphere to hover in where you're balancing old and new exploitation exploration conservative liberal you're balancing them and because you're on that in that sweet spot in that critical area you're able to do about the best that any organism could do

and the magnificence of life is the proof of that.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Through seven, speaking of life.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

So in our last talk, I had mentioned that complexity is, you can think of it, at least in a certain way, you can think of it as problem-solving capacity.

Organisms complexify, environments complexify, ecologies complexify in order to solve ever more difficult, challenging problems.

So it is not true that complexity is just a path to chaos and failure.

Systems do fail.

I mean, obviously that does happen.

There's complex systems that can fail.

So humans are complex.

Of all the organisms on the planet, we're pretty complex.

We have complex brains.

We have complex cognitive processes.

We think about what might happen in 1,000 years, and we're concerned about what might happen in 1,000 years.

That's enormously complex, say, compared to a bacteria that doesn't have a central nervous system.

So because we're complex,

organisms in general, that the more complex an organism is, the more complex its needs.

The more feelers it has out in the universe, the more extended it is into the universe in a sense.

And that is certainly true for humans.

And this table has some needs according to Maslow.

And I just want to mention these as an example, not that these are the needs we should focus on, but just as an example of

I think he has maybe nine or eight or nine of there, I think.

But affection, we want to be loved and we want to love both.

We want to share friendships.

It makes us happy to do that.

We want to be creative.

We want to create things.

We want to build skills.

We want to have freedom to associate things.

with whom we want to associate and freedom to move about and look around and poke around and look under things we we you know we want to participate we want to cooperate we we want to understand we want to learn learning is fun you know hopefully learning is fun we we want the rest when we're tired we want to get some exercise we want to move about you know we need to relax sometimes like all these things

uh, this is, these are, if we can call these core human needs, these speak to something that I've, I think briefly mentioned the last, uh, talk, which, which is called essential variables.

So if an organism is, if its purpose, intrinsic purpose is to maintain vitality into the future, well, you know, what, what are those variables?

that are important in maintaining vitality you know like you can think you can think of a few important things right off the top of the bat like fresh water to drink you know clean air to breathe the food to shelter you know like you could start to think of what some of these essential variables might be but i would like to suggest that some of these core human needs somehow fit into the concept of essential variables humans need to be humans need affection you we will be sick

if we don't have affection, right?

We will be sick if we don't have freedom.

We will be ill.

And we won't be able to, and we won't be able to solve, we won't be able to be good problem solvers in our environment if we're hampered by lack of meeting essential variables.

We'll be worse.

So the point of all that is when we think about

a complex organism like a human, we can think about complex needs and then we can think about, okay, so now it's starting to become clear when we're reducing uncertainty, we're reducing uncertainty about these essential variables, which might touch on things like the eight or so, nine core needs that I'm listing.

So I want to, for example, I want to have, I don't want to be uncertain that

I will be loved in the future or that I'll have food to eat or that I'll be able to move about freely.

I would like to be fairly certain that I'm going to have those freedoms.

I'm going to have these needs met.

Again, then we're not talking about some big computational calculator thing for this project.

This is about heart and soul.

being a human, even more human than society allows us to be today.

Like, you know, society is not set up.

Our society is not set up to focus on providing for these complex human needs, right?

I mean, we have poverty.

We have billions of people in poverty in the world.

And that's already, like, all kinds of needs are not met because someone doesn't have the, you know, the...

financial capacity to do what they need to do, right?

So we can, there's one last thing on this slide, this little phrase that I like to use is the solving problems that matter, right?

So society might solve all kinds of problems.

For example, if I work for a manufacturer that is producing some like, you know, let's say,

some commercial relatively useless product that people are buying because commercialism is pushed.

Maybe I'm solving the immediate problem of making an income so that I can pay my rent.

But beyond that, am I solving problems that matter?

I don't have a good example.

Maybe someone else does.

something useless there was a book there was a book there was a book about that a while ago and they had a phrase but i forget exactly what his phrase was well i don't know if it was a family-friendly phrase but i think i know it but yeah i don't think it was i hesitate to say it because it wasn't family friendly


SPEAKER_02:
You know, it's like, you know, whose team, our team, like that kind of a call and response, like which problems, the ones that matter.

I mean, then what does it mean to matter?

Well, that's our preferences and our affordances.

And then as far as cases where the work or the problem doesn't matter, there's times where the person might think that the problem matters.

But when you pull back, it's actually a nonlinear response where even if it does matter, the issue that they're concerned about,

that their effort may not be the most efficacious.

And this isn't going to go back to another optimization.

You must be engaged in the most efficacious because we're actually putting space for play and identity and participation, understanding all these attributes that aren't just some simple cybernetic like action selection, but it's really important to keep this as our guiding light.

It's the problems.

And those are the salient ones, the ones that matter, but we need to be informed by our values.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And obviously we're talking high level here.

We're,

we're trying to give a context for this whole thing of what could society be and how would we go about measuring fitness and w you know, what is this society supposed to accomplish and for whom?

And then we have to talk about the, you know, these, these high level concepts because they can be guides for us, right?

So the, just the phrase solving problems that matter, it can be a useful guide because it reminds us, Oh yeah, what, what matters and what am I doing with my life and what are we doing in society with our lives?

Are we doing things, are we solving problems that matter?

And obviously there's a whole bunch of enormous problems that we're not solving, right?

Like climate change and other things.

If society was solving problems that matter, there would be like enormous armies of biologists and other people, ecologists and field workers and all kinds of people focusing on the problems that matter most.

for happiness and survival.

And currently in today's world, you know, that is heating up to be climate change and biodiversity loss and, you know, ecological destruction and pollution and groundwater depletion and like all the things that were pushed, you know, all the damage we've done to our world.

Certainly cleaning those problems up ought to be

among the problems that matter.

Okay, so there we go.

I think one last thing on this slide.

So over in the bottom right, I bring the topic of culture in, and I just want to just say a word about culture from an active inference viewpoint.

So, you know, at its best, culture is a remembering of what is important.

to teach not only to teach new people, to teach new young adults as they mature what's important, but also to offload some of the computational burden that individuals would otherwise face.

So if I have to figure out everything for myself from scratch as an organizer,

For me, if my peers point me in the right direction, give me some indication of what's dangerous, what's not dangerous, what's important, what's not important, give me some guidance, I can learn so much faster if I have some good guidance.

Also, if I can just rely on culture to like, okay, my culture does this thing,

And I'm not going to maybe even think about it too deeply because I'm, you know, like if my culture is good, it's maybe reflecting in some capacity this importance of putting attention on those things that matter.

So now we've now talked about two important things here, actually, culture and how culture relates to to reduction of uncertainty overall, and then also attention and the role of culture in directing attention.

So those are themes that we'll be coming back on.

Nice.

So attention and essential variables, you know, like those go together, right?

If we're not paying attention to essential variables, then our whole free energy minimization thing is not functioning correctly, right?

Because we have to put attention on those things that are important.

Okay.

All right.

Next.

All right.

So now we get to the slide where I get to ask you and any listeners, like, what does this mean practically?

So we've talked about all these high level concepts.

We've given some context for, you know, for who we are and what we might need and what a societal system is supposed to do.

And those were all fairly high level discussions.

And now maybe it's time just to talk a little bit about what that might actually mean in a practical sense.

So the title of the slide is Practical Indications.

But down at the bottom, I have also known as, how do you solve problems?

Because the two are the same thing.

This is the question.

How do we solve?

How do we solve problems?

How do we focus on, if we're good at solving problems, how do we do it?

And obviously, if we're going to build new societal systems, we want to build societal systems that help us, that facilitate our problem-solving capacity, facilitate our capacity to reduce uncertainty, expected uncertainty, right?

So I'm just going to list some things, and maybe on the first read of this, we can just acknowledge, like, okay, yeah, that's how we solve problems.

Number one there, we gather data.

We sense our world, you know, obviously, right?

That's how an organism solves a problem and even knows that there's a problem to solve for that matter.

And we remember, we remember what we did maybe last week or last year.

We remember how we solved something before.

We remember that this situation is dangerous and we might want to avoid it in the future.

So we remember, remember, we anticipate or make forecasts.

And we've already talked about the importance of anticipation for cognition in any organism and cooperate.

We cooperate with those around us.

We have a,

problem to solve and we get some help.

Maybe we solve it together.

We work together.

We build a house together.

We build a jumbo jet together.

We do all these things together.

We farm together.

So cooperation is one way to solve a problem.

And then what does cooperation entail?

Well, it requires that we maybe as a group, we reward

about cooperation and it's pretty, you know, there's some really good ideas, pretty clear ideas, basic ideas of when, how do you actually facilitate cooperation and what makes cooperation go down the toilet, right?

So if your communication really helps cooperation, rewarding pro-social behavior, transparency helps cooperation, fairness helps cooperation, like all these, we know all these things, right?

from common experiences in life and also from studies in game theory and other fields.

So solve a problem, we cooperate, we communicate, we direct attention.

There's that word attention again.

We direct our attention to those things that matter.

We learn from our actions and observations.

So we update our models of things when we realize like, oh no, I guess the world doesn't work that way.

I should, I should learn something, but the world is a little more, it works differently than I was anticipating or had thought before.

Uh, and then we act to reduce expected uncertainty.

We experiment, we, we, we have goal directed activities or actions where we try to, that's the exploitation aspect.

And then we also have the exploration aspect action for epistemic gain.

And again, then we have this exploration versus exploitation trade off.

So I'm just saying what I think everyone already understands.

I'm just making a list here.

But now the question is, okay, fine, so that's how we solve problems.

How do each of these play out in a societal system setting?

So, you know, I think if we wanted to, we won't because we don't have time, but I think if we wanted to, we could list like 500 ways any of these play out or maybe should play out or could play out.

in a healthy society, a society that's good at solving problems.

I had already mentioned one earlier.

So let's just say on the topic of anticipation, wouldn't it be reasonable to somehow remember and pay attention to who is good at anticipating the future?

certain political figure or, you know, certain organization is, is that turns out to have a really good track record of accurately predicting what's going to happen next, well, then maybe we want to pay attention to them and pay more attention to them to then to others who have a terrible track record of, of predicting what's going to happen next, you know, like if a politician says, Oh, if you do this, if you do a then B is going to happen.

Well, you know, if

By and large, those kinds of predictions are wrong, then, you know, politicians probably not worth much.

But not just in politics.

Obviously, we anticipate and, like, for example, that's what science does.

Science is, you know, awash with trying to figure out how the world works and what's going to happen next.

and uh so so that's another area that we could you know a healthy society might really support the scientific uh you know the scientific endeavor and pay attention to what scientists are saying like for example with climate change and other things you know if the whole scientific world is saying hey this is serious you gotta pay you gotta do something about it well then maybe a healthy society would actually do something about it right um honesty and honesty i'm just picking out the

for numerous hours about how any of these might play out in a real setting, right?

Honesty, so look at the amount of dishonest information or manipulated information that is flowing around us today in this world.

You know, why is that?

I mean, obviously a healthy society would want to share honest and valid information,

Let's call it quality information.

Good models are built on quality information.

So here's a question.

Why in our world, why is there so much disinformation?

And I would suggest that at least some of it is due to the fact that individuals and organizations, corporations are

fantastically rewarded for putting out dishonest information, right?

I mean, just think of a thief.

I can call you up in a phone scam and if I can convince you that I'm your bank and I need your account number, then I can have enormous rewards for being dastardly dishonest to you.

But, but it's true.

I mean, maybe that's an extreme example, but it's true in just ordinary examples of business and life that one can be rewarded greatly or being fairly dishonest or, you know, putting out something less than quality information.

And then you gotta, then you gotta ask, okay, well then if, if then, you know, like we don't want, society doesn't want to reward antisocial anti,

anti-transparent, anti-honest behavior?

How would a society reward pro-social, honest behavior?

Maybe a society could become more transparent.

So transparency, obviously, would be a part of this.

But I'm sort of honing in.

I don't know if you can tell, but I'm sort of honing in just on this little question.

about how do we reward behaviors in this world as a society?

And then that suddenly brings up the question of how does an economic system work and how do we view money and how do we view income and how do we use money and income in our lives?

And is there some way that we could reinvent an economy and reinvent money so that

whatever we need to reinvent so that we're actually day to day, moment to moment, we're rewarding cooperative pro-social behavior and honest behavior.

So like, how do we do that?

Now I have some ideas on how to do that, but that's in the part three of the paper.

So we'll get to them later.

So I don't want to go much further on this, but I'm just suggesting that

that we could spend, you know, each of these could raise a hundred ideas of how to, what we could do in a healthier society to improve our capacity for group problem solving.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice points.

Good for nine?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I always think I am, but hold on one second.

On the right-hand side of slide eight are a few other ideas.

So, you know, obviously we've done

measuring the fitness of them so um you know how do we how do that's a that's also a general answer to this question of how do we build a society that is more fit well we actually measure things that are important and we score them and we share that information widely so we know how we're doing so we know so we can evaluate either our systems or our organizations or our institutions or society at large or those kinds of things so metrics are important

I already mentioned science and critical thinking are important.

So that touches on the educational system, for example.

A healthy educational system would really value critical thinking and would train individuals to be critical thinkers at an early age, I would think.

And then obviously then removing the barriers to cooperation.

This society has enormous barriers to cooperation.

I might want to

Here's just one example out of what could be a million examples.

Say that I wanted to use my life's energy, my work time, my 40 hours of work a week to make the world a better place.

I want to jump in and I want to, I don't know, let's say I want to teach kids, little children.

Maybe I want to be a good teacher.

Well, that's great.

Fantastic.

But if I do that, I have to pay a financial penalty.

I could become a banker instead.

So suppose those are my two choices.

I could become a banker or a finance person or something, or I could become a teacher.

Well, society is going to reward me greatly for being a banker or a finance person.

And it's going to not reward me very well for being a teacher.

I might want to cooperate.

I might want to work for the betterment of humankind.

But if I do, there's a good chance I'm going to be relatively poor.

You know, like I pay a heavy price for that.

And that's just a barrier to cooperation.

We should design systems so that cooperation becomes the default, easy, no, like duh, duh, do it this way because it's good for everyone.

It's good for you.

And

Sure, you want to teach?

Well, great.

Come on in.

Here's opportunities for you to teach, and you're not going to pay a penalty for becoming a teacher.

This is going to be easy.

If you want to be a teacher and help young children learn better, great.

Here's wonderful opportunities, and you're not going to have to pay a penalty for doing that.

We're going to actually just the opposite.

We're going to reward you for doing that.

Okay, now we're done with slide nine or slide eight.


SPEAKER_02:
That was good tonight.


SPEAKER_00:
OK.

So the only thing I really want to say about this slide is that this concept of the societal systems as a cognitive architecture, probably somewhere in the literature, there's something talking about that in some sense.

But I think maybe, I don't know if it's as kind of like pointed as I'm making it in this series.

And there and there really is no name for what is what is the name for the set of societal systems that helps the society that facilitates societal cognition?

What is the name of that?

And there isn't a name, you know, it's it's not an economic system.

And it's not a governance system, because that's just those are just some systems that are that have their own connotations.

So what is the name of this whole set of integrated systems that helps society to think?

Well, there is no name.

I mean, there is no formal name.

And so you can't look at if you're going to search in the literature on this topic, there's no there's no term to search for.

And so I thought maybe it'd be useful if I try to suggest some terms at least.

And I suggest the term societal cognitive architecture for the general the general idea that societal systems are a cognitive architecture for society.

But then for the more specific

developing de novo systems to be good at facilitating societal cognition, I suggest the term SAILS, Societal Active Inference and Learning Systems.

I mean, maybe there's some other better term, I don't know, but I threw together this one.

So it's SAILS that I'm interested in developing, new designs of societal systems that

facilitating societal cognition.

So, you know, if one of these terms catch on, maybe then in the future we'll be able to, if we're interested in the topic, we can actually do a search on Google and we'll find, you know, a hundred papers or a thousand papers on some of these topics.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, just one quick note on that.

It points to the need for improved cognitive architecture, such as knowledge management tools that help us collaborate and find information semantically, like information is for our experience, because you're right, it is fragmented and therefore unproductive across truly different disciplines and different jargons, different languages as well.

Unscanned documents, things that are just only on someone's notepad, just it's all over the place.


SPEAKER_00:
Right, and sometimes a thing doesn't really exist until you name it, and then it sort of exists for the larger, it can exist for the larger society.

So I'm naming this because maybe if we name it, we can talk about it, you know.

Yes.

The other problem there is like when I go to, it would be much easier for me to just throw out a term like cognitive social, cognitive societal architecture.

And if people understood that term, then I wouldn't have to spend a half hour


SPEAKER_02:
to explain what it is that i'm talking about right so terms terms can help if we have a shared understanding of what their meaning is what what is not sales because it's a you know what is what's not part of the function of the body how do we differentiate what is apart from that instead of this just being the one-to-one wrapper around economics governance legal etc etc


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right, right.

Good point.

And I really my, my, my use of the term sales, I'm suggesting it for use, really in this de novo design, you know, process of creating new systems.

So quite true, the the, you know, the cognitive, the concepts of cognition that we've been talking about, they are universal,

So it is true that we're kind of focusing on just sales as a term for the kind of R&D project, R&D projects to move forward that might look at the de novo designs of new systems.


SPEAKER_02:
Just the pun, traveling salesperson.

It's a problem.

You know, it's a hard problem, actually.


SPEAKER_00:
The traveling salesperson problem.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, it is.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So with that, we are ready to move on to the actual talk.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Drum roll, please.


SPEAKER_00:
Drum roll.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

The second part, you know, this is a different media.

We're kind of spilling above and beyond what you've wrote in the papers because the three papers are the version of reference.

That's where people will cite.

But actually in this increasingly digitized and citable world,

Perhaps the things that you're sharing with us, as well as even the anonymous content that people produce on a jam board or live chat, like this all becomes part of how we produce our uncertainty and act.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah.

And, and hopefully it becomes part of the record and part of the useful record for, for moving forward on some of these concepts.

Okay, so part one was all about worldview, there was, you know, high level discussions, high level topics about what creates worldview, and how what kind of worldview would be useful in the setting for developing new systems.

And then now we're moving on to the more nuts and bolts of things a little bit more in the sense of why are we even motivated to transform and, and

we do want to develop new systems what kind of strategy you know what like it's it's not enough just to come up with some great design it has to be viable in the sense that it can be implemented there has to be some way to actually use these ideas actually live these ideas and if there's not then we're sort of wasting our time so strategy is

R&D program.

So yeah, so I'm going to be in part two, I talk about really, I try to argue a given narrative in part two, that I try to argue that transformation is prudent, given the risks we face, attractive given its potential benefits, and achievable, given the current political, financial and social constraints.

So that's what I hope to accomplish in this paper.

And that's what I hope to accomplish in this

this talk too.

All right.

So on the question of motivation, like why transform?

We touched on some of these ideas in our first talk.

But I would just like to point out that we face a host of extremely difficult problems, climate change being one of them.

Climate change, biodiversity loss, groundwater depletion, soils depletion,

poverty, financial uncertainty.

In that sense, debt might play into that role.

If you make a list of all the very serious problems that humanity faces, it's kind of a long list.

Migration, and then one problem causes another.

So climate change is certainly likely

almost certainly will increase the number of refugees trying to cross borders, people living without homes that are fleeing areas that don't have enough water or are not livable or things like that.

So one problem causes the other, and what everyone is fearful of happening is that you have this collection of 10 or 20 really serious problems, and then something happens to flare one of them up

And then suddenly that problem, you know, transfers to other problems.

And then you have, uh, just one, you know, like everything's connected.

So if one part of our global society gives sway, it could be that, uh, everything starts to kind of fall apart.

So, uh, there is a fear of that and there is a need to address these problems independently.

And then also in a holistic sense.

And I would like to emphasize that these problems we face are, in a sense, symptoms, not really problems in and of themselves.

They're symptoms of a failure of society up to today, a failure to address the needs of the society, a failure to reduce uncertainty, a failure to do exactly what we were talking about in the previous part of this talk.

Right, so climate change is because we fail to take action.

We've known about climate change for 60 years, I don't know.

I mean, like it's been in the scientific world, like in a major way, major agreement on the implications and the basic processes and what it means to society.

That's been talked about, there was, you know,

the scientific world was on this 30 years ago and talking about it and writing papers and having, you know, so, so we didn't, society didn't listen and it didn't.

And I would say it didn't listen for a reason because if it had listened to those warnings, it society would have had to have changed.

And there are elements of society that are doing well.

and are maybe not so interested in changing behaviors and especially changing power distributions, right?

So the people that, the powers that more or less guide society were not interested in dealing with our serious problems because they have gotten worse over the last 50 years or whatever.

These problems have amplified.

If you don't solve a problem, it tends to fester and get larger.

That's exactly what's happened.

Now we're at the period of not only will climate change, you know, is climate change going to affect the GDP?

That's the yes.

Or if not millions or billions of people, it's life and death for our species.

We have to deal with this in some kind of bold way or we won't have children on this planet in, you know, whatever, in 50 years, 100 years, 200 years.

Humans won't be a thing.

So that's how I say that because that's how badly society has failed us.

We are at the brink of falling off a cliff.

Maybe we already fell off a cliff and we just don't quite realize it yet.

What kind of healthy organism puts itself and commits suicide?

What healthy system commits suicide?

None, really.


SPEAKER_02:
Only the phoenix.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, only the phoenix, yeah.

And, you know, maybe it worked out for that one okay.

It sort of rose, I guess, and maybe we'll do the same.

But, you know, my point is that the serious problems we face are all symptoms of our lack of cognitive capacity at the societal level.

And there have been solutions to all these problems for decades.

distribution of power in society and they're just people weren't willing to do that okay so um so in this paper that well on this call for transformational change so i am i'm trying to i'm calling for transformational change right now but i'm not alone so this this idea of we need bold change this

most of the scientific world really and most of the global policy making world and a large section of the global public is all realizing that we are in deep trouble and we need to change not incrementally not slowly but rapidly and deeply and across every aspect of society so i'll just use the words this is uh from the 2019 global assessment from the

IPBES, the UN, as they, in their words, they say current national global programs are insufficient to avoid, you know, and they call for a transformational change.

They use the word transformational and they define it as a fundamental system wide reorganization across technological, economic, social factors,

including paradigms, goals, and values.

I mean, essentially, you know, enormous fundamental change in how we understand ourselves, how we understand the world, how we behave, what we do for a living, how industry works, how consumerism works, what products we make, how we recycle, like how much energy we use, how, where we get our energy.

So I think maybe, I don't wanna put words in the UN's mouth, but I think maybe they were really still kind of talking about, you know, like improving current systems.

steps within our governance systems we can take bold steps within our economic systems financial systems we can do better there's ways that we can do better I would like to very much agree with that there are ways we can do better we should we should I would I would put that under the category of reform we should do everything in our power to reform the existing systems because that is the quickest bang for the buck I mean we can do more that isn't imperative that we act and put our energies behind

reforming as best we can the existing systems, working within existing systems and reforming them so they can do a better job so that we can reach some kind of transformation even within existing systems.

But this proposed R&D program and my interests are beyond that.

So I'm not, you know, my interest here is not in reform, not in improving capitalism, for example,

or representative democracy.

It is in building de novo systems from the ground up that are fit for purpose as we've been talking about.

So, you know, that's what I mean when I say societal transformation.

I mean shifting to building, testing, and shifting to new systems.

And, you know, we're familiar with these kind of concepts when we download software in the software world.

Uh, there, the terms are usually, uh, updates.

So like, you know, I'm going to update my software, minor improvement.

I'm going to upgrade my software to a new version.

I'm going to get, you know, version four instead of version three.

So that's kind of like big reform.

I'm going to get an upgrade.

Then migration.

So I'm going to do, I don't even like this, this company or this product.

I'm going to switch to open source.

and I'm gonna use the Linux operating system or some other, I'm gonna do something else.

I'm gonna use some entirely new system because the old one really doesn't work very well.

So my focus is on this, you know, is on migration, the testing development and implementation of de novo design societal systems.

Okay, so I think, you know, and science driven,

attitude.

Okay, so lots of people calling for transformational change, and that's what this paper is about.

Transformation understood as migration to new systems.

On slide 12, I think maybe, I mean, others might disagree, but I think maybe this is the first series in the literature that, in the science literature, that really lays out an R&D program that aims to tackle this de novo design of new systems.

I don't, I've not seen any others that are kind of comparable.

So I think we're maybe, you know, paving new ground here, perhaps, at least I hope.

I want to emphasize something we talked about in the last talk, that this is, we're talking about second-order science as opposed to first-order science.

So first-order science, again, is what we normally think of as science.

Someone is doing experiments.

They're detached from the experiment.

The scientist is detached.

They set it up.

They let the experiment run.

They don't interfere.

They just record what happened.

And hopefully, they gain some knowledge from doing so.

Fantastic stuff.

Most of science is all first-order science.

It's wonderful.

But for these kinds of problems, for this kind of problem that

requires what is called second-order science and there's a in my series I cite the work by phase you know on this topic and that's a great article I recommend that to everyone it's in the paper so you can get it there but he describes what they actually said hey it's a long list of authors describe what they mean by a second-order science and why it's important and they just

learning to learn.

We're learning to build new systems that help us to learn and build new systems, right?

We want to excel at learning.

That's the whole concept of this.

We want a society that excels at learning and problem solving and adaptation, and we're

And we're in the process of learning to build new systems that produce this effect.

So it's kind of a meta learning science, meta learning process.

And just in general, the second order science is the focus is on process.

The effort is value driven.

And the scientists are participants along with stakeholders who together learn.

So it's quite different from first-order science, and it's exactly the kind of science I think that is necessary for this larger meta-learning project.

In the paper, I talk about six overarching systems.

I just want to say that's what we're focused on here.

So economic, governance, legal, health, analytical, and educational systems.

Those are the ones I've chosen to focus on.

And each of them can be split down further, like in my terminology, the economic system also includes a monetary system and a financial system and so on.

And each of these can be split down further.

So that's what we're doing.

We're trying to develop designs for each of these that are integrated, not just, hey, let's just build a new economic system and leave everything else and change.

We'll do the economic system first.

That's not the point of the process.

The idea is how can we build a


SPEAKER_02:
helps us to achieve these goals and it's really a nice dovetailing with development is what organisms do that's embryonic development or colony level development or the niche being modified so it's like research and development research information foraging um

whatever we want to think about information foraging to mean here with research or just search, but it's like we already have design latent within potentially even the structures we have.

So how are we going to pull out of the tailspin if that's what we're in to build towards developing a healthier trajectory?


SPEAKER_00:
That's right.

We're in the process of evolution, you know, and every organism is evolving exactly as you said and developing.

So we're just being a part of that.

And, you know, quite a sensible part of that, I might add, too.

It's kind of like, oh, we're faced with severe problems that we might have a masked eye off of humans or go extinct because of.

So let me think.

What would be a good idea?

Oh, let's think about doing things differently.

Let's try to build a different way to live our lives.

You know, that's just kind of like, duh, that's a good idea.

Let's find a better way to live our lives and be more cooperative and have a healthier world

That's an excellent idea.

OK, so this is kind of a warm-up to what's coming in the paper.

I speak a lot about local community.

And I just want to emphasize, or I want to explain what that means a little bit.

So for one thing, I call society an organism or a superorganism and a cognitive organism at that.

And by society, I mean really a society

I'm interested in local communities for some reasons that will become clear shortly.

Local community might be just like a fraction of a city, not even a full city and not even a political body, not like a formal political body, but a group of people who in this case are particularly interested in participating in trying out and field testing and using some of these new systems that we're talking about developing.

Uh, you know, let's say, uh, when I say, uh, local community, let's say, uh, a group of a thousand people or more could be, could be larger, but not, not necessarily even a city and certainly not a nation.

Okay.

So, um, so I said that the UN and others are, this is slide 13 that the UN and others are

have come out with strong language calling for transformational change, which I think, again, you know, for many folks involved there, I think maybe their idea really is more what I would call reform.

Again, very, very important.

But it might help here to talk about why reform might not be enough.

Like why, you know, if the UN and other agencies and

Other groups are really putting up some great proposals for reform and improvement of existing systems.

Why am I interested in developing new systems?

Why don't we just do reform?

If that'll do the trick, why bother with more?

And there's numerous reasons that I lay out in paper number two of why I think transformation, new system development is necessary.

And to start with,

And as we've kind of been saying here, you can look at the world and the problems that we face with climate change and biodiversity loss and others, and you can suspect that current systems are incapable, maybe incapable of preventing widespread catastrophe and securing our continued vitality.

Really, the report card doesn't look good for existing systems.

They've done a rather crappy job of protecting the human health and the environment to the extent that we now face perhaps in our lifetime or soon after perhaps a mass die off of humans or even extinction of humans.

So why would we think that they're capable now suddenly of acting differently?

good excellent to do reform i don't want to talk anyone out of the reform efforts because they're absolutely important but i am suggesting that maybe we should have a plan b in case plan a doesn't work out so well so uh you know transformation this is a this is a plan b in a sense and in the end might turn out to be better than plan a even if reform is useful and helpful plan b might turn out to be the better bet so you kind of catch it on both ends there

So I'll just talk about a few things I mentioned in the paper of why evidence of current systems being incapable of preventing a widespread catastrophe.

So one is the Paris Agreement.

And then this is quoting from one of the UN studies, I believe.

It says, ambitions are broadly consistent with cost-effective pathways that result in a global warming of about three degrees by 2100.

So in a practical sense, if the Paris Agreement were interactive, that's sort of where it would lead to.

It is clearly, it is maybe an important agreement, but not enough, not nearly enough, it looks like.

And if indeed we were to reach about three degrees centigrade change from historical levels,

That's already in the iffy category of like, you know, how do humans, do we even have a civilization if we reach three degrees?

You know, it's an iffy question.

Maybe we do, maybe we find a way to deal with it and get by, or maybe we don't.

Maybe that's already way too much.

And also, the reform efforts don't adequately address certain structural problems that we face.

income and wealth divisions in the world.

Most of the reform efforts are not looking at how we can not have billionaires, but rather have everyone more or less equally engaged in the economic sphere and in a sense, having economic power to make decisions in this world.

So even if reform efforts are useful and good, I hope they are, maybe they won't be enough and maybe they won't even touch deeply on some topics that really need to be addressed.

So I argue, this section covers several pages, but in the end I argue that even if reform efforts are useful and helpful and they're successful for what they're shooting for,

they're still likely to leave societies hampered in their capacity to learn and adapt with many unsolved problems to address.

For example, even right now, even at one, wherever we're at, I'm not sure what degree we're at right now over historical levels, but still below two degrees, maybe we're 1.3, I don't know what it is.

Already there's nations that are, you know, there's island nations that are not able to

handle this, you know, like people are already starting to have to relocate and every indication is that that's just going to become worse and worse.

So even if we keep it below 1.5 degrees or we keep it below 2 degrees, the warming, we're going to have severe problems, social problems, economic problems, environmental problems, ecologic problems, and somehow we're going to have to deal with this harsher world

than even harsher than today, you know, more dangerous than today and more strained than today, more stressful than today.

And I'm suggesting that the best way to deal with a future world that is stressful and uncertain, highly uncertain and difficult is to become really good at problem solving.

Isn't, I mean, that's how you would go about it.

That's, you would be, if you can, you would become really good

at acting in an uncertain world and making wise decisions so that you don't have to suffer any more than is necessary.

Yeah, so that's, you know, like there would be, even if reform is successful, it would still be useful to develop, to become better at problem solving.

And I think that there's great opportunity

as a whole society hasn't even really tried to become a good problem solver, like, you know, in a, in a focused science driven way, we've never really put our mind to this and we can put our mind to it.

And I think that would be tremendous improvements that we could make.

That's, you know, that's why I wrote the series is because I think we could do so much better than we're doing today, which is not very well.

Um, let's see anything else on this slide.

Yes.

Down in the lower right-hand corner, I have a kind of a long list of things that we need to do and I won't read it now, but you know, we basically have to remake everything from what we make, how we make it, how we use it, where it goes, how it's disposed of, how we treat each other, how we cooperate, who we cooperate.

I mean, just like deep transformation from across every aspect of human life and human social life.

So, uh,

you know, to me at least, it's inconceivable that existing systems could even come close to the level of transformation that is actually not only needed, but would be beneficial.

Like, it would be really beneficial if societies became good at problem-solving and adaptation.

And it's pretty much inconceivable, to me at least, that existing systems and

beneficial.


SPEAKER_02:
I think this is really great.

I'm just looking for a natural pause point for where we would want to be.

What do you think about doing 14, going through it, taking our time, and then

this r d program being the pickup point for our third session i know we're going slow you're going on some great boomerangs so it's awesome but let's walk through leaving somebody at the end of the second discussion what would an r d program be that would meet the scope and the type of these challenges and then three is going to be like you want to know what it is go there


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And I think for listeners, Daniel and I have been talking about, you know, there's a lot of material to unpack here.

So I think we're going to have more than three videos, but we'll figure out what the dates will be for them so that we can go through the whole thing, you know, carefully.

Perfect.

Okay.

So we'll end on slide 14 then.

And maybe to start, I would just

proposal for a new R&D program aimed at de novo development of new systems.

But other people might come up with another proposal.

Like, you know, mine maybe is just one of many possible ways to go about the R&D program for new proposals.

And I would welcome, I would hope even, that it would be fantastic if there were, you know, 20 projects happening around the world

I've aimed at this same thing and that we, and that each of these projects was cooperating with each other so that we can learn from each other and, and move forward, you know, in the most efficient and useful, most useful way.

So that's one of the reasons that I made this desert data list is like, what would be if other, if, if, if there's going to be multiple R and D programs, or even if it's just my, this, just this one that I put out,

know what what would be a good what what has to be included in the r d program you know what which which what should be there so that we would know that it's a you know like a reasonably complete one and so that we could we could compare r d programs so if i propose this one and someone else proposes another one we can compare say on number five uh number five develops new integrated systems that span all six of these major societal systems economic

if someone else proposes one that it's only focused on economic systems well there's a way to just distinguish between the two r d programs so that's uh that's that's part of my purpose here of laying this out and then it's also also the purpose that um you will see as you read the series that i i talk about each one of these so this is just in a sense it's a

It's a index to the larger series.


SPEAKER_02:
And also one point is that a scientist might say, you need to do A, B, and C to really study, you know, the mosquito's wing.

And then of course they measure A, B, and C. So of course they solve the mosquito's wing.

But actually you're laying out a protocol for evaluating policy across scales and then putting up almost like a retort to yourself, at least initially, that you believe could be held against this rubric.

like a report card and then again where a policy is better on 0.5 or 11 or whatever it be we can make that decision in a way or we can version the rubric so this isn't just setting the target or painting the target texas sharpshooter paint the target after you wrote the paper hypothesizing after the results are known harking this is like laying out where we do want it to go


SPEAKER_00:
Right, exactly.

Exactly.

And, and I hope that that we refined it together as a community refined this list so that we hone it better even.

Maybe there's some things I left out or some things I should have said, or things I said I didn't need to say who knows, but I'm sure it could be improved.

So we don't have much time and I won't go I won't go into detail on these but

Maybe I'll just, just to give a flavor, I'll just talk about a few scattering here.

So obviously, number one, if you're talking about an R&D program, it might help to actually provide some information about the scale of the intended effect.

I mean, are we thinking that this R&D program is going to build new systems for one particular city or for a nation or for whatever?

if it's successful, right?

What is the scale?

And what are the costs?

What are the risks?

How much money is this whole thing gonna take?

And we'll talk about that, money we'll talk about in the next talk.

Based on second order science, which I've mentioned already,

Number three, it has a theory of change.

Like, fine, you tested a new system, you built it, you get great computer simulation models, great.

Now, what do we do with it?

How would you ever take that idea and make it real, implement it in a real society somewhere?

How does that work?

And where is the blowback going to be?

Where is the pressure going to be against it?

What might go wrong?

So that should be in there, theory of change.

Number five, it develops integrated, I claim that it's important that it develops integrated systems across all six of the major ones, because if it doesn't, if you build a governance system independent from an economic system and you're still using the old economic system, it's not gonna work very well, because they're gonna be at odds with each other, not integrated.

Six describes the purpose of a siloed system.

What in the world is this supposed to do?

How do we know it even worked?

What have we measured fitness?

What was it supposed to accomplish and how can we evaluate it on what it did accomplish or what it's supposed to?

um how does cognition play like in this whole series as well focused on societal cognition maybe some other ph maybe some other r d program doesn't even use the word cognition maybe they have an entirely different way to think about what a society is and how it does and what the purpose is so if so you know it'd be good to say so uh makes the work freely available to the public so that

It's not a proprietary project at all.

Number eight, it develops flexible options that the public can choose from.

There is no one size fits all solution.

I mean, that wouldn't be very wise at all.

Societies have to have flexibility in how they act, what they implement, what they choose.

So hopefully the program would develop a smorgasbord of ideas.

possibilities that could be useful in different settings.

Number 11 addresses the cultural changes.

What kind of educational changes, for example, would be necessary to make this work?

There would be substantial ones, actually, because you build a new system.

For one thing, you would have to explain or educate people on how the new system even goes together and how it works and how would you know if it's not working, you know, all those kinds of questions.

Number 12, if new systems are implemented in multiple locations, is that information shared between them?

How does that work?

Is each independent or are they communicating or is this all part of a larger plan to have multiple tests going on at the same time or are those just independent things that come and go as they do?

Obviously, number 13, develop systems that are fair and just and that is reasonable.

And number 14, what are the expected impacts?

When you do simulations for this new system, how does it look for energy use and waste generation and climate change and biodiversity loss?

What are we going to get if we build these?

How is it going to go?

What is the likely outcome of these things?

So that's just a few ideas, a few topics that would be important to address in any R&D program, and I've tried my best to address them here.

And even in just three papers, you know, like some of these are addressed in just a few sentences or a few paragraphs somewhere in the papers because, you know, you would really need a book, I think, or a series of books to really do a thorough job on all of these.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, you know what I kind of saw almost when you have this list is like a GitHub or a versioned open source repository where people can fork the rubrics they like, they can add more challenges, they can go into detail.

What do you mean by fair?

What do you mean that they're just?

Well, those are things that we actually inactive inference we can get down to.

And that's not to say that we're going to be carving out the human.

It means that we're going to be designing for ourselves.

and for whoever's on board.

And just like the shipmakers make it for those who are on the ship, but the ship is part of society.

There's going to be a ship with sails.

So I think there'll be such interesting conversations because really you could...

fractal into yeah, seven, what is the role of information?

I mean, I went to a conference today on only a fragment of that.

So of course seven is going to be a big topic, but it's, it's, it's third order science.

Well, you did with laying out the second order criticism paradigm.

So it's quite interesting to read about and learn.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

You know, speaking of, uh, speaking of a repository,

At the very least, you need a language and a means of communications that you can convey.

If I have an idea for new systems, I need to convey that to the rest of the world in some way to convey it to you.

Maybe you have your own idea of what a new system would look like.

How do we convey that idea?

How do we convey a complicated idea to each other so that we know what each other is talking about, and then we can start to do tests on them or figure out which one works better in what situations?


SPEAKER_02:
a way to communicate a way to present the information so that we can understand what each other is saying just one kind of closing metaphor or at least thought that comes to mind is like let's say two people like a movie one person said i love the special effects the other one says the special effects were super cheesy i thought the story the other person says i didn't even i don't like movies but i like the book

So everyone can like the movie, and the point is they're aligned on action.

They might even want to hang out together.

They might be part of a fan club.

They might have a product related to the movie.

But if the problem is framed as, okay, come to consensus on why you like this movie, we cannot personalize the solution.

So everybody can have a different understanding of why they like the movie that's playing out in front of our eyes.

And if it's about which part of this movie do you like or not like,

we're going to be arguing a lot.

And if it's like, which movies should we watch?

Potentially that's a different question or how should we reduce uncertainty about the movie that we should watch?

There's a lot of ways to frame it that I would hope would be new.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think so.

I think so.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Maybe we should leave it there and we'll pick up more next time.


SPEAKER_02:
John, thanks so much again.

I'm going to just re-upload this video in case there's any weirdness with the live stream.

So it'll be high quality and just we'll be in touch about planning these upcoming sessions, but we will know that we will meet next week on April 20th at 3 p.m.

Pacific PDT for the third session of N of bleep.

Okay.

Sounds good.

See you later, John.


SPEAKER_00:
Peace.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye.

Bye.

## idO34jucRIw

SPEAKER_00:
Okay, hello and welcome to Active Inference Lab.

This is the third in a ongoing series of discussions between, I guess, Active Inference Lab and John Boyk.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc in California, and I'm going to be kind of

working through the Jamboard as we've done in these other sessions while John goes through his paper, some of the implications.

We can also raise up some questions from the live chat so people are totally welcome to leave questions in there.

Wait, actually, it's already sort of messed up or not sure.

I hope that it will work.

It looks like it's okay.

We're just sort of dealing with the streaming tech and I'll play with it once you start talking, John.

But yep.

I hope this is a fun discussion because the other ones have been awesome as well.

So I'll flip over to slide 14 from our second slideshow and let you pick up with some points from last time and let you know if anything is awry.


SPEAKER_01:
OK, sounds good.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
My name is John Boyk.

I'm a courtesy faculty at Oregon State University Environmental Science graduate program.

And our series of discussions is about a series of three papers that I recently published in the journal Sustainability.

And the topic is societal transformation.

um i think somewhere in the middle of this talk we'll show some links to those papers and uh and to my website where all this information can be found uh so we're do you have the slides up you want to put up slide 14. we're just going to jump in we're going to jump into halfway through the last talk we had a bunch of slides that we didn't get to so we're going to try to get to them

um now yep i'm there so i'll be following along but you just won't see it but we're good to go oh i won't see it okay all right okay all right so uh slide 14 is uh is a list of 14 desert data that i had proposed in this second the second paper part two uh i should probably say what the title of that series is the title is science driven societal transformation parts one two and three

So we were talking about part two last time, which was on motivation and strategy.

And we're going to continue with that now.

So in that part two paper, I had listed 14 Deseret data for what maybe could or should be in any R&D program aimed at societal transformation.

And throughout the series, I touch on all of these 14

I would just like to make clear that the three-part series is itself a proposal for an R&D program.

It's kind of an informal proposal to the world about a program that could be started.

And it is possible that other people have, other groups have other ideas of what kind of R&D program could be constructed.

And it could be that in the future, there's numerous R&D programs that are in operation that are all looking at this topic of societal transformation.

And I wanted to offer a list of points or topics that each of them might address.

And that way, at the very least, we could compare programs by comparing these 14 points.

um i just we we covered we went through him last time so i'm not going to go through him again but i just wanted to say a couple of things uh daniel i remember from our last conversation you had said something about um you know getting a a bunch of scientists together and maybe they won't agree on you know different aspects of this and there you know could be some

arguments for one point over another point or one approach over another approach and that of course that is true and that's fine and that's good there should be a variety of voices heard and considered in any R&D program

But I did want to make the point that the R&D program that I'm proposing, the concept is an evidence-based science-driven R&D program.

So suppose that, well, let me say that, that an evidence-based program is different than a popularity-based program.

It's not just that everyone gets to vote for what they want and the R&D program would go off in whatever direction everyone votes for.

In a sense, that's true because how else would you govern things?

But in another sense, it's not true because there has to be some science process.

With a design program, we have to be addressing the science-based aspects.

of it so um and that is largely driven by fitness purpose and fitness so the so all right um let's see


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Just continue going ahead.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

We're good?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

All right.

I was saying that there could be multiple R&D programs proposed by different groups, driven by different groups, but I would expect that they would all be based on some kind of science-based evidence approach.

So while each R&D program might have a slightly different way of measuring fitness, those discussions would be based on scientific evidence and reasonable evidence, as opposed to just a popularity.

We're good?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Working with tech.

Thank you everyone for standing by when it kind of flips out for a second.

We'll try to restart it like as soon as possible, but that's why we use the asynchronous modes of work because we're really lucky when we get to have synchronous time with the authors or with anyone, but the asynchronous and the updates on the comments are what really matter for this kind of a project, not someone's internal understanding or just a dialogue.

So thanks for bearing with us, everyone.

Go ahead, John.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, just to make that last point, is the R&D program that I've proposed, it's really a meta-framework for learning new systems, new system designs.

So the idea is that the R&D program would look at a wide variety of designs.

It would provide a way, a means for evaluation of different designs that different groups might come up with.

So that's all I wanted to cover on that topic, and then on to new information.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
We'll be able to do it.

Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, here is this.

This is going to work.

Give me one second.

Alright, thanks everyone for holding by.

I hope that you enjoyed this section.

The silence to think about these ideas.

Okay, so now it's called making lemonade.

Yeah.

Okay, so now I will spend some of the time when you're talking, john to just continue like trimming and stuff.

But we actually are back in the game.

So please continue on side 15 in two and go from there and then continue on.

So sorry about that.

First 15 minutes of fun.

Now go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one little thing.

My screen, my picture on my computer is quite dark, but I don't know if I'm coming through on everyone else's computer.


SPEAKER_00:
Looks good.

And I'm going to fix it on the other computer.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

All right.

All right.

So slide 15.

I was saying before the interruption that this R&D, just a few things on the R&D program.

It has, as I envision, a 50-year horizon.

So this is...

This is a careful movement towards societal transformation.

It's going to take a long time.

But studies will be, if it were funded, if it moved forward, studies would start right away.

Field trials would follow in the near term.

And those communities that choose to participate in field trials would see benefits far faster than other communities that are waiting.

So this is a 50-year horizon towards global scale or near global scale transformation.

So it's going to take a while to achieve change at that huge scale.

I also want to mention that the program involves the public in a variety of ways.

I envision this as a partnership between the public, especially between local communities and the global science community.

So there would be field trials, there would be a variety of studies, and the public can get involved in a variety of ways.

There would be lab studies, there would be surveys, there would be the ability for the public to input their ideas and their wishes and desires into the program.

So hopefully this would be a conversation, a multi-way conversation between the stakeholders that are involved.

And on the science side, I mostly want to make the point that the program could involve nearly every academic field that's out there, literally in A to Z. And at the bottom of this slide, I just list a few of the many fields that would be appropriate here.

Certainly some of the science fields we've been talking about, complex science and other fields like that, but also education, media, literature, linguistics, like you name it, and there would be a place, a need for participation in this project.

Okay, next slide, 16.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
We're good?

Yep.

All right.

So, you know, the idea that the science world would be actively participating in a program for societal transformation, this is, you know, in a sense, this is rather bold and new, novel.

There obviously are programs aimed at the study of

of transitions and developing the knowledge base for some kind of a societal transformation because many in the science world and the public policy world understand that bold change is necessary if we're going to

you know, avert the problems that we're facing due to climate change, biodiversity loss, and a number of other very serious social and environmental problems.

So big change, deep change is on many, many people's minds, but

Science, the role that science has, that many people envision for science is more of a knowledge, is more of in the traditional science world, knowledge gathering, knowledge production that would support the public and politicians in choosing new policies and various things.

So the idea that science would be involved in the actual R&D of making new systems, designing new systems, testing new systems, that's more of what is being called second order science, and that is fairly new in the science world.

So this is breaking new ground for

force for the science world.

So I have a bullet list here of various reasons why the science community might want to be involved in this.

So I'll just go through a few of these real quick.

First societal, the idea that society is a, can be understood as a organism, a super organism, if you will, and a cognitive organism at that is

timely and important and offers numerous opportunities to advance basic science knowledge.

So while in participating in a program of societal transformation, a great amount of science knowledge would be generated.

Next is societal systems are sophisticated, so the skills that are offered by the science community are extremely important.

They would have to be computer simulations, for example, and a variety of other very technical problems that would have to be solved in order for new systems to really work and for the design process to work.

So for that, you know, the science community is uniquely qualified to contribute to those effects.

The goals of transformation are ambitious.

This is the third bullet, and yet the time available for action is short.

So this has to be not tinkering, but moving in a direct and focused way towards societal transformation and the development of new systems.

And the science community can help with that to keep it all on track and moving forward.

I've already mentioned the second order science threshold, a threshold to a new way of doing science, and that can be useful and involve science more in the public sphere in the future.

And the next is that the science community is trusted by the global public, and then is a position to help focus public attention on pressing problems and solutions.

Next to the last one is the science community can offer a global perspective and global coordination.

So what we would not want are a whole bunch of experiments to occur for the R&D program and then to be forgotten and never picked up again or never integrated into the body of knowledge after that.

So the science community can offer a central, in a sense, a central focal point, a repository for data and for assessing data and for assessing the many experiments that might occur in such a R&D program.

And lastly, the science community can act as a powerful ally to the public in promoting and ensuring that transformation moves forward.

So I hope that the science community will find interest in this kind of R&D project.

That's really the purpose of the whole series is to offer the idea to the science community that we could do this together.

This could be a very important and timely service that the science community offers to the world.

All right, on to 17.

All right, so,

And I've said this before, but if I were the smartest person on the planet and I came up with a fantastic new design for societal systems, and for viewers that are new, by societal systems I mean economic systems, financial systems, governance systems, educational systems, legal systems, and the like.

If I were the smartest person, I came up with perfectly designed societal systems.

If there was no way to implement them practically, then my effort would have been wasted.

So any R&D program aimed at societal transformation has to have some kind of viable strategy for implementing any new designs that might be created.

And in the proposal, in the series, I offer a theory of change and a strategy for change that I call local global viral.

And the idea there is the local global is the idea that much of the work would occur in local communities.

And by local communities, I mean volunteer communities, volunteer individuals.

Who would develop who would participate in the in the in the testing of new systems and even the design of new systems and cooperation with and partnership with the global science community.

So we have the local global connection there and

And the viral connection is such that the concept of the, I use what I call a club model, and the concept of the clubs is that clubs would be implemented locally on a volunteer basis, as I mentioned, and they would be designed such to produce substantial benefits for the participants.

And if that is, if they're well designed and indeed the participants obtain substantial benefits, then the concept of the technology and the concept for the clubs and the club model and the systems that they embody,

would quite naturally spread from one community to the next.

If a club starts in, say, in a city, not as a city, but just even a small fraction of a city, that could be a club.

A club could be maybe perhaps a thousand people or more.

So just a subset of a city could start a club and be part of the whole R&D program.

A field trial could happen via a club.

And if the club really does produce benefits, then the next city over or the next community over is going to have an interest in starting it also because the benefits are substantial.

And at the same time, a club can grow in the participation rate and local area could grow.

So clubs can grow in size and they can replicate into new locations.

And that sets the stage then for viral growth.

And that it would be how the societal transformation and the use of new systems could spread to a near global levels over a period of 50 year horizon.

So clubs are designed to basically out-compete native systems.

And by native systems, I mean just the legal, economic governance systems that we are using today.

These new systems will obviously be designed for a purpose, and that purpose is to benefit and improve the quality of life and the security of participants.

And if they achieve that, they will outcompete native systems for the public's attention, engagement, trust, and respect.

So that is what they should do.

And if they do, then their use would quite naturally spread in a viral fashion.

Now, the clubs, I just want to say about the club level.

So we're not talking about, say, a family making changes.

This isn't really family-focused, the whole project.

It's not really focused at the business level, like a particular business, a new business model, for example.

It's not focused there.

And it's not focused at the city level, so a new city charter or a new way the city can operate to improve somehow.

It's situated in between the city level and the kind of family slash business level.

And I think of that as the Goldilocks level.

If a club was smaller, I would say this level, this in-between level, the middle ground sometimes I call it,

is the smallest level of organization that would allow a club to be viable, testable, self-replicating and effective.

So anything smaller than the club level, you could imagine, say, if we're just talking about a business, well, then that business has to compete in an environment against other businesses to survive.

And if those other businesses are, you know, not on the same, in the same, you know, doing the same thing on the same program, they might have advantages that the new business model might not have.

At the same time, if we went to a higher model, say a city level, trying to change things at the city level, well, that's suddenly really expensive and difficult, especially for a large city.

So there would be a lot of political blowback for trying to change things dramatically at the city level.

And the club level is such that you could implement new systems without having to deal with

the need to win elections or get approval from any public body, right?

So a thousand like-minded individuals can just start a club and no need for anyone else in the community to join in.

They can do it all on their own just as is.

So that's the idea is to reduce the barriers to participating in a club and in new systems and have it be such that new systems could virally spread over time if they show their benefits.

Okay, so just to make the point then, when I'm talking about societal transformation, the new designs that we're coming up with, I'm talking about the designs for a club, not the designs for a city, not the designs for a county, not the designs for a state or for a nation, but I'm talking about societal systems, designs for a club.

And the club will then demonstrate to the world in field trials whether these new systems work well as advertised or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Good point.

Because sometimes when we're talking about these complex multi-scale systems, it's good to make it clear that we're talking about policies, affordances, capacities that are at a certain level of analysis.

We're not invoking a nation state or something like that.


SPEAKER_01:
No, we're doing something.

We're working at a workable level.

You know, this is focused at a workable level.

This can happen.

There's really no reason it couldn't happen.

And obviously, getting the initial funding for the project is a big deal.

But once the initial funding happens, I don't see why this could not move forward exactly as or, you know, close to what is planned here.

Yeah, next slide.

Is this the end game vision?

18, is that where we're at?

Yep.

Yeah, OK.

So where is this all leading?

I've already said there's a 50-year horizon aimed at societal transformation on a near global scale.

But the real goal, obviously, the real goal in this is for societies, humanity, to use systems that are beneficial to them, that are most beneficial or widely beneficial to them.

I should say there's good reason to expect that a well-designed R&D program that engages local communities and the science world could come up with designs that are substantially better than our current ones.

I mean, if the goal is to increase quality of life and reduce uncertainty, if that was how you were judging a design of societal systems, then I think you would have to say that the current systems are

are failing.

They're terrible in the sense that we now face enormous stress and strain due to climate change, due to biodiversity loss, due to a host of interrelated problems, all of which were preventable, all of which have been talked about in the science world and in other communities for the last several decades.

And all of which had we taken action, we would not be under the risk that we are right now.

So if native systems have given us a world of extreme risk, then I think it would be fair to say that native systems are failing humanity.

And it would be hard to imagine that a sophisticated science-based effort with some of the best minds in the world, you know, focused on this topic could not do far, far better than current systems.


SPEAKER_00:
Just to connect it to one note from game theory, it's that the strategy has to be resilient along the way.

So it needs to have that kind of like introductory dynamics and getting off the ground and bootstrapping or not relying on lateral connections amongst clubs.

It has to be sort of an end in and of itself.

And then it also has to be a resilient strategy.

uh mixed strategy at 50 it has to be a resilient dominant strategy and so flexibility to play different strategies at different um phases of the uptake is critical that's why you've laid out a timeline as well


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah.

And that's also kind of related to your point is that there could literally be hundreds or thousands of experiments going on around the world in different communities of different system designs and different aspects of a particular design.

So you would want to be very flexible, very adaptable.

We're learning as we go, as a matter of fact.

and would change the strategy slightly as we go, and change the focus slightly as we go, adjusting to circumstances.

And starting small and growing organically helps you to do that, as opposed to starting big and perhaps failing big.

So in the endgame vision, the idea is that in the future, humanity is using systems that really serve humanity.

As we've talked about many times now, the view here is societal systems as a cognitive architecture, as a way of facilitating societal cognition.

And obviously, we would all like our societies to be good at thinking, good at learning, good at adapting, good at making decisions so that we can all enjoy the benefits of such.

So the end game vision is perhaps, I mean, here's a couple of scenarios for the end game vision.

The R&D program moves forward.

We demonstrate really useful designs that give substantial benefits to communities and the existing native systems slowly uptake those ideas and blend those ideas into their projects.

into their systems and then in the end, you know, the native systems become much better.

So that would be great.

That would be fantastic.

And another scenario is that native systems fail to adjust and change and uptake these new ideas.

And if that were the case, since the new systems are designed to earn the public's trust and respect and attention,

um they would it would seem reasonable that they would out compete native systems for the for the public's trust and respect and if that's the case then you know people would be using these new systems and relying on them more so than native systems so those are just two scenarios but you could you could imagine any number you know a number of other scenarios that might occur from such an r d program

But either way, at least with these two scenarios, either way, the end goal is reached of, you know, a large majority of the human population using systems that actually serve them and serve them well.

Slide 19?

Yep.

Okay, so a little bit more on clubs.

So by the time the first field trial occurs in the first system, and this could, you know, potentially the field trial, the first field trial could occur maybe anywhere in the world, practically.

But by the time that a community participates in a first field trial, it should be really clear what the expected outcome is, right?

A community does drive its systems.

A community makes decisions day to day about services, about waste control, about energy generation, about all kinds of things.

A community makes its own decisions.

But the general trajectory towards improved quality of life, improved well-being, improved security, improved economic security, reduced income inequality, like all of those things, there should be very few surprises as to what occurs in a field trial.

There would have already been numerous simulations that would have occurred before a first trial, first field trial already, before it even begins.

There would have been all kinds of user testing that would have occurred.

There would be all kinds of game playing with new systems that would have occurred.

So by the time the first field trial starts, this should be a trajectory of exactly what is predicted.

And so there should be few surprises for the field trials.

Now, obviously, that doesn't mean that something, you know, there might not be hiccups or whatever, but by and large, there should be very few surprises.

The community should know really what they're getting into, how the system operates, and what the expected benefits are in each year of participation.

A second item is that while the initial field trials might be really focused at the individual club level, as the R&D program progresses, there would be an effort to connect clubs via networks so that clubs themselves are participating in some kind of cognitive operation.

As a community of clubs that also needs to make decisions to learn, to adapt,

to make decisions together.

So the idea is that some of the same kind of approaches and technologies that are implemented at the club level could also be implemented at the network level.

So that the entire, the entire

you know, range of clubs and the individuals within clubs could all be participating in some kind of optimal cognitive system, right?

Making good decisions and opportunities for learning.

Next slide.

So why the club model?

I've already mentioned a few things.

It's in the Goldilocks level that allows for replication and viral spread.

But there's a few other advantages that I would like to mention.

First, we're talking about, when you think about bold change,

violent revolution is one kind of bold change.

So we obviously are not talking about revolution.

We're not talking about any kind of violence whatsoever.

We're talking about improving the well-being of communities at every step along the process.

So this is nonviolent, and that's one part.

Another part is that success is measured.

Success and progress are measured throughout the process.

So not only might you be doing better, but that would be validated through a variety of metrics.

This is an experiment.

The science world is engaged in this ongoing experiment to develop new systems.

So data would be gathered.

And everyone would know that you're doing better if you're doing better, right?

We would know if they're working or not.

Maybe that's a better way to say it.

The evaluation of system fitness and the quality of life for community are central to this whole project.

Again, because the clubs are operating in that middle ground,

that minimizes political opposition.

As I said, any group can form a club so that you don't need a city's approval for this.

You don't need a nation's approval for this.

This is just a civic club.

So a civic club can start nearly anywhere in most countries or in most democratic countries.

And so you don't need a vote.

And this is really important because

I am speaking to the global science community here, and I'm inviting the global science community to participate, but I don't expect that everyone, all scientists will be interested in this, nor do I expect that all individuals in the general population would be interested in participating in a field trial or

or anything like that.

As a matter of fact, I would expect that most people in any given city will have no interest in this at all.

But that doesn't matter.

Because again, all it takes is a thousand people in your city or your area to start a club,

That club shows benefits.

It quickly becomes clear to others that this is a very useful program.

Incomes are rising.

Incomes are stabilizing.

Quality of life is improving.

The club feels more empowered to make decisions that affect its future.

There's a stronger sense of community.

There's a better ability to deal with problems as they arise and find long-lasting solutions.

So on numerous levels, quality of life and environmental quality should increase, information should increase, transparency should increase, democratic participation should increase.

And those are all really attractive characteristics if indeed the club model provides that.

So if that's the benefits, then again, the idea will spread from one community to the next and grow within different communities.

And it's not necessary that...

that a large percent of the population jumps on board on day one.

It's just not necessary.

There must be, I would argue that even today, if we looked around, there would be a community of 1000 people who would be interested in participating in a field trial.

And the first field trial, of course, is still some years away.

The program isn't even funded yet.

So by the time we get to the point where we really need a community to run a field trial, I imagine that will be quite easy.

As a matter of fact, I would expect numerous communities to offer themselves as participants for the first field trials.

um this just a few more points here but uh the city whoever in in whatever city the first field trials occur they're likely to have beneficial spillover effects so uh you know tax revenues might rise for example uh other other spillover effects from the club might help the city at large so you know maybe even cities would welcome such a thing if it's going to improve the quality of civic life

for those who participate and for those who don't participate.

This club model is opposed to, say, going big, to changing, for example, the US economic system or the global economic system on day one or in a short amount of time.

This local global viral strategy is far less costly, far less risky, and far more flexible.

We're talking about starting small, bootstrapping, or growing organically.

That all can be done on a practical budget, as we'll talk about shortly.

As I mentioned, it allows for parallel testing.

Numerous field trials in numerous countries or cities could be happening all at the same time.

As far as cost goes, what would be the cost?

Well, it's a little hard to say because the program isn't really developed yet.

But this is just a kind of a guess on my part.

But I would think that in the first few years, the cost might be less than $10 million a year to get this started.

And then in subsequent years, still in the first decade, the cost might be on the order of tens of millions of dollars.

Now, that is, you know, in a certain sense, that's a lot of money.

But in a certain world, that's a lot of money.

But in another world, that's peanuts.

So this is about the same cost as a modest size or a good size startup, you know.

That this level of funding is available in the world.

It's this is not a crazy cost.

And I argue that, you know, with this modest cost, we could really change the trajectory of humanity here.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
That's it for part two.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, that's it for part two.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

So we will continue this talk about part two in our next Jamboard.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'll add the new link and we're now on slide two of Jamboard three.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Good.


SPEAKER_01:
So the slide two is just where you can go for more information.

So if you'd like to know more about the proposed program, if you would like links to all the articles and links to all the previous videos that we've made and that I've been involved with, you can find them all on principledsocietiesproject.org.

All right, slide three.

So there's a few remaining topics from part two that I'll talk about now.

Some opportunities outside of clubs, a little bit about fitness metrics, and then some final thoughts on part two.

Yep.

So we've already talked about opportunities in clubs, which could include, for example, increased income and higher quality of life and a bunch of other material benefits, material and social benefits.

But there's also some opportunities that could occur for those outside clubs.

And as I mentioned, clubs sit at the midway level between the kind of family slash business level and the city level.

And both of those levels are already well developed.

And, you know, there's an enormous amount of revenue there.

Attached to both of those levels, the middle ground is not yet organized, but as it organizes I would imagine that revenue opportunities are you know similar to those at the city level and those at the at the family slash business level.

So the R&D program would help to organize this middle ground, the club level.

And some of those, there's a little bit of evidence that such organization is already happening.

For example, is it called, what is the app called?

The neighborhood app?

The name escapes me right now.

But there's an app that is widely used and is used by millions of people in the US at least.

about communicating within your neighborhood and sharing information within your neighborhood, right?

So that's already a big business.

That app alone is a big business.

Cities are also developing community energy supplies, community solar, and that's just another way that this middle ground is organizing.

And if the R&D programs goes forward, there would be a tremendous amount of organization happening within this middle ground.

So that opens up opportunities for consultants, for example.

Most of the work in developing the R&D program, the tools and technologies needed for field trials for new systems,

That would mostly be open source, you know, publicly available knowledge and information.

But it could be that businesses, consulting businesses or other businesses could provide services to new clubs, could provide... These could be training services.

They could be, you know, like...

Internet services or any other kinds of services that would help clubs get started.

And I imagine that could be a big business as this moves forward.

Maybe a good model for that is Red Hat Incorporated, which provides services related to the Linux operating system, provides services to businesses.

Related to Linux, Linux itself is an open source product or open source technology.

And Red Hat, which is an enormous company, I don't know if it's a, I see a billion dollars in tax revenues recently.

So this is a very, very large company operating on top of an open source stack in a sense.

And the same could be, similar opportunities could occur for businesses who want to work in this consulting or service providing space.

Another opportunity is for cities and other governments because of tax revenues.

Later, I don't know if we'll get to it in the next session, but maybe in the next next section of these discussions, we'll get to the simulation model that I published on what I call the LIDA framework, Local Economic Direct Democracy Association framework.

That simulation is just illustrative of

a potential kind of a prototype new societal design focused on economic system.

But in the simulation that occurred, the simulation was for Eugene, Oregon, using census data for Eugene, Oregon.

And the simulation occurred over a 28-year period.

But by the end of that 28-year period, let's see, I've added down there just a few words about

what that provided but a billion in tax revenue right right right which was more than double the initial tax revenue so potentially this is a you know could be in a sense kind of a windfall for local governments city governments and county governments for for tax revenues

And then finally, there's an opportunity for large investors and that we are looking at a future world that is gonna be very stressful because of the implications of climate change, the effects of climate change, biodiversity loss and other social environmental problems.

So if it happens that there's a shortage of good investments to protect your money, the club model and the club process and the R&D program might become, they might be seen as safe havens for parking money until things change.

And if that's the case, I could imagine that some institutional investors who desire to make social investments or who see the wisdom of making social investments could invest in this whole process.

And of course, that would provide funds for developing the club model and helping the club model to spread and grow.

Yeah, who knows what is going to happen in the stock market as the ravages of climate change approaches.

And maybe this club model idea could really actually help large investors by providing a safe haven for their investments.

And I'm talking social investments.

I'm not talking highly profitable investments that some might be used to, but I'm talking about social investments where it's invested at a low expectation of a profit.

Okay, slide five.

That's cool.

Okay, so just a little bit on fitness metrics.

We've been mentioning them all through these talks.

I just wanted to say that they serve several purposes.

For example, fitness metrics, the information gathered about fitness metrics.

So for example, just to name a few fitness metrics, could be family income, could be education levels, could be water quality, air quality,

I mean, you name it, there would be potentially hundreds or thousands of topics to collect information on.

So this information could help a club assess its own status.

How am I doing?

How are we doing?

You know, you need information to answer that question.

How are we doing?

Well, we can say that we are doing blank.

You know, we're doing so well or so poorly or whatever the case may be on education, on environmental quality, on economic security, on all these different issues.

Second is this information helps clubs to solve problems.

We have, for example, maybe the problem is focused on economic security.

How do we solve this economic security problem?

Well, we need information.

We need to know how we're doing right now.

How were we doing last year?

So that we can make good decisions for solving these problems that we're facing right now.

Metrics are also useful for assessing club and system design.

Again, clubs are built for purpose and are supposed to function successfully for purpose and achieve the aims that they were designed to achieve.

And all of that to assess club fitness and to assess how a club design is doing requires information.

Another use of information is just informing members.

So everyone has questions about, you know, just day-to-day questions in their life.

You know, what career should I choose or, you know, where can I buy fresh strawberries today or whatever, you know, whatever information that individuals need in living their day-to-day lives and running their businesses day-to-day.

The information gathered by a club could help them to make better decisions just in their own personal life.

And then lastly, the data assessed would just be a windfall for basic and applied science.

In a sense, we're talking about a large repository of longitudinal information that follows individuals and families and businesses through their life and how they're doing their quality of life as decisions are made and as the club makes decisions, as they make individual decisions.

That information would just be gold for understanding, you know, societies better, understanding clubs better, understanding health better.

You know, then that information, there's only a few small repositories like that today.

So we're talking about just a really a gold mine for science and basic science and applied science if this moves forward.

Obviously, there would be personal, you'd have to protect personal data in all of this, but that could be done.

And just a few words about how these fitness metrics and data gathering system would be different from what's already done.

Already, for example, the census collects information, and the Sustainable Development Goals, SDGs, are proposing a collection of data at the national level.

And all of that data for the census and for SDGs, it touches on some of the same topics like quality of life and education and economics.

And so some of the large topics are similar

But there would be many, many differences between this kind of data collection and the existing programs.

So just a few differences.

This would be a larger and more detailed set of information.

It'd be collected and managed at the community level, not at the national level.

It would be about local conditions, so specific for local conditions rather than, say, national conditions.

forecasting other kinds of models are integrated into this repository.

So this would be a, you know, an intelligent, the aim is here an intelligent data gathering system.

It would be part of, you know, forecasting metrics into the future and things like that.

And obviously the club is designed to serve a different set of purposes and in particular purposes related to community cognition, societal cognition.

Lastly, clubs would collect information on a far more frequent basis.

So some survey questions are asked every few years.

Sometimes every year, sometimes every few years, sometimes every five years.

And the SDGs, I think, are collected mostly on an annual basis.

So this is on a perhaps, you know, some data would be gathered minute to minute or hour to hour or day to day.

So there would be a far richer and much richer collection

higher quality data set that would be that communities would generate.

And the basic idea is a community needs to know what's going to happen to me like a community needs to know what's going on.

Where did we come from?

What's going on?

Where are we headed?

What should we do?

And to answer those kinds of questions requires rich data.

And that's exactly what would be proposed here.

Community could collect rich data about itself.

So it would know how it's doing and what's going to happen.


SPEAKER_00:
If I could also add one comment there, with active inference type models, we can have a rich or deep generative model, even if we have sparse data collection initially.

And then we can ask what kinds of collection of what type of data or what type of modeling or what perturbation

would make sense given our generative model, or how can we differentiate between two generative models or two hypotheses at play?

So the richness can be specified upfront.

We don't need to just grab what we can see in terms of data.

We can actually be principled in terms of what information is pursued.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

As we've already said, part of the concept behind active inference is decision making under uncertainty.

And obviously, we're talking about a community that doesn't know its future and isn't sure what's going to happen next because no community understands its future very well.

And especially in today's world is very uncertain about what's going to happen next.

Will there be enough food for us next year?

Will there be enough clean water for us next year?

I mean, these are some big questions, but there's a million little questions.

And so somehow a community has to make decisions under uncertainty.

And that's really, you know, what the point of active inference is, is how that can occur.

And then touching on a point that you just raised, Daniel, is

You know, active inference is a way to make steps in cognition, right?

It's a flow of information processing, decision making, action, information flow, decision making, action.

So it naturally lends itself to an ongoing process of learning.


SPEAKER_00:
And also a multi scale one.

So there's a multi scale learning, just like you said, some are one year questions, one day, one hour, there's multiple ticks to these models that we've seen nested models at different timescales.

Cool.

Right, right, right.


SPEAKER_01:
I also want to mention too, is when you know, when we talk about models, sometimes we might be thinking of compute, say computer models, and that's fine, you know, computer miles, computer models can extend the, the index, its extension of the human capacity for processing information.

But you can imagine, too, that individuals do process information.

They learn themselves about their world.

what might happen next and what they expect if certain decisions are made.

So part of the flow of information and the processing of information at the club level is to ask people what they think will happen if we do this.

What do you think will happen if we enact this rule or put our funding priorities over on this topic?

What is going to happen if we do that?

What's going to happen tomorrow?

What's going to happen next year?

What's going to happen to my grandchildren if we make this decision today?

I mean, these are questions that humans can take a stab at, you know, can answer to the best of their abilities.

And we might also imagine that certain humans are quite good at it.

You know, just because certain that we all have talents in different areas.

So, you know, this is not just about logic and computer models.

This is also about engaging the human spirit and the human heart and in directing a path towards a better future and making decisions that lead to a better future, both in the near term and in the long term.

Nice.

All right, so some final thoughts to part two.

I've already mentioned that it seems already that there's enough public support for this because it doesn't require a lot of public support to get off the ground.

Again, just as far as the science community goes, I imagine this could move forward if just dozens or a hundred or something like that scientists were really interested in this topic, I imagine it could get started.

And if just one community somewhere in the world is interested in perhaps doing a field trial of any new system once it's developed, I mean, that's really enough.

So we're talking about a tiny fraction of the world population that would have to be involved in this to get it off the ground.

And just like any new technology, the iPhone or, you know, like it doesn't, once you build it and you demonstrate that it works and it brings, it reduces people's uncertainty about what's going to happen next and it empowers them to make decisions that improve their quality of life and improve their security going forward.

then the rest is history, I think.

That's how I imagine this would work out, is you just demonstrate a better way, and it has such benefits that it just spreads.

So to get it off the ground, just a fraction of the world would need to be involved, a fraction of the population or a fraction of the global science community.

But once it gets rolling, then I think people will actually jump out of the woodwork to be a part of this, because it's like, who doesn't want a better world that is demonstratively better than what we have now?

All right, so there seems to be enough support.

There's various groups working on similar kinds of topics about, say, for example, transformation and other topics like that.

So it's hard for me to imagine that there wouldn't be enough support to move this forward if there were funding.

Funding, obviously, is the big thing to get over right away.

But if there were funding, I think this would go fine.

Another question mark I have at the bottom is, you know, it's a good question.

Would transformation actually be easier than reform?

I mean, in reform, you're asking corporations, for example, large corporations, to change their behavior, even to change how they measure success of their endeavors.

For example, by including more social metrics in addition to just revenue metrics.

You're asking power, as we'll talk about soon enough, you're also asking people, those with concentrated power to distribute that power to the rest of the world.

And, you know, this is a big ask.

Reform requires some big actions by big players.

And that's great.

I mean, reform is absolutely necessary and every effort should be made to move reform forward.

We might not survive without reform.

It's especially good for the short term to get things, you know, improve conditions and improve our trajectory in the short term.

But in the long term, transformation is necessary.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I ask a question?

Yeah.

You mentioned funding being a rate limiting step.

So what would you spend money on?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, well, as a couple of slides ago, I mentioned that it might cost about whatever, maybe less than 10 million or around 10 million a year for the first few years.

But there has to be a variety of things would have to happen just to get the program going.

You know, there would have to be conferences, there would have to be

some kind of staff to handle the program.

There would have to be some early studies done, like the first studies would have to be funded.

A lot of the funding would actually just goes towards studies, but studies about what the public's opinion of transformation is,

How the idea of transformation is seen, for example.

Simulation studies showing potential benefits.

There would be a slew of work that would have to occur.

And we're talking about work by professionals, scientists and otherwise.

And that just costs money.

10 million is actually not much.

That's a small team.

to get things off the ground and it would cost about that there could also be funding for arts projects funding for literature funding for stories about what a transformed world would look like so you know works to to to bring the idea of the potent you know like the potential of trans

To tell the public that we actually can, there's a path.

We can transform.

We could live under different systems.

And what would that be like?

What would that look like?

What would that feel like?

What would we, you know, how would that be?

You know, that's like a, there would be lots of art things and music things and literature things and media things that could support that in addition to all the science-based efforts.

So I don't think...

There would be a few things you could do without funding.

There could be maybe a few studies that you could kind of squeak by and spare funds or something.

But without substantial funding, I don't think this would really go too far too fast.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Well, that brings us to...

our our real topic part three nice uh so part three is focused on design and when i say design i mean high level design concepts not not nitty gritty how would you do this how would you do that but

High-level design, there's a few things that I talk about in this paper.

The paper itself is a narrative on the topic of de novo design, you know, design from scratch of new systems.

Obviously, as we've said many times now, the society views it as a superorganism and its societal systems as a cognitive architecture.

So in that sense, the goal of design is to facilitate cognitive societal cognition through a better architecture.

I spend time on a few topics in this paper on attention, communication, self-identity, power, and influence are all discussed.

And I also talk about prototypical societal system design.

This is the LIDA framework that I mentioned just a minute ago.

I don't think we're going to get to the LIDA framework.

I'm sure we won't get to the LIDA framework today.

And there's a lot to say about that because that is...

As far as I understand, it's still the first simulation in the science literature about how an integrated system might function.

So there's much to say about that.

And I don't mean to say that, you know, the whole R&D program is aimed at the leader infrastructure.

It's not.

Or leader framework.

It's not.

But those concepts could be useful in developing other ideas for societal systems.

And at the very end of the paper, I highlight some design considerations.

So we'll get to those maybe in two, at least two sessions, two or more sessions here.

Cool.

Slide eight.

Yep.

Okay, so I just wanted to say a few more words about, you know, reform versus transformation.

So there, as I mentioned, there are loud voices at the UN and even in governments, national governments, state governments, local governments, and certainly in the general public and certainly in the science community calling for bold change.

really radical change to avoid this cliff that we're hopefully not going to fall over here, related to climate change, related to biodiversity loss, and a host of other social and environmental problems.

And, you know, just to kind of

emphasize how dangerous our situation is, it is not clear if humans will go extinct with all the other extinctions that are happening.

And I don't mean extinct in a thousand years.

I mean, like, will there be, will there, at least, will there be a civilization, any sensible kind of, any civilization that we're used to, will that exist in

Who knows, 10 years, 20 years, 50 years, 100 years, you know, like our future is highly uncertain because we have not addressed deep problems that have been with us for many decades.

We've allowed them to grow worse.

And now we are all at risk, at risk of just lower quality of life or at risk of mass die off of humans and at risk ultimately of human extinction.

So there's lots of voices calling for bold change, and that bold change can be seen in a couple of ways.

The typical way to see it is reform of isolated societal subsystems.

There's a lot of focus, if you just read the news, there's a lot of focus on green energy, for example, using solar-powered energy.

things like that better trans you know electric cars rather than gas gasoline engines that's all great again all of this stuff is wonderful but i would i would offer that that there's something really missing from this kind of assessment and that is the larger picture the the the the the meta level uh they're sometimes called in the mlp of the multi-level perspective gills it's called the

the landscape level or the regime level.

And I would say that we have to address that level if we're gonna really solve our problems, if we're really gonna develop, if our systems are really gonna act well as cognitive systems, then we have to address the systems level parameters and characteristics.

So right now the focus of all the work that's being done in sustainability and this bold, the idea of bold transformation

almost all of it is focused on this kind of meso, in between level, say the energy infrastructure or the transportation infrastructure.

And this paper and this whole series instead is really focused at the landscape level, the large level, the whole systems level.

Okay.

I just wanted to make that point clear.

And okay so now now I you know we're we're already in part three of the series and i've i've i've listed six systems that are that are six you know Meta systems or landscape level systems that i've that i'm interested in economic political legal health science and education.

But in the first few pages of this paper, I finally say what that actually means.

So I'm basing my definition of a societal system on what's called a function system.

And there are citations there by Roth and Schultz and others about what a function system is.

It comes out of social systems theory.

But they list three characteristics of a function system.

It has to be observable and not a subsystem of other societal systems.

So the economic system is an entity in and of itself, not a subsystem of other systems.

It involves a communicative system whose operations refer to a society and manifests the functional perspective at work.

So Roth and Schultz identified 10 function systems.

And I would say that six of these I'm calling the overarching systems, the economic, political, legal, and so on.

In parentheses there, I have their functions.

So the function, the one word function of the economic system is distribution.

The one word function of the legal system is standardization.

The health system is restoration and so on.

The education system is formation.

There's four other function systems that Roth and Schultz identify, art, religion, sport, and mass media.

And I do talk about these, but I talk about them more indirectly.

So that's what I mean by a function system.

And I also use the word, that's what I mean by a societal system.

And I also use the word institutions throughout the series.

And it's worth spending just a little bit of, spending a little time describing what I mean here.

I use the term in two senses.

One is just concrete organizations, for example,

a tax institution inside of a governance system, for example.

But the second meaning is more broad.

It's more along the lines of a social institution.

And this is kind of interesting because

Grabner and Gobani define social institutions.

They give a little blip there.

Codophile systems of social structures and particular norms and rules that incline individuals to act in specific ways.

And interesting, the idea, this is, you know, they've developed these ideas apart from active inference, but the language is not so dissimilar because they talk about institutions as constraining and enabling people to act and coordinate in complex and uncertain environments.

They stabilize the expectation of individuals about the behavior of others.

and thus the institutions allow individuals to offload some of the cognitive burden that they would otherwise be required to compute.

If there's some kind of social norm and I expect you to behave in a certain way under a certain circumstance, I don't have to spend a lot of thought figuring out what you're going to do next as I go about my life.

I can just assume that you're going to

act according to the norm and then that's a whole lot of work that i don't have to do to to forecast what i think you're going to do so uh institutions allow individuals to offload some of the cognitive burden and uh and and anticipate the state of play and the beliefs of others so obviously that's that's related to active inference right active inference is uh

You know, when we talk about forming, you know, structuring a society to reduce uncertainty, one way to do that is to develop a set of norms that everyone agrees to or everyone follows or mostly follows.

So that the uncertainty about what's going to happen next is reduced.

So developing institutions, if they're quality institutions, actually helps them to reduce free energy and expected uncertainty.


SPEAKER_00:
I think there's a few dimensions to this and it would be fun to unpack with what does it look like to have the active inference institution?

What does that mean as far as the operating procedures of the internals of the business versus how the stakeholders interpret it, how it's communicated?

So how it actually plays out will be something we're just exploring.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah.

And when I say institution institutions, I'm, you know, I'm talking widely, so financial institutions, you know, social institutions, cultural institutions, and so on.

And I'm suggesting that they can the institutions can be viewed through the lens of active inference and may be improved by understanding, you know, how human cognition works and how group cognition works, we might be able to improve our institutions.

Just some reminders from our previous talks about the goals and purpose of the R&D program and of purpose of an organism itself and thus the purpose of a societal system that serves a group of organisms, a society.

So the goal of transformation from this view is to develop and implement systems that can best facilitate societal cognition.

So that's the goal.

We have metrics to assess whether new design is better or worse than some other design.

And importantly,

If we weren't thinking about cognition, if we were just thinking about conditions, we might say the goal of transformation is to improve education levels or improve diets or improve quality of life in some way or improve economic security or any number of things like that, all of which are fantastic or good.

But once we bring this new idea of societal systems as cognitive architecture into play, then we're talking about the conditions, such as clean air, clean water, being the outcome of a decision-making process.

So the focus starts to shift to the primary, the primal goal of quality cognition versus the secondary goal of what quality cognition brings.

Quality cognition at the societal level brings clean air and clean water and low uncertainty and higher good education and freedom and any number of other characteristics, conditions you might want to list.

So it is important that by looking at societal systems as a cognitive architecture, suddenly we have a much richer understanding of not only how a society works and how decision-making in a society works, but also we have new metrics by which we can measure the success of a societal system.

So those would include cognitive metrics.

data metrics information metrics processing metrics you know all kinds of metrics so that's a little bit on on goals of transformation and the goals of the program and a little bit on the purpose the purpose of the program and the purpose of a of a new design right

I just want to say that the purpose of a design is both aspirational and functional.

We've already talked about design as the last step in the process of worldview, leads to purpose, leads to fitness metrics, and then finally to some kind of system design.

So in that process, in that process, obviously, uh, uh, purpose is, uh, is functional, like, you know, everything else, practically everything else depends on purpose, you know, or many things depend on purpose.

But beyond that, having an explicit purpose for a club, say, you know, like for a particular community, a clear statement of useful purpose can actually help in and of itself.

to a shared purpose can help to unite individuals and focus attention on common causes and encourage cooperation.

If we all know why we're doing this together, if we all know what we're doing and why we're doing it, and that purpose is to improve our collective quality of life and improve the environment, well, then it's gonna be a lot easier to get people to come together and talk and unite behind a shared purpose.

So in this sense, a purpose itself could aid societal cognition, right?

Societal cognition depends on cooperation, depends on trust.

So just having a purpose can aid in societal cognition.

And as a counterpoint to that, what is the purpose of our current society?

We have these native systems of governance and

economic systems, you know.

So what is the purpose?

What is their purpose, right?

What is the purpose of an economic system?

You know, I mean, we could debate that, right?

But I would say that if you just take things at face value, one purpose would seem to be

to promote revenue and sales and consumerism.

And if that's the purpose, if that's part of the purpose of an economic system, then why would, you know, it's hard to get behind that.

You know, it's hard for a whole society to say, oh, that's wonderful.

Let's get behind consumerism because it's so destructive.

Okay, so a little bit on goals and purpose and onto the next slide.

This is just a quick review of active inference.

Maybe I don't even need to say this because we've gone over it a few times, but essentially, you know, the short view is that we can view action cognition as an uncertainty reducing process.

So that's what this is all about in a nutshell.

And via the active inference mechanism, we take in observations, we update our models, we learn, we take actions that can reduce our uncertainty, either explorative actions that bring in new information, epistemic actions, or goal-directed actions that actually immediately or in the short term act to improve our situation.

So it's all about reducing uncertainty.

And especially it's about reducing the uncertainty of essential variables.

And this is, of course, you know, this is a rich topic in and of itself.

What are the essential variables of a society?

I mean, you would imagine that in some way they would include clean water and food and sufficient food and clean air and shelter and all those kinds of things.

But as we talked about earlier in the last discussion, we talked about maybe eight or so core human needs that include affection and freedom and a bunch of other core human needs.

So we're complex organisms and we have complex needs and these essential variables, the variables that really matter, are themselves a complex set of variables.

And if we focus our attention on addressing this question of uncertainty about essential variables, that almost means by definition we're doing what I like to call solving problems that matter.

problems that matter are the problems that really relate to the essential variables about how are we really doing?

How are we going to do tomorrow?

How will we do in ten years?

Yeah.

So

So we'll just read the last sentence of the last block of text I have there.

This is by Badcock.

And they phrase, they're speaking about active inference.

And the active inference plays out at the social institution level.

And they say that the elegant idea that we can operate together to minimize collective uncertainty stands to cast a new light on classical social phenomena.

And that's about it.


SPEAKER_00:
In a nutshell, that's it.

And to draw one point on that in contrast to, for example, reinforcement learning based approaches or reward maximization based approaches, it's almost like you have the Gaussian distribution.

It has a mean and a variance.

And the reward learning is like, let's shift the mean up as much as possible.

I mean, isn't the average income right now in US dollars higher than ever?

Well, maybe.

But then if you think about what the dollar means and how the dollar is distributed, then the average doesn't really tell you too much about the distribution.

So active inference is about reducing your uncertainty on a specified generative model.

So somebody might think I think the distribution we might want to see this type of distribution, this shape or this kind.

And that's a discussion to have.

And then we can reduce the variance around that.

and let the mean fall where it may.

So it's very different to have a reward highest as possible because having high expectations, but an unstated and often unformalized variance can lead to some ridiculous outcomes like the St.

Petersburg paradox and other investing fallacies, let's say.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, good point.

So your point was that reinforcement learning is aimed at, it's not really necessarily a probabilistic approach.

And you will have to, really ought to include the distribution of whatever targets you're looking at in order to get a better idea of what's a good decision and what's not a good decision.

Absolutely.

Another difference between RL and active inference is that the programmer, whoever is designing the experiment or whoever is coding the robot or whatever,

has to decide in advance what the, what the, what the, what the rewards are for certain actions.

So, you know, you fall through a trap door, negative 10 points, you, you, you, you get the, you win the chess game, you know, positive 10 points or whatever the game is.

And active inference allows the, the agent to learn goals as it goes, learn the world as it goes and make, change its,

change its priorities as it goes, which is exactly what humans have to do.

We have to be learning as we go and changing our perspective and changing what our goals are and what we're valuing.

We have to change that on the fly in order to maneuver in a highly uncertain world.


SPEAKER_00:
And if I could add one more point on that, and this was expanded upon by Noor Sajid and Philip Ball in one of our previous discussions, that relationship and the learning of the cues in the world can be basically semantic and arbitrary.

So sugar isn't just always simply a reward.

for the human in the environment.

Like right now I don't feel like having sugar, so it's not part of my preference vector.

So with active inference type models, we can separate out, okay, what's on the table in terms of our current affordances, how about future affordances?

What are our current preferences and how sure are we about them?

And all these parts of the actual action plan that will help us align on shared action, rather than thinking that if we simply align on shared thought, then all of a sudden we'll know what to do because that's not even true.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Right.

Good.

Good.

Okay.

So we've been talking about societal systems as a cognitive architecture all through this.

But maybe it's time we actually gave a little thought to what cognition actually is, right?

So Lyon lists 13 cognitive tasks that he says qualifies as universal tasks or capacities.

And this is part of the worldview that we talked about in the first discussion.

And that all of life is intelligent.

All of life is engaged in cognition.

All living things are engaged in cognition.

And these are some of the tasks and capacities that what we mean by that.

So these hold true for a human, certainly, but they also hold true for bacteria or slime mold or plant or any other living organism.

I don't know if I need to go through all 13 one by one, but I'll just kind of jump around a little bit.

So just number one, there has to be some sort of repulsion or neutrality or some kind of judgment of what's good and what's bad, what's useful and what's not useful.

Certainly to cognate, you have to sense, you have to bring in information.

There has to be some kind of memory storage or some kind of recall.

There has to be some kind of learning, some kind of problem solving behavior.

There has to be communication with other agents of the same kind or different kinds.

There has to be anticipation.

Certainly, if we're going to make a decision about our future, we have to anticipate what our future might be if we do or don't do some kind of act.

There's attention.

There's a million things to spend our attention on as a human, and what we spend our attention on will govern, in large part, the quality of the decisions that we make.

And the last one I'll talk about is self-identity.

So if I say I'm going to the store, in that sentence, I'm talking about this particular body, right?

And my self-identity is focused on this particular body.

But I can also talk about myself as a citizen of a community, as a citizen of a nation, of a

as a part of an ecosystem, as a part of the biosphere, so we have the capacity to self-identify at numerous levels.

I call that extended self-identity, you know, not just ourselves, maybe our family, maybe our community, maybe our environment, maybe our local environment, maybe our global environment, and maybe of human civilization, we're a part of human civilization.

And as we'll see shortly, how we self-identify governs, to some degree, the kinds of decisions and the kinds of behaviors that we display.

So we can think of these as occurring in every organism.

And the next slide brings the two ideas together, the idea of function systems and the idea of these universal cognitive tasks.

How do they relate to each other?

And I'm offering that in a sense, these 13 cognitive tasks are really, you could think of them as building blocks for the higher level functions.

So for example, an economic system, say in the function view, an economic system might involve all 13 tasks in one capacity or another.

A education system might involve all 13 tasks, but might particularly involve the tasks about learning, for example.

We can think of lines list as containing low level cognitive building blocks and function system as being the higher level functions built on top of these or from these.

And then we can think of active inference as the multi-scale process that connects the two.

And these function systems then provide a cognitive architecture that provides a society with a cognitive flexibility.

That is, a society needs to make decisions.

It has these six or ten different systems, different function systems that it can make decisions through, that it can learn through.

And there would be certain kinds of problems that are maybe better suited for, say, an economic system or a governance system or something.

and other kinds of problems that might be better suited for a legal system or an education system.

But maybe some problems really have to engage multiple function systems.

So the fact that a society has these various systems of cognition gives it a certain cognitive flexibility and provides a certain kind of redundancy.

And then obviously raises the question of what kind of balance are these eight or ten function systems?

How does the dynamics of that balance play out?

Next slide.

In this slide, I'm just listing the next four things we're going to talk about.

And if we get to it, that will be the end of our discussions today.

Those are

Those are neuronal versus human societies.

What are the similarities?

What can we learn from neuronal societies that might help us when we're thinking about design?

All of these four points are related in some way to the design of new societal systems.

Influence, how do we influence each other?

And particularly, what is the role of coercion and influence?

self-identity and selfishness.

We just were talking about that when I was talking about expanded self-identity.

And we'll pick up that theme in a short discussion about cancer.

What is cancer?

And then lastly is power distributions.

We have, we have eight or 10 or six or 10 functional systems.

If one is, you know, if one of those is unbalanced with the other two has too much emphasis in a society than others, how does that affect a society?

And then also within a system, if for example, in an economic system, if a financial system,

power is, you know, concentrated.

How does that affect a society?

So we'll talk about that, all that, and then with the idea that all of these pertain to the design of new systems in some way.

We can learn something from these topics about how we might want to design new systems.

So slide 16.

So it's kind of interesting, you know, the associations and community that happens inside of our brain for a human to solve problems is not so different in some ways about how we engage with each other in potentially solving problems.

as a society.

So I'll just kind of read a little bit from that first paragraph, but similar to neurons, individuals connect with each other in complex ways, just as neurons do.

We exchange a variety of signals over a variety of distances, just like neurons do at a variety of strengths.

Both neurons and persons can potentially connect to a very large number of others.

Each individual, each neuron, each person can share multiple connections with others.

And these connections can form metal level structures like institutions or tissues or whatever the case may be.

Neurons and persons self-organize into

modules of tissues, families, clubs, businesses, et cetera.

And neuron-neuron and person-person connections are dynamic and context and need dependent.

The neuronal architecture is quite flexible.

Just as human social interactions are flexible, associations come and go, even if there remains some kind of large scale, you know, consistent structure.

And each individual is cognitive, just as each neuron is cognitive.

That's actually kind of a new result in the science literature, the capacity of a neuron to process information in and of itself.

So, you know, obviously we want our neurons to work together.

We want them to associate with each other in a way that helps us to solve, you know, our particular problems.

We want their signals to be strong and good.

so that information moves throughout the neuronal process as it should.

We want our neuronal architecture to reorganize itself as we need to, as we need to learn new tasks, for example, or new topics.

And all of these are, this is also what we want for societies.

If we're going to be part of this cognitive architecture,

If we're engaged in societal cognition, we need to associate freely with each other, join collaborations and groups as we see fit.

That's part of societal cognition.

Societal cognition and particularly the designs of societal systems might impact

any in this bolded list that I have, but the first is the strength and the quality of associations between individuals, the richness and extent of our communication.

For example, a societal system design might have as part of it a means of communication so that

say a large group of people can get together and collaborate in coming up with a decision on some topic, right?

So the societal system itself could have communication and coordination aspects to it.

Temporal and spatial locations and movements of individuals affect our societal cognition and designs can affect that.

Quality of information that is gathered and in particular I'd like to point out the motivation to engage in say economic behavior hopefully will be different than it is in native systems where the motivation is largely to increase personal income and wealth.

We would want... Go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
I was just going to ask what the differences were in contrast, but finish whatever you were going to go ahead and say.


SPEAKER_01:
Just on that topic, a new design would want to employ a set of motivations that is very useful for societal cognition and societal health.

And certainly encouraging people to act in a kind of a selfish, self-centered, strict, selfish way.

for their own gain would make little sense.

You know, that's like a design flaw in our current system, you know, that we're not encouraged to cooperate and encouraged to solve common problems together.

And the design of a system can deeply affect what our motivations for actions are.

As a matter of fact, a design ought to make cooperation so easy that it becomes the de facto default behavior.

That should be the kind of, you would think that would be the, how a good design would work is it would just reduce the barriers to cooperation and communication and coordination because

Those are all key to societal decision making and learning.

Just a few others here.

A design might affect, for example, how well a society's beliefs aligns with its reality.

For example, if in a new design there's a strong role for science and there's funding in clubs for scientific exploration,

Well, then maybe it's more likely that new systems will be more aligned with the beliefs of people working in new systems or engaging in new systems might be more aligned with realities because, you know, science at its best is aiming towards a better understanding of our world.

Design might affect how independent and cooperative individuals are, as I mentioned a minute ago.

Also might affect how deeply the level of critical thinking is, right?

How well does a society, does a community encourage critical thinking through education and through norms and through other processes?

Obviously, critical thinking is important in problem solving.

You can't solve problems if you're not doing critical thinking.

You can't solve problems well.

And also the capacity to plan, the extent of the anticipatory horizon, you know, what a design might affect, how much attention is paid to planning.

various predictions made by organizations and groups.

Maybe it would be important to pay attention to the predictions that people made so we can understand who is good at who is who has a skill, you know, who's good, how can we improve our capacity to anticipate what's going to happen next?

So in numerous ways, in the same sense that design of a brain system might affect cognition within the neural communities, some of those same ideas can play out in the design of societal systems because associations and et cetera, et cetera, would be important at the societal level.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll just point out as an evolutionary biologist that selection has shaped .

And so several conditions of today have benefited from developmental basically patterning that has been selected on for a long, long time, many, many, many generations.

So real evolutionary pressures

the kind that create resilient neural systems at the level of societies would require essentially population-like dynamics competing and the birth and the death and the diversification of human societies.

So systems mapping is really helpful and toolkit transfers there for sure.

But there's a key evolutionary bit that neuronal ensembles have, that ant colonies have, that simply saying distributed systems are like those two things is not there, but in the long range, that's where it would be.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I think I've said this before, but if we're talking about how can society do better at cognition, what kind of systems might facilitate cognition, well, then all we have to do is look at evolution.

We look at what is the world doing around us?

How does a brain work?

The information and the ideas and the

the patterns that we see throughout nation of throughout nature can be look, we can learn from them as to how good cognitive systems work because nature is built.

Nature is a good cognitive system, right?

There's so much to learn from nature.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

So this is the second of the four topics.

Influence.

How do we influence each other?

So we have a group.

Obviously, the people will be there's problems to solve.

There's activities to undertake.

There's challenges that arise.

And group members would try to influence one another in some ways through communication or some kind of communication.

And Turner, the fellow I'm focusing on here, his ideas come from he did work in social identity theory, self categorization theory, and some other related fields.

And he identifies two forms of influence.

Now, this is not coming from the active inference world, but I'm going to make the point at the end that the two are closely aligned with each other.

One type of influence is persuasion, and that's where you simply argue that your understanding of reality is in some way better than other understandings are.

your path of action is in some way more beneficial than other paths of action.

But already then we're talking about aspects of cognition in the human brain or active inference because we're talking about some kind of testing of a model of looking at potential paths forward in action and then evaluating them as regards to which is the most beneficial path to take.

So already we're touching on the ground of active inference.

Another form of influence is control, and that comes in two flavors, legitimate authority and coercion.

And legitimate authority, we've already talked about this because we've talked about institutions and offloading of cognition from the individual level to the group level through social institutions of one kind or another, norms or

actual concrete institutions and things like that.

By and large, legitimate authority, people are willing to accept legitimate authority because they understand that it's in their best interest.

One example is most of us in the world are okay if

if a traffic cop stops someone who is, you know, speeding at a very high speed, because that's dangerous to us all.

And we are glad the traffic cop is going to take some action and exercise authority over this fellow who's endangering the rest of us.

So by and large, we are good with legitimate authority, and we don't feel that it limits our freedom.

And then there's coercion, which is more of a confrontational form of influence where you maybe force someone to behave in a certain way or to act in a certain way.

And there's various forms of coercion that can occur, including various forms of manipulation.

I'll just list a few, but that could be disinformation, deceit, omissions, obstruction,

The exercise of false authority, drowning out or silencing of competing voices or various things.

So, you know, this is rampant in our societies today.

These occur, you can turn on the TV and you'll see evidence of all of these.

And Turner makes the point that coercion, all of these forms of coercion,

is easily abused and very dangerous to a society because it tends to reduce trust in societal institutions.

It tends to reduce the long-term health of the group.

It can be destructive in the sense that coercion breeds resentment to being forced to behave in a certain way.

And it can reduce trust and reduce cooperation and it increases an antagonistic climate.

And that means that the society who's during the coercion or the group that's during the coercion has to use even more energy and more resources.

resources to buckle down and make and make the coercion even more severe so that they can get the individuals to behave in the way they want.

So, you know, there's a role for coercion, especially say, like, you know, police arresting someone dangerous who has a gun and there's about to shoot someone, you would hope that they would tackle that person to the ground or whatever.

and prevent them from hurting others.

So there's a role for coercion, but it can be easily abused, as I said, and must be used very transparently and judiciously, or else, in the long run, the whole society is going to suffer and potentially go down the tubes.

So that's the way he sees it.

And then we can see how this plays out in the active inference framework.

Already we've talked about persuasion and the similarities between persuasion and learning and then legitimate authority as being similar to offloading of cognition to social institutions.

And obviously, when we're talking about influence, we're talking about group associations.

And we've already now mentioned that with respect to neuronal associations and how neurons and people in a society have to have the freedom to associate at will to provide flexible cognition for the society.

Right, so association is a part of influence.

Just the fact that we're associating and trying to influence one another is a part of cognition.

So what are the impacts of this on design?

Like how might we change a design or what kind of design elements might we incorporate into new societal systems if this was our concern?

If we wanted to encourage persuasion and legitimate authority

how this is the question I'm asking the world in this paper is how could this impact design?

You can think of a few things off the top of your head.

For example, transparency would help this process.

Coercion is very difficult to achieve if there's high transparency.

If there's quality information flowing, then coercion is more difficult to achieve.

If there's quality education happening

Maybe even especially education about what coercion is.

What is manipulation?

What are the many faces of manipulation?

How do different groups in society use, how do they manipulate in order to get their will?

What is the role of media in coercion?

These are all good questions to ask.

if we're talking about what kinds of new designs would we want in order to avoid some of these problems.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.


SPEAKER_01:
The next of these four topics is self-identity, and I use the example of cancer here.

So Levin has published a couple of papers that I think are really interesting on this topic.

And it's true that as a cancer develops in a body, the communication tends to be changed.

There can be less quality communication between a cancer, you know, between a tumor and the surrounding tissues.

And at the same time, there can be more communication between cancer cells or within a tumor.

So communication kind of goes haywire in a cancer or can go haywire.

And the idea that Levin has is that what happens is we often portray a cancer as being a selfish growth that's occurring in the body.

And he says, you know, it's not really quite like that.

It's a little bit more like both normal tissue and cancer tissue is self-interested and acting in a self-preserving manner.

The difference is what the functional extent of self is for the two populations.

So the functional extent of self for normal tissue, normal cells in a normal tissue is the whole body.

Like the cells are connected and are communicating with other cells in the body, both locally and distantly.

So the body is a cognitive apparatus.

You could say an extension of an individual cell outward

to a larger cognitive apparatus, a larger environment, a larger milieu.

And in a cancer cell, that communication is breaking down, and the functional extent of self for a cancer cell might grow smaller and smaller and smaller.

So the cancer cell, just like the normal cell, is acting in a self-interested and self-preserving manner, only its functional extent of self is small.

So it's taking care of us.

It's including in itself a small group of cells, small tissue relative to the body.

So its ability to think, in a sense, cognate shrinks.

because it's no longer attached to the rest of the cognitive apparatus of the body.

It has to do any cognitive processing that it can do within a much smaller set of cells.

So its capacity to act, say, over multiple timescales, to behave in such a way that it will exist in two years or five years,

uh is reduced because it's it's he has a nice term for it he calls it the cognitive light cone of self is reduced in a cancer and this is really interesting you know when we talk about us how this might play out it's at a societal level right there's uh you know there's there's maybe some injury or stress in a certain population

That population is retracting itself from maybe from the rest of the society, the rest of the environment, because it maybe feels threatened or it feels unheard or it feels unappreciated or just is under stress.

And it's, you know, a local group is forming that is more interested in the local environment.

cognitive light cone of self, a smaller light cone of self, and that can be dangerous.

If that happens too much in a society, that can be dangerous.

It can also be useful because people are getting together in small groups to think about how to solve a problem.

That can also be useful.

But if there's too much of that or if it happens under the wrong circumstances,

then you can get the situation where the society is really kind of starting to disintegrate because there are elements in the society that are acting, preserving the small self and acting to protect the small self as opposed to the whole.

And you can just imagine what that leads to.

And so the task of design then is to create a cognitive framework

in which communication is rich, in which everyone's voice is heard, in which problems are actually addressed and not just glossed over or ignored, where the needs of the whole are taken into account, where everyone's story matters, where everyone has an opportunity to impact

larger workings of the society, the decisions that society makes.

And building such a design, building such a society and a cognitive system then would reduce the risk of, you could say, cancerous growths occurring.

Right.

So, you know, cancer is informative in this sense.

You know, it's an amazing, my background is in cancer biology.

And it's a never ending source of information and, you know, to look at how complex the complexity of the situation surrounding cancer.

So that's it.

So, you know, we can design systems so that cognitive light cone of self is expanded rather than contracted.

And that's going to go a long ways towards, you know, kind of encouraging cooperation, encouraging coordination, encouraging group problem solving on group problems, you know.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
The last topic is power distributions.

So we've been talking about functional systems.

Each functional system has a function.

I've listed some of those.

And each functional system also operates via a particular medium.

So for example, a good example is the economic system operating through the medium of money.

So some authors that I cite suggest that each functional system, if left unchecked, tends to have a growth imperative.

And we certainly see that in the economic system.

It's like everything is now suddenly, my couch in my living room is now worth money because I can sell it to someone who wants to visit my hometown for a weekend, right?

So everything is commoditized now.

Many things are commoditized that used to be

more freely shared without just in the course of life with uh with people who had needs so i sell my i sell my time i sell my resources i sell my ideas uh

And the financial system seems to have overtaken many aspects of our life.

So in that sense, in our current society, you might say that the financial, the economic system is overemphasized relative to the other functional systems, say the education system and other systems.

So obviously then when we're talking about design, one of the goals of design is to balance the influence of each function system.

And that is a topic that we already mentioned very briefly about integrating systems together.

So integrated economic system, legal system, governance system, all serving the same purpose and all acting as a flexible system.

cognitive architecture for the greater good of the whole.


SPEAKER_00:
If I can give a comment on that, you mentioned checks and balances and that in the American context referred to several separations within the governance mechanisms and the development that happened subsequent.

Here we're talking about checks and balances in a little bit more of a general cybernetic goal oriented system

way.

And we're talking about checks and balances between these different sectors, it almost sounds like.

So it's not just that there's going to be market mechanisms with all of the manufacturers of a product competing on that one dimension.

And then on a separate sector, there's competition of the academics on this one question in this one way.

How can we link those competitions in a way that actually is aligned with the overall goals of society?


SPEAKER_01:
Right, exactly.

How can we align all of the systems to the same purpose, which is the, you know, the reduced uncertainty and expected uncertainty of the society in relation to the essential variables, the things that matter.

Right.

So that's one aspect of design on this is how can we maintain a balance among systems?

But another aspect is how can we maintain a balance within systems?

So the economic system, again, provides a really good example here.

And I have a sentence there that today the wealthiest 1% of individuals globally own about 40% of the world's wealth.

Now, that is like insane.

I mean, that is crazy, especially if we think of money as a voting tool.

I mean, money is a voting tool.

It's not a recognized formal voting tool, right?

But it's an undemocratic one.

If I'm a billionaire, I have lots of votes in this world.

I can get people to do any number of things that I wish them to do.

I can direct

nonprofits to focus on particular issues i can i can make a new company that does a particular you know provides a particular service or or uh you know i i can i i can i have all kind i have a billion times more influence than just a normal person right

So money is a voting tool, and it's just used as an undemocratic one.

But it could be used as a democratic voting tool.

The money system, the economic system, could be highly transparent.

It could achieve a reasonable degree or even a strong degree of income and wealth equality.

so that the money as a voting tool becomes a fair voting tool, right?

Like in a democracy, we would not stand for I get one vote and the guy down the street gets a billion votes.

I mean, we would recognize that as being deeply unfair.

But it's the same thing in an economic system.

If one person has $1 and the next guy has a billion dollars, that person has enormous control over how society makes decisions.

So it's not just economic power.

I mean, I'm focusing on the economic system.

But there's six or 10 systems that we could be focusing on here.

And each of them has some kind of medium.

And we could talk about the distribution of power in any of them.

For example, we could talk about the distribution of power in a governance system.

Currently in the US, there are, what, 400s?

I don't know how many legislators and senators do we have in total.

I don't know what that amounts to.

But compared to the population, we have empowered, we have put enormous power

in the hands of a tiny sliver of people.

And, you know, is that a good idea in today's world?

Could we do better?

I imagine that a different kind of governance system would do a far better job of distributing power so that everyone can feel like their voice is heard and that they can be part of the decision making process.

You know, as it stands right now in America, I get to vote every two years about like a yes, like a thumbs up or a thumbs down on certain candidates.

And that's kind of it.

Formally, that's it.

I mean, I can do some informal things.

I can write to my congressman or I can, you know, I can complain in the newspaper or write a letter to the editor or something.

But as far as formal things that I can do to have my very nuanced understanding of the world heard,

All I really get is like a yes or no every few years, you know, on a group of candidates.

And that's hardly taken advantage of my understanding of the world, right?

I have much more insight to offer than just a simple yes or no every few years.

So I think it would be possible then to design systems that balance this medium of communication in each of the function systems, achieve some much greater degree of incoming wealth equality, achieve some much greater degree of power distribution within governance systems, power distribution within legal systems.

There's great room for improvement

on all of these.

Yeah, so I think, is there one more?

Oh, there's one more slide.

Yep.

And that is really focused on economic power.

So the first one I already talked about, using money as a voting tool, we already do that.

And we would be better if we just did that above board and in a democratic and transparent fashion.

And new systems could do that.

And when I say economic systems, again, I'm including in that monetary systems, financial systems and the bigger picture.

A large set of studies have shown that income and wealth inequality is bad for society.

It affects health, cooperation, trust, anxiety, happiness, social cohesion and mortality and social stability and numerous other factors.

So it's quite clear that

high amounts of income and wealth inequality are detrimental to society.

And again, today, we are extremely unequal, extremely unequal.

And then the last, just to end this whole talk today, I would like to point out that income equality

is not unpopular.

The concept is not unpopular.

There was a large study done a few years ago where they showed participants graphs of the division of

of economic power income and things like that, to, you know, they had three different choices, an image that was really very equal, like 5050 equal, one that was fairly equal, but not quite, you know, not quite perfectly equal, and then a really extreme one.

Well, it turned out that people didn't, you know, they asked people like, which of these do you prefer?

And it turned out that they didn't like the extreme one at all.

And that happened to be the one that was the picture of the U.S., inequality in the U.S.

And the one that was more mild, I think, was the inequality maybe in Sweden or something like that.

So they preferred the distributions of economic power that were less extreme.

And when asked, which of these do you think is the most fair for society?

more than half of those queried, and this was many thousands of people who were queried, chose actual income equality, like completely equal incomes as the most fair way to run a society.

And I don't suppose that people really thought that was possible.

I know it's not possible, but that would be the more fair way.

That's what I imagine people were thinking.

And when we next come back to talk, we'll talk about the leader framework and some potential designs that actually would achieve income and wealth equality over time.

So that's yet to come.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Awesome.

That really flew by.

After some little tech bumps...

was awesome and that is a little bit like an analogy for maybe this program there's some technical details up front few live streams to start few teams few memes but um maybe once there's momentum and once there's proof in the world

and a little bit more of a contact between the theory and the practice, we would see some new kinds of momentum.

So maybe give a last comment.

What is going to happen in the fourth session and then our two group discussions?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, we have one more.

I'm glad you said that because I did want to say to folks that we have one more discussion in this series coming up next week.

And in that discussion, we'll talk about the LIDA framework as a prototype and some of the things it might achieve, how it might work.

And that is a big part of our discussion next time.

And then there's two regularly scheduled, regular scheduled discussions on part three of the paper that will happen in May.

I think the first one is in two weeks.


SPEAKER_00:
It's the first two Tuesdays of May at 7 a.m.

Pacific.

And that will be like the group active inference live stream.

So we'll have a bunch of other colleagues and that will be more of a group discussion.

But the fourth one,

conversation between just us will be April 27th at 3 p.m.

Pacific.

So I'm really looking forward to that.

And thanks for coming on for so many times and giving us so many good insights.

And we appreciate your time and all the participants who stuck with us also for the tech.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for having me.

## PakWPvu07OM

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome.

Welcome to Act-Inf Lab.

We're in live stream number 21.04 on April 27th, 2021.

And today we are in the fourth of a series of conversations with John Boyk.

So John, it's been really awesome to get to know about you and your ideas and work


SPEAKER_01:
with you on these jam boards so as i sort of set things up for a second and share the jamboard link with the live chat go ahead and just re-catch us up and then i'll meet you on the first slide in just a minute okay sounds good thanks uh so my name is john boyk i'm a courtesy faculty at oregon state university um and the series of discussions that we've been having is on the is on a paper a series of papers that i just published in the journal

sustainability it's a three-part series the topic is well the title is science-driven societal transformation parts one two and three so we've this is our fourth get-together here and we're just finishing up our discussion of the last in that series part three which is the subtitle design

And we covered quite a bit in that paper, part three, but now today we're going to focus on just one aspect of that, which is the leader framework, local economic direct democracy association framework.

This is a, I'm terming it a prototype of design for new societal systems.

And as a reminder to listeners, we're talking about the de novo design of new societal systems.

specifically using a club model.

So the societal systems for a club, the club is a small community somewhere, something larger than say a thousand volunteer participants.

That's how the series itself proposes an R&D program.

And that's the strategy for change.

community level in cooperation with the global scientific community who is working on the technical aspects.

Then field trials occur at the club level and if the new systems deliver as promised and they promise substantial improvement in social and environmental quality, economic security and various things like that, then the idea is that the club model would grow and spread and spread to new locations.

and new testing and new trials and eventually would spread on a near global basis.

So, are we on slide one yet?


SPEAKER_00:
We're ready on slide one.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so that's just our list of discussions we've had.

You can check out the links there for the previous YouTube videos.

And slide two, if you would go there.

is just where to go for more information.

So my website for this project is called principledsocietiesproject.org, and it gives links to the series, gets some background information.

Actually, on there is a live or interactive model of the leader framework.

So a big part of what we'll be talking about today is actually on the website if you want to run the model yourself.

so there you go there for more information and then third slide so today's topic again is the lead of framework local economic director democracy association these are ideas from my 24 uh 2014 book called economic direct democracy that book is available for free on the website or if you want to spend money you can go to amazon and buy it there

And along with that book, I published a simulation model of the leader framework, or at least parts of the leader framework.

And that is in the International Journal of Community Currency Research.

So links are there for that.

And again, all of these links are available on the Principled Society's project website.

Okay, so.

Now, why would I want to discuss, this is slide four, why would I want to discuss the LIDA framework in this three-part series?

A few reasons.

One is that the LIDA, the design of the LIDA framework, maybe you should say that the LIDA framework is intended as an integrated societal systems architecture.

or what I've been calling a cognitive architecture.

The idea behind this whole series, behind this work, is that a society, large or small, is a cognitive organism, and its societal systems, which, for example, economic systems, legal systems, governance systems, etc., act as a cognitive architecture.

So when discussing the idea of societal transformation, my focus here is on

creating new societal systems, de novo societal systems, de novo design, so that they function as cognitive systems.

They facilitate societal cognition.

And this is a fitness-based, evidence-based R&D project.

So the idea would be that you could assess how well one design works

is doing over another design.

And eventually communities could choose designs that function very well and are fit for purpose.

All right, so the LIDDA framework embodies the cognitive viewpoint.

It also was designed to be implemented via the club model, which I talk about in part two of the series.

That's the strategy for change.

Number three is here.

The reason is that it involves integrated systems.

So in the series, I talk about six overarching systems, legal, governance, et cetera.

And the LIDAR framework integrates most of them.

And finally, there's a published simulation model available, at least for some economic aspects of the LIDAR framework.

And at the time, and I

ANOVO ECONOMIC SYSTEM THAT I'M AWARE OF.

NUMBER FIVE.

ALL RIGHT.

SO I'LL GET INTO THE, WE'LL TALK A LOT ABOUT THE SIMULATION TODAY AND A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE, YOU KNOW, THE STRUCTURE OF DELITA.

BUT LET ME JUST OFFER A FEW WARM-UP THOUGHTS.

THE DELITA ECONOMY IS NOT

like what we face in normal economy.

It's fundamentally different.

And in particular, it is a democratic, it is a cognitive architecture, as I've said, and it is deeply democratic and transparent.

So in the leader economy, money, there is money, both the national currency in America, the dollar, and a local digital currency that I call the token.

So those two currencies are used as a voting tool in a highly transparent, fair, and deeply democratic process.

And as we talked about last time, money is already used as a voting tool in our world.

It's just that it is a non-transparent, non-democratic voting tool for the most part.

Some people have billions of votes in the economic system and then other people have just a small number of votes.

So the leader framework makes that voting function explicit and fair and democratic.

The emphasis of the simulation we'll be talking about in a moment is on the economic system.

But as I mentioned, the leader framework encompasses almost all six overarching systems.

This simulation is,

and uh this so this first one simply looks at the economic aspects aspects because that was the simplest to do for me at the time um so money is used as a voting tool and it's and voting occurs in two arenas it occurs in local markets so i buy some product from

And it also occurs in the financial system, what I call the crowd-based financial system.

And we'll talk a lot about that.

But essentially, individuals contribute a certain amount of their income to the crowd-based financial system.

And then once their money is in the crowd-based financial system, the CBFS, then they get to choose how that money is used.

So in a sense, they get to vote for

They offer their votes for how the community is, what the community wants, what the community wants to fund, what kind of jobs the community wants to fund, and so on.

So if you had an economic system in which money was used as a voting tool, well, it would be fairly undemocratic unless incomes and wealth were somehow equal.

So over time, uh, the effect of the leader is to, um, equalize income and wealth.

And I'll show the, show the results of that in a minute.

The latest simulation runs 28 years.

And as you'll see at the end of that 20 year period, everyone who has joined the club, uh, is enjoying an equal level of an equal and high level of income wealth.

And lastly, the LIDA framework is designed to focus on motivations.

That is, any new system developed in this R&D program, the goal is to have that system be fit for purpose.

And as we've talked about, the purpose of a society, the purpose of societal

implicit person purpose of a societal systems is to facilitate societal cognition and to, and thus to, uh, ensure that the organism, the society, uh, maintain achieves and maintains a high degree of vitality.

So the, uh, any new systems developed should be fit for purpose.

And, um, and if they're fit for purpose, almost by definition, they will,

facilitate cooperation because cooperation and communication is a part of cognition.

So the LIDDA framework rewards barriers to cooperation and with the idea that it makes cooperation so easy that cooperation becomes the default behavior.

And it also focuses on motivations.

It does not reward people for non-cooperative behavior, for example.

And that is in contrast to our existing systems, which I call native systems in the series.

But in native systems, I am for paying my workers a very low wage, for example, for taking advantage of my workers.

The society would reward me greatly for that.

And that doesn't occur in the leader framework.

partly because income and wealth are equalized over time.

Thus, the motivation to participate in the economic system of Alita, or we can also call it a club model, is not personal gain, but community well-being, well-being of the larger organisms.


SPEAKER_00:
I just have one question.

Are the members of a club, are you thinking spatially co-located?

Are they remotely located?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, locally in space.

And it is perhaps possible to have a club that is distributed over space.

But I didn't start that way.

I mean, that maybe could be something that's added later, but I'm focusing now.

It's the easiest thing for me, has been the easiest thing for me to focus on the local market, local area.

But there's reasons why the local area is important because many decisions actually are local.

Like who will pick up my garbage and where will that garbage go is a local decision.

Many of the decisions, many of the

Our quality of life is largely a local issue, for example.

My economic security is largely a local issue.

And obviously, being close in space allows a greater opportunity for community building and gathering and seeing face-to-face and communicating face-to-face and getting to know each other and building a deep sense of friendship and community that way.

But yes, in the future, communities might be extended in some way.

And as a matter of fact, the idea with the leader framework or the idea with the club model is that the initial focus would be on developing the tools and systems for clubs for the project.

And then that would land systems for club networks.

So that would be by definition non-local

you know, non-local engagement because clubs might be in different areas of the world.

Okay.

So.

Is that right?

Yep.

So there's in the bottom left of that slide, over in the bottom left of that slide, I'm listing the six overarching systems that I talk about in the series.

And you will see that all buttons are deleted.

So I would imagine that if this were developed further, that health would also be included, but I just haven't included it yet.

So very briefly, the seven integrated components, the first three, I call them collectively the token exchange system.

Again, the token is the local currency, and it travels in parallel with the national currency, with the dollar locally.

There's a token monetary system that creates and destroys tokens.

There's the crowd-based financial system, which I mentioned already.

That, to be clear, that CBFS handles both the national currency and the token.

It issues to local businesses and nonprofits.

It issues donations, interest-free loans, and subsidies.

And these are all transparent through democratic decision-making.

And it also has a nurture arm that people contribute to and members contribute to.

And that nurture arm provides income for not what I call not in workforce members.

So when I say that the LIDA achieves income equality over time, I mean for every single member.

So you can think of it as every member family or however you want to think of it.

But regardless,

workforce, ill, not ill, employed, not employed.

In that sense, it's a little bit like a universal income, only it's a very high income.

Same income that everyone is enjoying.

I'll show you that in just a minute.

And then number three in the TES token exchange system is the market system.

So these would be local markets that are members.

And a part of the, some of the new businesses that are developed by the leader would are called principal businesses, principal businesses.

And that's a very special business model, unique to the leader.

Kind of like a nonprofit, kind of like a hybrid between a nonprofit and a, and a regular for-profit business.

Um, number four, there's a property rights system that goes along with this.

Uh, for example, um, a club.

Alita would have an IP pool for intellectual property.

And the club could also manage other properties, could manage real estate properties, for example, or any kind of property.

So it would be democratic decision-making for property management also.

There'd be some restrictions on the sale of principal businesses, kind of similar to nonprofits.

And there would be high transparency throughout.

So the community would know, if the community is using money as a voting tool, the community would need to know what's happening with their votes.

What are the choices that the community is making with money?

And so the flow of money would be highly

Um, number five is an information and incentive system.

Uh, this would include, for example, in education programs, reputation system, the fitness and indexes that we've talked about, which allow the community to understand itself, how it's doing, what's going to happen next.

Uh, how, how, what is the quality of the design that we're using?

Could we improve our design?

Uh, and along with fitness indexes, the last one there's computer and other kinds of forecasting and assessment methods that would help a community to understand.

what are the trends and how is the system working and how are we doing?

Number six is a collaborative governance system.

And that has three branches, administrative, legislative and judicial.

So that then covers the legal system.

And finally, number seven is purpose.

And we've already talked in each of these discussions, we've talked about the importance of purpose

and how purpose follows worldview and design and metrics follow from purpose.

Okay, so next.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, so now we'll spend most of the rest of this discussion on the simulation model.

Cause I think that'll, that'll be most, that'll make the description of the leader framework most clear.

And again, uh, the, the, this is, this is a first simulation.

Um, it's, it's intended to introduce the, the leader framework.

Um, and also just to describe some general concepts of token dollar used dollar as the national currency, if you don't mind.

token dollar flow, and the third aim of this on the left paragraph there is to demonstrate at least conceptually that income equality can be achieved.

that there's some parameterization of this model that you can choose parameters such that this goal of income equality can be achieved at the end of the simulation.

The simulation lasts for about 28 years, I believe.

So this is not, you know, the concept behind the LIDA

it grows from there it injects like in the very first year maybe just a few members will will join and the lita injects a small amount of tokens as the as the local currency into the economy and makes some very small changes and then

year makes another few people join and make some bigger changes still and the the growth of the leader occurs exponentially fast now I would like I would like to say that that the functions of the leader how it how it works how it achieves these aims how it achieves income equality for example this would all be worked out far in advance before any field trial ever occurred so

what would actually happen is there would be say, you know, who knows hundreds or more of simulations or papers, or at least let's say a large number of simulation and papers on a variety of topics would be finished before any community was ever asked to participate in this.

So once that body of knowledge is developed, then perhaps the, the, the program would say, okay, what is there?

Are there any communities in the world that would be interested in participating in a field trial?

And if you did participate, here's the list of benefits that you might expect over, say, a two-year field trial.

Income levels will increase.

This is what's going to happen.

This is how participation will increase.

This is, you know, the trajectory would be laid out through a variety of simulations.

So everyone should know what they're getting involved in, what they expect from this, and there should be no surprises from the field trials.

Now, that doesn't mean that the community has no choice in their behaviors and what they do with the system.

The community drives the system, but the system is designed such to achieve its purpose, right?

Fit for purpose.

All right.

So on the left there, I just want to emphasize that this simulation conveys broad, low-level, low-resolution design intentions for an actual

token exchange system.

So I'm not predicting that a token exchange system would work like this.

This is rather an illustration of the concept of the token exchange system and the leader framework.

And obviously this simulation can and hopefully will be followed by a large number of other simulations that are progressively more sophisticated.

This is in many respects a fairly simple

simulation, and there is tremendous room to expand it and improve it.

But it's still useful.

And in particular, that's because I made the simulations stock flow consistent, which means that no no monies come out of thin air, it's all

If money leaves one agent, then another agent receives it.

So all the flows of money are accounted for.

And just that alone allows one to say that, okay, logically, mathematically, this all adds up.

And lastly, I would say that this is what I call a semi-realistic simulation.

That is, starting income levels resemble real income levels.

Tax rates resemble real tax rates.

Thus, the initial conditions are so unrealistic.

But again, the simulation is very simple.

So I start with a semi-realistic initial setting, and then certain things don't change over the years.

The only thing that actually changes is just what pertains to the LIDA itself, the members themselves.

So if you don't join in the simulation, if you don't join the LIDA over a period of years, then your income stays just what it was, and nothing really changes for you.

You keep the same job, and

keep the same family and things just move ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I ask a question here?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, please.


SPEAKER_00:
OK, you can address it now or later.

But what is the relationship between your simulation and game theory?

And what is the relationship between your simulation and active inference?


SPEAKER_01:
OK.

Okay, so this is an agent-based model.

So that means, you know, between the lines, that means that there are individual agents that make decisions of what they want to do, and that determines how the history of the simulation goes.

In a highly sophisticated agent-based models, the agents themselves might be very complex and they might make decisions about complex situations.

And since this is just a simple introductory model, the agents are relatively simple, like for example, a family, and they make fairly simple decisions.

And the main decision they make

in this simulation is whether or not to become members in any given year.

Does a family want to become a member?

Secondly, they'll make a decision on how they choose a wage option, which is a construct that I'll talk about in a minute.

So there's not very many decisions that individuals will make here.

So it is like a game theory, but it's a very simple game.

And later simulations could be made much more sophisticated.

And in relation to active inference, I might say that I created the book and the simulation model long before I was aware of what active inference was.

So neither the book nor the simulation model mentions the cognitive aspects.

And that came a little bit later in my development and as the project developed in my mind.

one could easily imagine how active influence might fit into this for example you as i said a community is considered to be a organism it's understood as an organism a cognitive organism so just like every organism it has to fulfill its intrinsic purpose which is to maintain and achieve vitality and it and it

In the active inference scheme, it receives information from its world through its senses.

It updates its models.

It chooses actions.

That changes the world.

And then it receives new sensations based on the changed world and perhaps updates its model further or chooses a different set of actions or continues with the same action.

That's how active inference works for an organism, but that's how active inference would work for a community too.

The community senses information.

It decides, you know, it learns what it can learn from the current sensations.

It makes decisions about what it'll do next in a variety of ways.

What will it do with its solid waste?

How will it generate energy?

What will it fund next?

What businesses will it fund?

What nonprofits will it fund?

What is its targets?

Does it adjust its targets?

So these are all decisions that the organism of a community would make as it tries to achieve and maintain vitality.

And fortunately, since this is a fitness-based, evidence-based program, the community would know at every moment how it's doing, what its indexes are, its indexes for

nexus for uncertainty about the future.

So as it tries, as the community tries to reduce uncertainty about its essential variables, then, you know, it would have an immediate feedback as far as like scores about how it's doing and those scores and that information could help it then to update its models or, and choose the same or different actions.

And so that's the, that's how

part of this say just a principal business and the principal businesses the principal business could also be thinking about its cognition in terms of active inference it to gathers information and then makes makes adjustments and learns and chooses actions and another example is the crowd-based financial system itself this is a decision-making work

And that whole structure could be modeled using ideas from active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

It's interesting how you developed the idea and applied basically the evolution of computational modeling to it.

And that helped a few things maybe come out into relief, like that multi-scale aspect.

And then also the fact that you're pursuing not the maximum GDP, not the total divided by the number of people,

which you're maybe going to get a higher average with one billionaire and everyone else at zero, but that's not the pursuit.

It's actually a uncertainty minimizing trajectory policy sequence that's starting to sound a lot like active inference.

So it's kind of cool how it dovetails together.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, right.

This is, these are, these are, you know, these are probabilistic.

You could say the community is developing a probabilistic model of what will happen next, what will happen to me.

And that fits in very well with the active inference scheme.

And individuals in the community are developing a generative model

of how I see the world and what will happen next.

And as a matter of fact, since anticipation is so important in cognition, the individuals in the community, individual organizations such as businesses and the community as a whole would be developing anticipatory models, whether those are formal models in computers or whether they're informal models in their minds.

about how I see the world and how I see what will happen next if A, B, and C happens.

So all of that information, that full anticipatory capacity of individuals and organizations and the community as a whole can be taken into account in the LIDA, can be used in the LIDA for its own good.

All right.

Slide eight.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Are we there?

Okay.

All right.

So this image on the right really captures much of the simulation and much of the idea of the LIDA as far as the token exchange system goes.

And before I describe it, I just want to emphasize once again that the token exchange system is just one part of the LIDA, and there's other parts that are not in this simulation at all.

Well, the governance system is not in the simulation at all.

So this is just flows of currency.

And this figure one on the right describes how that works.

To simplify this a little bit, let's just look at the arrows in blue.

And the arrows in blue are both tokens and dollars that flow together.

And we could start at organizations

These are the agents of the model, the five agents, organizations, persons, CBFS, rest of counties, which is the rest of the world, and government, which is local government.

Just looking at the blue lines, we see there's kind of a circle being made between organizations, persons, CBFS, and then again to organizations.

And that's essentially how things flow.

Organizations, persons are employed at organizations and organizations pay wages to persons.

Persons spend money back into organizations when they buy goods and services.

Persons support the CBFS with contributions and the CBFS supports persons in particular, not in workforce persons with what I call nurture support.

The CBFS

also provides loans subsidies and donations to organizations and the organizations pay back the loan principle i might add that the the concept of loans here is uh is the token itself is designed to be a non-inflationary currency and loans are offered interest-free so what you don't see here in this circle i just

described, what you don't see is investment for profit.

That does not occur in the system, especially with relation to principal businesses.

It doesn't occur and obviously doesn't occur with nonprofits because nonprofits are, by definition, not for profit.

So if I'm a person, I receive wages from my employer or maybe I'm self-employed.

I sell things to the other persons.

I have to contribute a certain fraction of my income to the CBFS.

And once it's in the CBFS, organizations will apply to the CBFS for loans or subsidies or donations.

And along with my fellow colleagues in the CBFS, I have a pool

And I can decide, you know, I like that idea that this new business wants to do.

They're going to make a new light bulb or they're going to make a, this is funding for a small organic farm or whatever the situation might be.

I might like what they're doing and I might see value in it for the community.

Again, this is, the investments are not related to profit.

So I'm not thinking the way I would think in today's world in the native economy.

If I have money in the native economy, I'm thinking, where can I put my money that will return to me the greatest gain, personal gain in finances?

In this system, I'm asking, since personal profit is not part of the picture, I'm asking, where can I put my money that will receive the greatest gain in terms of fitness scores and community well-being?

and quality of life for myself and my children.

So those are the kinds of topics that become pertinent then when the personal profit motive is taken out.

So again, in relation to the native economy, the government, say the US government, also makes subsidies to various businesses, but here,

All these choices are deeply democratic.

Given that incomes are more or less equal, everyone has more or less the same amount of money in the CBFS, same amount of currency.

So everyone has essentially equal say in which businesses get funded, which businesses, whether they get subsidies or whether they get donations or whether they get loans.

And the reason for subsidies

rather than loans and donations, might be that, for one thing, you have to pay back a loan.

So if a community wanted to support, say, a bakery, and they thought that this bakery is really great, they're not making a lot of money, so they're not going to be able to really pay back loans very well,

And maybe even they're operating at a loss, but there's just such a great community resource.

And we just love this little bakery so much that we would like to give this bakery a subsidy so that it can continue to operate, even though it's losing money every year.

That would be one example of a subsidy.

Or there might be, we want to subsidize a hospital or we want to subsidize any operation that perhaps is not actually making money and couldn't pay back a loan.

On the other hand, maybe some business is doing well and we would be willing to support it, but we want to give it a loan instead of a subsidy.

Donations really apply more to nonprofits and subsidies really apply more to businesses.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just give a thought on that, John?

All right.

It's like if a person who's granting money has $10,000 and they're deciding whether they want to be the one who gets to decide where the $10,000 go or whether they're going to give it to the cafe who's going to spend it potentially at other local businesses and allocate it a different way and the employees are already taken care of.


SPEAKER_01:
it's going to contribute to a public good especially a locally um defined one and so it's like yeah i'll let them spend my ten thousand dollars that i was just going to give away anyway right right right yeah so so that raises a really a good point that that i wanted to make is that what's really happening here even though it's currency that's circulating what's really happening here is

It's just a way to ensure that everyone gets the same amount of votes in this economic arena.

And what people are voting for is not so much money.

Money isn't the resource.

Especially in a mature leader, the money is circulating, as I'll show later.

So it's, so it's not really a shortage of money.

Like how will we get the money for this or where will the money come from?

It's not that.

It's using money as a voting tool to allocate other resources.

Like if I give a, um, if I support a bakery, say with, with a loan or a subsidy, what I'm saying is I'm, I'm voting.

spent in this bakery.

I want this bakery to employ these people, and I want the bakery to provide this service to the community.

So I'm voting for the service and the allocation of resources that are embodied in this bakery.

Or it could be a hospital, or it could be anything.

But that's what we're really voting for, is how we spend our time.

What do the humans in this, what do the members

in their life, in their 24 hours a day and seven days a week or whatever, in their year, how do they spend their time?

How do we want to spend our own time?

What jobs do we want to work in as a community?

How do we want to spend our time?

Do we want to be employed by nonprofits?

Do we want to be employed by regular businesses?

Do we want to be employed by principal businesses?

the evolution of this economy is the decision-making process of a community to decide how it wants to spend its time and where it wants to put its focus and what kind of conditions it wants to operate in.

All right.

So that's a little bit of an introduction to the flow of tokens and dollars together.

Maybe I will say one more thing before we get off this is that

suppose that um and this might be obvious from things i've already said but i just want to emphasize it but suppose that me suppose that me and a group of people in the cbfs decide like hey it would be really cool to have a bicycle manufacturer in our town so so together you know the the 12 of us or the 50 of us or the 100 of us decide like yeah let's support this bicycle business now every it's natural that not all businesses are going to

make it, you know, some are going to fail and that's natural and good.

A community would want to take some choice, some chances and fund some things that maybe even, you know, a reasonable chance it will fail, but if it doesn't fail, it would be great.

So, so we fund a bicycle business and it fails after a few years.

Okay.

Fine.

The same money is still circulated in the community.

Nothing's really changed now with what has changed, however,

is the allocation of human resources that were allocated to the bicycle business now can be allocated someplace else because the bicycle business doesn't exist.

And in the meantime, those employees might become then not in workforce members, right?

They maybe don't have a job for a short period.

So they go from the unemployed category in the person's box to the unemployed and not in workforce box.

And fine, their income doesn't really change.

So

They were, you know, they're not out in the street, and neither is the business owner.

The guy who did the whole thing, he's not out in the street.

His income hasn't really changed too much, especially if he's a principled business.

So he's fine.

The employees are fine.

Everybody's taken care of.

The community took a chance.

They said, hey, this would be a good experiment.

Let's have a bicycle shop.

It didn't work out, but now we'll just reallocate those resources to something else, some other decision.

So, you know, the funny, when I try to explain this to people, and I'm using terms money and currency, it's really, it's difficult for some folks to get past their interpretation, the common interpretation of what money and investment and currency means.

And this is, as I said earlier, this is a leader economy, but it's not like any kind of economy that we think of.

This is really just a decision.

This is a cognitive system.

In short, this is the description of a cognitive system that a certain flow of that is uses what I call a currency.


SPEAKER_00:
If I can make a point on that, John, it's like if you use the metaphor of money, a lot of times people debate.

characteristics like fungibility or store value or transfer value.

But if we think organismally and we think about, let's say, blood flow or neural information or hormonal signaling, like the goal of the muscle cell is not to accumulate insulin.

It's to use it as a cue to know when to change.

And so if you think about information flow, blood flow, no cell needs to hang on to the red blood cells and capture things around it because it's part of a bigger plan.

So I think that that's a really nice attribute you captured.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, excellent analogy.

And that's very much what the leader framework is like.

It's kind of like a body, kind of like an organism that requires the different cells in that organism to receive blood and food and information and other things like that.

So, and also on that point, when I say money is used as a voting tool, even more broadly, it's used as an information tool.

So the community is exchanging information when they exchange money.

Still on slide eight, I've explained now the blue lines, the token and dollar flows, but I haven't explained the green lines.

So this new club in this model,

Uh, as in, as in all models for new clubs, the community remains part of the larger world.

It's there's no, the club is not segregated from the rest of the world.

Uh, apart apart from the rest of the world, it is engaging in all the normal stuff.

It's paying taxes to the government.

It's purchasing products from member member organizations, but also from non-member organizations and amazon.com or, you know, whoever.

So, you know, it's participating in the normal way.

And this leader framework or the club framework is another layer of organization on top of the normal world.

So these green lines are showing how dollars are flowing.

And again, this is a simplification of the real world, but it gives the idea still.

So persons are paying the dollars in taxes, paying their taxes in dollars, I should say.

And the government is also giving some income support to unemployed persons.

That also happens.

The government is giving dollars in the form of grants and subsidies and contracts to local organizations.

And local organizations, and I created this as a kind of a simplification, but local organizations are exchanging goods and services with the rest of the world.

So dollars leave the community when a local organization

some far distant business.

And at the same time, organizations outside of the club, outside of the county are purchasing things from the member organizations too.

So that's a simplified version of how dollars are flowing.

And obviously now we got a problem because we have,

our first challenge maybe you could say one challenge is to somehow design this system so to reach the aim in number three there that income is becomes more equal over time but now we have the problem of we've created this this local currency the token and we have to pay taxes on income to the government

And we can't pay taxes and tokens.

The government's not going to take it.

So we got an immediate challenge of like, how do we make this thing work so that every individual has enough dollars to pay the taxes it needs to pay and organizations have enough dollars so they can purchase goods outside the county in dollars.

And yet the whole thing can grow and

How does that happen?

Another question, design question, is how do you make this thing good enough that anyone wants to join?

Fine, I've drawn this picture here of conceptually how it works.

But if I don't receive anything materially from joining, why would I join?

in actuality, there might be lots of soft reasons to join.

I might feel like I'm more a part of the community, or I might feel like my voice is heard more, or I might feel that by joining, we're able to make better decisions together about things.

But in this simulation, I wanted something a little more substantial than that.

So in the simulation, I made the rule that a

person will join, a family will join this if it increases their income, and they won't join if their income doesn't go up.

So that becomes the challenge then.

How do you inject enough tokens and get a good enough circulation of tokens and dollars in this membership such that my income goes up from joining, or at least most people's income, everyone that joins, their income goes up.

And then how many people have to join to make this thing work?

Like 2% of the population in 30 years, or 50% of the population, or 90% of the population?

What does it take?

So these are all the questions that we're going to dive into next.

First, a few assumptions, just

how this whole thing works.

The not-in-workforce population is static.

I think it's, whatever it is, 36% or something like that.

There's just a big, as in the normal world, a big chunk of people don't participate in the workforce.

They're disabled or they just stay home and don't work or whatever reason.

I chose a 7%.

Let's see.

I think the unemployment rate starts at about 7%.

Something like that.

Everyone in the county is adults and grouped into two-person families, just for simplicity.

So household income and family income are synonymous.

The purchasing power of the token is taken to be equal to that of the dollar.

So when you hear token, think value of our dollar.

And structural unemployment is 1%.

So you can't get much below that, no matter what you do.

And all employed persons work full time.

Just a few assumptions to make this simulation simple.

And again, later simulations could be more complicated.


SPEAKER_00:
Give a thought there, John.

Yeah.

there's almost two extremes for the token one is actually something that was tried in my little town of Davis California with the Davis dollar which was a one-to-one US dollar it was a stable coin before there was stable coins and so then they pegged the local currency it didn't end up continuing um it's not active to this day but it was a pegged coin and then the other alternative would be like

a token that essentially people could they could make an nft out of it or they could go full crypto and they could inflate it and speculate on it do all sorts of leveraging if it was really being traded on the open market so there's kind of a continuum between a total protected in-group currency something that's pegged to a national currency all these other options for the tokenomics so it's really um it's a it's an interesting starting point but i hope others when they're viewing this see that there's a lot of space for experimentation


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, great points.

And yes, there's a tremendous amount of space for experimentation.

And on that note, I want to emphasize that I'm thinking of this as kind of a prototype concept, just to generate ideas, just to give an example.

The goal of the R&D program, if it were funded, is that...

it would evaluate and help to evaluate, facilitate the evaluation of any number of designs and any number of design components that maybe are interchangeable or can be mixed and matched.

So this is just one concept.

And I would hope that over a period of years, many concepts are tested, obviously tested first in simulations and in bench scale studies and things like that.

And then if the ideas are really good,

than also in field trials in real communities.

Now, having said that, though, I do want to emphasize that, again, this is a science-based, evidence-driven program.

So it's not just a question of, hey, what do you guys want to do?

Well, we want to do this.

And what do you guys want to do?

Well, we want to do this.

You actually have to show that your design is good or better than others, or at least

describe how this design compares to another design in terms of the fitness metrics in terms of fulfilling the purpose of a system so there's a general general agreed upon a concept of system fitness and system and fitness metrics uh how to there's a generally agreed upon uh path to assess a system and then any design that is you know that is uh that is good relative to

then, you know, that's the idea.

Like any conceivable design that improves fitness is a good one.

That's one point.

Now you also, just on the currency, I wasn't actually going to talk about this, but like you brought it up.

So here we go.

You, I think you mentioned two kinds of currencies.

One is kind of a potentially speculative currency like Bitcoin.

Another is a currency backed by the, say the US dollar or something, you know, like you have, everyone has to,

put in a dollar, and then they get a dollar out of a local currency.

My concept for the LIDA is neither of those.

So the concept here is that the LIDA is, there's a word for it that's escaping me right now.

It is just simply created out of thin air.

It's an accounting system.

So in the same... Crypto.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Also crypto is by fiat too.

It's by computational fiat.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah.

So this is by no computation though.

This is just fiat because we need more tokens.

So this is an accounting system.

And obviously there's a limit to how much tokens you can create because the concept here is that the token holds the value of about a dollar.

So if you created 10 billion tokens and flooded the community on day one, the token would be worthless.

It can only be created to the degree that it can be engaged with and employed in the circulation.

It's all about circulation.

And in particular, it's not speculative.

So you cannot sell, in this system, you cannot sell your tokens to anyone else.

That's because in this system, I wanted people to be

you know, engaged, you know, this is like a voting system.

I wanted people to be engaged in the voting or community choices and just wouldn't be right if I sold my votes to some other third party and gave them a whole bunch.

That doesn't mean I can't entrust, like in the CBFS,

organization that says like an investment group in a sense a social investment group that says hey we've been watching you know we pay a lot of attention we we model the success of businesses and the needs of the community and if you entrust tokens to us and dollars to us we will choose good investments for them that we feel are best and you know improve the community well you can do that that's fine you know that's all great but you can't sell your tokens to anybody

or scholar or otherwise but that's just that's just this design so as you said you know other designs would work differently and you could model out which ones improve the fitness of the community best both current fitness and anticipated fitness all right number slide 10. yep um so uh some additional notes um

As I said earlier, one of the aims of the simulation was to show a way, a logical way in which incomes can grow and equalize over time.

But another way to say that is that Alita essentially pays people to become members.

I mean, that's how the simulation works.

If their income goes up by becoming a member, then they become a member.

So that's a good selling point.

If Alita has started up in my community and I realize that by joining my income goes up, well, that's a good reason why I might want to join.

Another thing is that we'll talk about three constructs here.

That's kind of the machinery that makes this whole thing go.

It's the income target, the token share of income, and the weight.

I already mentioned that Alida can create as many tokens as it can productively use, limited by inflation concerns.

The simulation goes for 28 years.

The first 15 of that, I termed the growth period.

And this is when the number of participants in the community is rising.

The number of tokens generated by the community is rising.

The club itself, the LIDA, is expanding in all ways.

And it reaches its peak at about 15 years.

And as it turns out, that's 90% of the local population end up joining the LIDA, again, because their income goes up.

And then the following years, the 13 years following that are called the post-growth period.

And that's just an equalization period where everything kind of settles out in time and reaches a kind of a homeostasis point.

Let's see here.

Oh, and on the right, with regards to the LIDA, we can talk about family income pre- and post-CBFS, right?

So if

If you're required to contribute a certain fraction of your income to the CBFS, well, then obviously your pre-CBFS income will be higher than your post-CBFS income.

When I do comparisons here, I'm really making comparisons on the post-CBFS income.

So you can think of that as really pre-tax take-home income.

All right.

And maybe the last thing to talk about.

Oh, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
one funny note on that is depending on the uh governing tax body and how they regulate whether a certain kind of crypto transaction is taxable or not every transaction of a token could be considered taxable I'm not a lawyer obviously and this is the future but I'm just saying that depending on what kind of overarching tax structure exists it could completely make or break this total structure from making it tax-free to making it something that grinds to a halt


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, if this was tax-free, the token was tax-free, if I could get income as tokens tax-free, then this whole system is gonna work like a charm, I would say.

I've designed it under the assumption that everyone will have to pay taxes on the tokens that they receive.

So that's the more conservative assumption and it holds true and we'll show how it all works out.

I do want to emphasize that this,

the structure of the leader and the way the CBFS works and the contributions to it and things like that, it's not dependent on the goodwill of members.

These all occur because of the rules of the club.

So if you want to become a member, here are the rules.

There's a variety of rules that you follow.

And what some of those rules are in code

what your contributions to the CBFS will be.

Again, once you put the money in there, then you get to choose, you know, largely you get to choose how that money is spent.

All right, on to Eli.

Yep.

So I mentioned that there's three constructs that sort of drive this whole thing.

And the first is the income target.

I also mentioned that simulations would be available long before the first field

no trial ever occurs.

So in these simulations, the community that's being simulated would choose an income target.

And that income target is a increasing level of family income up to a certain plateau and then it levels off.

So that path, the expected path of that increase in income

family income is part of the design of the leader and it's, and different communities could choose slightly different, uh, um, um, functions or paths to get there.

But that's the concept that the, that everyone knows in advance how we're going to get to this, uh, plateau level, you know, how many years it'll take at what rate for example, like that.

Um, uh, second, uh, construct is the wage option.

And, um,

This is to address a certain problem.

So, for example, I'm in a family, my husband and wife team, and I make a lot of money and my wife is not working, as an example.

Well, then she could join the LIDA and be included in the Not in the Workforce group, and she could get a high income just from being a member of the LIDA.

But I'm going to stay outside the LIDA because I'm making a ton of money anyway, and I don't need the LIDA.

So the best choice for us would be I stay out of the LIDA.

She joins the LIDA, and our income goes up considerably because of it.

But that would be a little bit of a freeloading situation, and it wouldn't be good for the LIDA as a whole.

So to prevent that kind of thing, there's two wage options.

if our family income is, as this income target rises at any given year, if our income target is above it, or if our income, say I'm working in some business, if our income is above the current year target, then we choose wage option one and the club

will give us a stipend, you know, above our normal income in tokens, a small stipend.

So we get a little bit of, we're doing well, we have a lot of money because our income is high and we join and we get a small amount of tokens that we can play with in the CBFS and stuff.

On the other hand, if we, our family has a low income, lower than the target and we join, then we receive the whatever current year income target is.

So in the first year that might be low, but each year it increases

And by the time the simulation is over, everyone essentially is choosing this wage option number two and is receiving the current year income target at its plateau.

That's a little bit about that.

And then I should say that the

set of families whose initial income is below the 90th percentile.

I consider those the target population.

And as we'll see, the LIDA increases incomes for 90% of the population.

And it's that 90% that joins the LIDA by the end of the simulation.

And there's also a token share of income target, TSI target, that is in any given year.

know how are the dollars and tokens uh you know what is like if i'm going to purchase goods in by local community and local businesses how many tokens am i going to give relative to dollars that's also a design parameter okay slide 12.


SPEAKER_00:
One question is, you mentioned a two-person household where one person had a high income and one person didn't.

And then you said it'd be free riding if one person joined and the other didn't.

But what about one person wanting to join who doesn't have an income?

I mean, where does that play in?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, that doesn't play into this simulation because for simplicity, I assume that everyone was in a two person family.

Obviously, in a more sophisticated simulation, you would have young adults that are single and so on.

So that the simulation just doesn't have that level of sophistication.

But I would argue, though, that I'm showing by the simulation the main concepts.

where there's actually one person families and things like that.

But good point.

Okay, so in a moment, I'm gonna show you some of the results of the simulation.

And just keep in mind that that's a simulation for 100,000 people.

And I'm using for initial income values and income distribution, I'm using data, US Census data for 2011 for Lane County, Oregon, from the US Census.

So that's how I'm making this semi-realistic in part, is I'm trying to mimic the distribution that was in Lane County, Oregon in 2011.

And then that's to start with, that year zero, and then every year it changes as it changes.

And if you never become a member, then your income stays at that same level.

Obviously not considering inflation in this model, it's just a simple model.

And so we're kind of,

it's named the concept of inflation for the moment.

Um, and it, and it could be easily added in a more sophisticated simulation.

Um, uh, as far as other ways to make this semi-realistic, I, as at the bottom of the left-hand side there, I choose a tax rate that is a reasonable tax rate.

There's a bunch of other, uh, uh, uh, parameters that I chose to be reasonable parameters of what I could


SPEAKER_00:
What's a reasonable tax rate?

What's a reasonable tax rate?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I chose for individuals, I chose 90% of adjusted gross income, you know, and then everyone gets a $2,500 deduction and, you know, things like that.

So like in the ballpark, that's what I'm arguing is that these things are in the ballpark.

And again, a more sophisticated simulation could look at a broken, you know, like a more complicated tax rate or something.

I also look, for example,

to nonprofits just in dollars, just regularly.

And I chose a percentage of income for that, too.

Things like that, just to kind of get semi-realistic.

And it turns out that the simulation is not very sensitive to those parameters.

So they can be changed a bit, and the simulation should show the same results.

Now, on the other hand, there's some token exchange system-specific parameters, and they definitely drive how this whole thing works.

There's some of them I mentioned for the constructs.

There's the formula as how the income target rises every year.

That makes a big difference, and so do some of the others.

The amount that people contribute to the CBFS makes a difference, and so on.

And speaking of the amount they contribute to the CBFS,

There's the nurture category, for example, the subsidy category, the loan category, and so on.

And there's what I call earmarks for all of those in this simulation.

Like a certain percent of income goes to subsidy group in CPFS, a certain percent goes to lending, a certain percent goes to nurturing, et cetera.

I called it nurturing, by the way, is because I wanted to convey the idea of the community is nurturing itself through this process.

votes from like from their employer so again money is a voting tool okay all right initial employment rate is seven percent unemployment rate is seven percent and the initial fraction of employees who work in nonprofit organizations is about seven percent

Now, when a community, say the LITA existed and the community was getting together and kind of forming to use a LITA, they would have to make all kinds of decisions of like, what kind of income target function are we gonna use?

How many years do we think it'll take to reach our full capacity?

There'd be a whole bunch of decisions like that to make.

And one of them would be how many, what kind of makeup of the,

organizations do we want?

Should we all work for nonprofits?

What if 90% of us, the membership, actually work for a nonprofit?

That's kind of an interesting question.

And I would argue that this will work.

The community could choose fairly extreme values and should work as long as the system continues to function as a cognitive system and as long as the community is using it to solve their actual problems.

So

If the community wanted to have most everyone work in the nonprofit sector and wanted the nonprofit sector to grow food for the community and provide services to the community, it could do that.

I think it could do that.

If it instead wanted to fund principal businesses to a large degree and nonprofits to a smaller degree, it could do that.

So again, this decision-making process is a way for a community

wants to be, what flavor it wants its economy to be, where it wants its individuals to work.

Like, you know, being a member of a community like this, I would want to choose jobs that are useful to me and to others and that I would want to work in, you know, like whatever those would be.

But an interesting thing, though, is if a community chose to fund a large part of its workforce in nonprofit sectors, it could have, say, a large number of biologists out repairing forests and streams.

And it could have a lot of forest workers repairing things.

There could be a substantial amount of ecological regeneration funded from this.

But there could be other things.

It's whatever the community

feels is going to increase its fitness, its capacity, its well-being, its quality of life.

The community can choose not only which jobs to fund, but what kinds of jobs, what kinds of organizations.

All right.

All right.

On to the next slide, 13.

So this is the way the simulation occurs.

And it goes in annual steps.

And each year, the first step

as new members are added according to this expected participation rate.

And some of those people who are already working in what I call lead of funded new jobs, LFNJ, that is, you know, the lead of funds and organization, but that organization might go bust and then those people would lose their lead of funded new jobs and they switch over then to the unemployed or not in workforce category.

So, uh, number two, every year, some people lose their jobs.

Some members lose their jobs.

Uh, the, the number three, the CDFS makes nurture payments to those people who are not in the workforce who are unemployed.

Um, uh, I'm just going to not going to go through each of these.

Um, but I will mention number five.

Um, so the leader has injected tokens into the economy.

You can't pay taxes with tokens.

So by definition, dollars have to come from elsewhere.

Another factor is that in a poor community, it may have a shortage of dollars relative to the rest of the world, right?

Other areas in the country might have a higher percentage of dollars in circulation.

So somehow this club, this leader has to pick up dollars from elsewhere.

in order to fund its, you know, in order to achieve the level of income that it's aiming to achieve.

And it does that by one main process, and that's by having a kind of a sophisticated bi-local program.

That is, it's the community is supporting local businesses,

and spending a good chunk of its resources in the local businesses.

And then by definition, that money is not flowing out of the community.

It's staying in the community longer.

It's circulated in the community longer.

And the community obtains dollars from elsewhere by adjusting its trade balance with the rest of the world.

So one of the

would be tracking is what is our trade balance with the rest of the world?

How are we doing?

Are we adjusting our trade balance as necessary to bring in the dollars that we want?

And in this simulation, as you'll see, the families actually reach what would be considered a very high income from this, the 90th percentile of starting income.

So the families would receive quite a very high income

And that would include tokens and dollars.

And as it turns out, the dollar portion of that is about the national average.

If you looked at all incomes in the US, that community ends up, in a sense, obtaining its fair share of dollars.

So if every community in the country were to do this, there wouldn't be a shortage of dollars because those dollars would just be more equally dispersed everywhere.

That's kind of important.

What you would not want to do in some R&D program is design a system so that a small community can do exceptionally well at the expense of everybody else.

So that's not what this is.

So number five was that you adjust the trade balance as part of these steps every year.

And again, this is a very simple simulation.

So at the end of each year, all the individuals spend whatever

And finally, number seven, individuals may pay taxes to governments in dollars.

Yeah, so that's it.

So that's kind of the steps you get there.

That's how it sort of works mechanically.

Here's some of the parameters that I used.

Over on the left are the kind of general parameters.

Excuse me, those are the targets for the community.

So the income targets, both starting and ending values.

Uh, and this is for the growth period, which is a 15 year period.

So the, uh, uh, uh, income target starts low at the, essentially at a, like a, uh, what would might be called a minimum wage.

Right.

And then it rises up to, uh, over almost 110,000 tokens in dollars.

So 110,000 family income in currency.

And, uh, that is the 90th percentile of starting values.

So by the way, I've already said that every year the club essentially pays people to join.

So obviously, in year one, it's not asking anyone to reduce their income down to the minimum wage.

So no one is asked to lose income in this.

People join because their income increases.

Now, some people might join because they just want to be a part of the community, part of the LIDA.

And their income would increase, too, if they're above the income target that year.

Their income would increase by a small stipend paid in tokens.

So even if I'm making $1 million, I can join, and I can receive some tokens, and I can participate in CBFS and other things like that.

So that was the table on the left.

And the table on the right are some of the earmarks that I use in this particular simulation.

And you might notice that the highest earmark there is for the nurture arm.

So a good chunk of my kind of raw revenue coming in, my raw income, a good chunk of that, almost 40%, is going to the nurture arm of the CBFS.

And that's paying, again, for anyone who's unemployed or not in the workforce.

And other than that, some of my income goes to the lending arm, some goes to principal businesses, some goes to nonprofits, goes to subsidies of various kinds.

goes to donations for nonprofits and so on.

And I also have, obviously, if I'm putting money into this lending function, then I'm building up a kind of a savings account in the CBFS that if people are paying back my loans, then every year I'm maintaining a good chunk of money in the CBFS itself, kind of like a savings account.

I think, yeah, that's about it.

there's a couple of rules of thumb that I realized in trying to find parameters that actually make this thing go.

And the one rule of thumb is the nurture arm has to have a high enough earmark so that that actually functions as, as it's supposed to.

And, and also the donations earmark for local nonprofits has to be high enough so that any nonprofit that I fund can actually pay its employees the, the, the, the,

By the way, a principal business, one of the things that demarks a principal business is that it pays no higher than the final income target.

So the final income target is about $107,000 tokens and dollars.

And a principal business would never pay someone more than that.

And ideally, most people who join a principal business would become members and I think they all would become members and participate in the lead itself.

So that's a few things that distinguish a principled business.

And obviously, a community would want to fund principled businesses because this is a business model that is designed to support the leader and club model itself.

So it's designed to support the community.

And if I were voting in the CBFS, I would really, you know, like I value being a member.

I value my community and I want my, I want this thing to work and I want, I want to receive the benefits that this system is promising.

And the, and the way to get there, or one way to get there is to mostly fund principal businesses so that they are serving the community in the way, kind of like a nonprofit serves a community.

Uh, and, um,

And they're paying wages that are consistent with how this whole thing works.

And they're really being responsible to the community via this business model.

And it's really in my best interest to support principled businesses with subsidies and donations and loans and things like that.

Not that there's no room for regular businesses.

There is.

All right.

Yeah, that's it for parameters.

Next slide.

Now we're going to start looking at what actually happens.

We have about 20, we have about 35 minutes left.

I think we're going to get right through the end of this.

So I may have to go a little faster as we get to the end.

So the first slide on the upper left is the fraction of the county population.

And you can see in that blue line, that's the rate at which people, the participation rate, which is decided in advance.

You know, this is what we expect to happen.

And there it goes straight up.

And then it reaches the plateau after 15 years.

So that's after 15 years, 90% of the county population has joined the LIDA.

And they've done so because their income has gone up.

Uh, the, the, if I were, if I were, if I were a member of a citizen in the county and I didn't have a job, well, for sure, I would want to join the leader because I'm going to get, my income is going to go way up if I joined the leader relative to not joining the leader.

So, uh, I account here for every, not every unemployed person or not in workforce person to, to, uh, to actually, uh, uh, join the leader so they can be part of the, you know, receive funding from the nurture arm of the CBFS.

Down below that, there's the income target.

The income target is the blue line.

Again, after 15 years, it reaches a plateau of about 110,000 tokens and dollars, and then it levels off.

And again, I want to emphasize that at that level, every community in the country could do this.

This is not preclusive.

If one community does it, that doesn't mean that others can't.

Every community could achieve these levels based on the assumptions of the model.

On the right is the fraction of income over the years.

So fraction in, let's just look at the green line.

The green dotted line is the token share of income target.

So in the early years, that's a very low fraction.

Most of the income is in dollars.

And then it rises over the years to eventually reach about 35%.

So at the end of the simulation, about 35% of income is in tokens and the rest is in dollars.

And then the fund starts with the bottom right graph.

This is the average family income.

Starts at about $40,000.

That is from the census data.

Starts at about $40,000.

And you can see what happens with the blue line over the period of 15 years.

It more than doubles.

So family income more than doubles.

It reaches the 90th percentile of starting income.

The red dotted line is showing the similar thing, only it's including the money that people have in their savings account in the CBFS.

So there's a two person family, each has contributed a maximum of 30,000 to the savings account.

So on top of this high income families also have $60,000 in savings in the CBFS.

You might notice that all the growth is happening during the first 15 years.

But you can tell from the blue line, the family income line at the bottom graph, that there's a little bit of a lag.

It takes a little bit of time for the whole thing to actually reach its maximum family income.

And that happens about year 28 or something like that.

I might also mention, too, that in this simulation, I was just trying to find kind of reasonable parameters and a growth period and things like that.

such that it would all make sense and would work.

And we're not expecting the community to change in year one, suddenly everything changes.

It wouldn't be like that.

It would tend to grow slower.

But having said that, you could think of the simulation as what might happen in the first LIDA.

But imagine that there's already a hundred leaders or 200 or 500 leaders around.

It's really clear how these things work.

There's lots of data coming in from leaders all over.

It's clear that incomes are rising and the,

interest by the general population is growing very rapidly.

Like suddenly it's a new thing and everyone wants to join because everyone's income goes up and their empowerment goes up and their sense of community goes up and they're aligning their purpose with some greater good.

It feels good.

There's a whole variety of benefits that come from being a member.

So someone wants to start a club in another city,

And suddenly there's a tremendous interest on day one.

Well, then all of this would go a lot faster.

It wouldn't necessarily take 15 years.

It might go in half that time or whatever.

On slide 16.

On the left is the unemployment rate.

As I mentioned, it starts at about 7% in the county.

And you can see that after about 15 years, the county achieves full employment.

So, uh, that all works well, the lead is generating jobs and whether they're nonprofit jobs in the nonprofit sector or for-profit sector, the unemployment rate, everyone's being engaged that wants to be engaged.

Now keep in mind that a certain percent stay out of the workforce.

And I just chose a typical percent, whatever that was 36% or something so that not everyone is working.

Some people are doing other things, non-formal jobs or whatever term you might want to use them.

You know, everyone's engaged somehow.

People are actively engaged in their lives and in their community.

But some people who are in the workforce, the unemployment rate is very low.

And the unemployment rate in the club itself reaches its lowest level after 10 years.

It just takes a little while for the rest of the county to catch up.

On the left, this is the before and after snapshot of what family incomes are.

upper graph shows the distribution from the census data on day one or day zero.

And the bottom graph shows the same thing on the 28th year of the simulation.

And you can see that essentially everyone in the county, 90% of the people in the county are making the income target, which is just over 100,000.

So it goes from a highly unequal

income to a almost completely equal income over the period of 28 years.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me ask a question, John.

So I still see that between 350 and 400, there's still the 10% who don't join, ostensibly because they would stand to lose.

Right.

So how do you take- That's correct.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
They wouldn't join because


SPEAKER_00:
sorry, just how do you take the other 90% and make their average value something with fewer people working productive jobs, having a higher average than 80% that's below 100K in the top graph?


SPEAKER_01:
If I understood the question, it's

kind of what do you do with the 10% who don't join and do, is there some kind of, do their income somehow equalize over time or do they, like what happens?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, let me just ask again, because they don't change.

So ignoring the 10% whose income does not change, how do you take the bell curve right side here, which has an average below 100,000, and then by reducing the variance, also increase the mean while potentially having fewer people with income generating jobs?

Just how does the extra USD per year come into this system?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Again, I'm not sure if I understand the question, but how does the extra U.S.

dollars come into the system?

That's through balancing of the trade deficit.

So that's how the new dollars come in that weren't there before, right?

So what this club is doing essentially is adjusting its trade balance with the rest of the world such that it's getting its fair share of dollars.

And the dollar income of the club

equals the average dollar income of the US at the end of the simulation.

Did that answer your question?


SPEAKER_00:
So it's predicated on basically a locally positive economy that's generating a trade excess to get more USD because you need more USD to pay that number of people, 100,000 versus between zero and 100,000.

And so even though fewer are making potentially productive jobs, fewer are not in the workforce, there's so many more USD coming in that we can raise the income for them and everyone else.

I'm just saying that that's built in, right?


SPEAKER_01:
That's built in.

Yeah.

That's all built in.

Yep.

Yep.

Now you're not, what I thought you were originally asking is what do you do with the other 10% of what happens to them?

We'll talk about that in a moment, but I'm going to argue that their incomes actually fall towards this, this plateau of around 110 too.


SPEAKER_00:
I think social pressure, social pressure would ensure it.


SPEAKER_01:
That would be one, that would be one thing.

And there's some other reasons too.

Well, we,

We might as well talk about it now since we're on the topic.

So let's suppose that I own a franchise of a corporation, say McDonald's or something, could be anything.

And I take in money from the local community.

They spend money to buy my food, but then I'm sending money outside of the community because I'm paying franchise fees and other things, corporate fees and other things.

So some of my money's leaving the community.

I'm paying low wage workers.

And that's what makes this whole model work is that I can get low wage workers to sit behind the counter and make hamburgers or whatever.

Now, what happens when there's no low wage workers to choose from?

Like everyone's joined the leader.

Everyone who I would have paid 30,000 a year, 40,000 a year is now making 110,000 a year.

Where does my workforce come from?

How is my business model going to even function if I don't have a low-income pool to draw from?

So my business model is going to be strained, to say the least.

It won't work very well.

It's changing the game.

It's changing the foundations of how the normal business works in the world.

And not only would people not be available because the leader would be paying higher incomes, higher wages, but those people should be enjoying their jobs a whole lot more.

They would understand that they're helping the community by working in the bakery or wherever they're working.

It's part of a community effort to raise the fitness of the community, right?

Like we're all in this together.

And I'm getting a voice.

by becoming a member.

So there's lots of reasons I would want to be a member, and very few reasons I would want to be a low-paid worker at McDonald's or anywhere else.

And that's another reason.

And the third reason is there's the IP commons that I mentioned earlier.

So there's all these, you know, the leader has now funded all these new businesses.

Some are technical businesses, some other businesses, but there's all kinds of property being generated in particular intellectual property that, uh, that is shared amongst the membership amongst the club and maybe even between clubs.

So suddenly there's this enormous advantage to, to principal business or to, uh, to a member of businesses, to becoming members, because you get this, you know,

volume of free intellectual property.

And standard businesses that are outside of this do not have access to that.

They have to pay royalties to get that IP stuff.

So that's another reason.

And I think there's actually still one more reason that I want to talk about.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, a successful community...

a successful community would have many leverage points and many ways to draw income in and an unsuccessful community would have no one wanting to help them except for the U S government paying USD, which I also saw in the model, right?

That the USD is providing by the government.

So it's like welfare at the country level and also at the community level.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Yeah.

So imagine that's a good point.

And imagine how that's going to affect, say a county government, a good,

county level governance or state level governance or even federal governance what if it didn't have to pay like all this unemployment insurance and all these other things the fees that the government has to pay you know when people are when people need help right all these programs uh and the and all of it is being taken care of at the community level by by leaders and clubs like leaders so the so there would be actually like in that sense you would expect that

state and go and national governments might actually like this concept you know because it's reducing their liabilities you know it's especially at the local government the local government as I said the local tax revenues are double in this in this simulation so you know the county government might go like hey good idea this is if this could work this is a great idea and the individuals might say hey this works this is a great idea my income is gonna double

Great.

Fantastic.

Just a bit on income.

Obviously, with this, the lower your starting income, the more you benefit from this.

So if you happen to be someone at day zero where your family income is fairly low, yours is going to have the greatest rise compared to someone who's already making, say, mid-level income or something.

But it doesn't matter.

It's like the rising boat catches everybody by the time it gets up to the

Some more results on slide 17.

On the upper left-hand corner, you can see how much money is circulating in this CBFS.

I want to emphasize again that this is a community of 100,000 people.

This is a small community, right?

So this small community is now circulating $6 billion in currency annually.

That's $6 billion that it has to choose about, like, what jobs do we create?

What nonprofits do we support?

What do we want?

What kind of parks do we want?

What is the road quality?

How is our hospital system?

Like, whatever decisions this community needs to make,

It's got $6 billion in currency to play with.

So an enormous amount.

And that should be enough for the community to make whatever choices it wants as far as what are we going to do?

How are we going to get there?

How are we going to improve our quality of life?

And maybe just on that note, I will mention again, we've already said this, but

There's no club that's an entity in and of itself.

As clubs start to form and develop, there would also be along with them networks of clubs that are forming and developing that are also a cognitive system.

So the cognitive system is playing, the cognitive architecture is playing out at the local level at a club, and it's playing out between clubs as clubs need to make decisions about how they're going to solve larger problems, right?

So again, no club is in this for its own good and only its own good.

Clubs are connected.

This is a greater good project.

Um, the bottom left, uh, these are how the workforce gets divided over time.

So on day zero, most of the workforce is in the regular standard businesses.

Almost 90, 97% is in a regular standard business.

A little bit is in the nonprofit sector and obviously zero is in the principal business sector.

But after, after the period of 28 years, it achieved some different balance of the core course.

And I just want to say again, that whatever balance that is, it's a balance that the community chooses in advance, right?

So this, it just didn't play out by itself.

These are based, these are all based on the community decisions all along the way.

Like we want this community wants to achieve a 50%, uh, you know, to split its workforce, uh, 50% into the nonprofit sector or 40% or 80% or 90% or whatever it wants.

Um, upper right graph are the donations made to nonprofits.

These are dollar donations apart from the CDFS.

And I'm just using a, like a fraction of income goes to donations, like a general fraction.

And you can see that, uh, donations to local nonprofits more than double.

So, you know, this, at least, uh, in theory, this whole system is like a boom for county governments.

It's a boon for the nonprofit sector.

Uh, it's a boon for the education sector.

Uh, and then everyone else's income is going up and unemployment's going down too.

So like who loses the only people that are losing from this whole thing are the people who hold enormous economic power on day zero.

You know, like those people aren't really gaining from this.

And if lots and lots of clubs were to, you know, lots and lots of cities were to implement clubs and this actually happened in scale, you know, distributed at scale.

then the real losers, in a sense, would be those who are quite wealthy to begin with, like billionaires, say, or multimillionaires, because their incomes would probably drop, as I've mentioned, over time, only because of social pressures and because they can't get people to work in their businesses and things like that.

But at the same time, everyone's well-being increases.

So it's not like anyone loses.

Everyone wins here.

Like the world is, you know, all communities are more empowered to solve their real problems that matter.

This is a cognitive system aimed at achieving sustainability and thriving into the future.

So there really isn't anybody that loses from this.

There's just some apparent losers, you know, and not very many of them at that.

The lower graph on this, I won't say too much.

I'll just explain the blue line there.

This is the number of tokens that are generated by the community.

So obviously in the early years, for the first 15 years, you're generating tokens because you're growing in this growth period.

And then after that, the tokens are just circulating.

And importantly, they don't circulate outside of the membership.

So if I'm a standard business, there's no one can, oh, that's the other reason why.

why clubs and club businesses would grow is that if you're not a part of the club, people can't spend their tokens at your establishment.

So I might be a local business and I don't want to participate and that's fine.

It all goes as it goes, but everyone else's incomes are increasing.

Part of that income is in tokens and those people can't spend their tokens at my establishment.

The only way they can is if I joined the,

If I join the club, then they can spend their tokens at my establishment.

Page 18.

And I think this is the last of the results I was going to show.

This is the results just for the local government.

This is tax revenues for the local government.

The red is the tax receipts.

So for this Lane County, I estimated that it starts at about

billion dollars annually in revenues and it more than doubles by the end of the simulation so their tax revenues go way up and you can imagine what counties would want to do with you know if their revenues tax revenues doubled you can imagine they could put that to very good use uh okay and just some final remarks on these last two slides

And this first one is something that we just were touching on.

What happens to the other 90% that don't join the leader?

So I would argue that in the long run, even that 10% that has very high incomes would see their incomes move closer to the target income for the leaders.

And that's for all the reasons that we just mentioned,

business owners don't receive the benefit of tokens because they can't accept tokens.

There's social pressures to belong to the club because it's in everyone's benefit for people to belong to the club.

The IP is, there's an IP pool that people have access to if they join the club.

So like a number of reasons, maybe there was one other that we talked about.

So you would think that, you know,

This is the new, you know, like if this is happening, then it's like who uses a typewriter anymore, right?

Hardly anybody.

And it's because computers work better for typesetting, you know?

This is a technology.

That's another way to say that.

This is a technology.

This is a decision-making technology.

And it's both a soft and a hard technology.

Education is part of it.

There's, you know, there's all these components to it, but it's a technology.

And, uh, you know, that's what happens in the world.

A new technology springs up.

It's, it's far better than the old one.

And then suddenly the old one is toast.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, the old one becomes subsumed into conflict at a higher level.

So you could have different chains that are competing.

So the idea that still... One part for me is that just thinking about evolutionary transitions and individuality, it raises the level of conflict to another level up from what we've seen before with everything that politically and game theoretically would come with that.

And the second piece is I don't update my priors based upon...

models without parameter sweeps.

So it's hard to look at a given layout and imagine.

But it's something that we actually use as a North Star for people who are on that political journey.

They might see that as beneficial.

But as you're pointing out, people who don't see it as beneficial are not going to join until the incentive structures are restructured for them or that will happen.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, absolutely.

and everyone's learning from this.

So, you know, the communities, the world is learning from this, right.

And the world is learning over time, whether this is even a good idea or not, is this whole system work.

And obviously if it doesn't work, if it doesn't produce these benefits that are, that are, that are expected in advance, if it doesn't do that, then it doesn't work.

And then no one would join because it's a stupid system, right.

Or it has flaws that need to be fixed or something.

So, uh, yeah, everyone's learning together and, um,

And, uh, there could be numerous trials going on of different systems at the same time.

And, you know, try it for the world.

Everyone can be trying to figure out what works best in this, what kind of systems work best.

And, um, yeah, all of that's happening.

It's evolving as, as we go, it's evolving.

But the important thing is, is that this is a framework to facilitate societal cognition, you know, at the local level, at the club level.

And, um,

If we think of our societal systems as cognitive systems, then it's a perfectly reasonable question to ask, what kinds of system designs work best?

And that's what this whole R&D program is aimed at, just asking that question.

Of all conceivable designs, which kinds of designs might most facilitate societal cognition and therefore achieve the intrinsic purpose of a society, which is to thrive now and in the future?

So what designs?

And you can imagine all kinds of trials to help answer that question.

Next slide.

And this is the last one.

Just a few remarks.

I've touched on this already.

But an organism is agile, right?

Among other things, I have legs.

I can run from danger.

I can do things.

I can change my behavior.

As a community, we can change our behaviors.

We can do whatever we need to do to achieve whatever task is in front of us, or at least achieve most tasks.

But in particular, Alita is agile.

It is flexible.

It can choose what jobs it funds.

And suppose that 10 years into a new club, some big thing happens or some new challenge that wasn't anticipated, it just arose.

Well, this is decision-making under uncertainty.

That's the whole concept of this.

This whole system facilitates decision-making under uncertainty.

Something new has happened, now the community has to respond to this new set of conditions.

It can change its makeup of what businesses it funds, what organizations it funds, who does what.

It can change how many people work in the nonprofit sector versus for-profit sector.

It can essentially use, it can vote to focus its attention and its resources, human and otherwise, on whatever problem it needs to focus its attention on.

So it's agile by design.

And part of that, by the way, is having fairly equal income.

So in our native system, if I'm a billionaire, it is really hard for the society to allocate my billions of dollars for some worthwhile project, right?

Because of the private property laws, that's my private property and you can't use it, right?

But if everyone's income is equal, then everyone is participating in that redistribution

to the community so uh a community empowers businesses with with funding for example and it's important that it can retract that uh support when necessary so the the design of this whole system is such that there that things can change uh rapidly if need be and the community can redirect its attention to whatever problem it needs to address

Again, the next one there is that the main resource is not money, it's human attention and energy and also to some degree natural resources.

But the real purpose of money is simply to allocate human attention and human energy and resources into those problems that actually matter.

And lastly, again, the leader can, because of its agility, because members are choosing what kinds of jobs to make, what sorts of businesses, what sorts of economy it wants, it can choose any flavor of an economy it wants.

It creates the jobs that it wants to work in and the kinds of jobs that people want their children to work in.

So it can do whatever it wants as long as it functions as a cognitive system and as long as it actually meets the essential needs of the organism, of the community.


SPEAKER_00:
and that is it in a nutshell or not in a nutshell that's it in those long there's the uh there's the the blueprint haiku for the nutcracker it is a few levels upstream but that's why it's fun to have these open-ended discussions and just allow um

you've worked on for so long to flow out just hear how you're laying it out and maybe in closing out this little discussion as we head into the next two weeks with the group discussions how would somebody get involved or where can somebody come into play after seeing this or reading the papers


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, well, I can be reached through the website, principledsocietiesproject.org, and there's other resources there.

So one start would be just to familiarize yourself with the material a bit.

But we have a mailing list, so people can just join the mailing list.

And as things progress and as opportunities arise, then we can use our mailing list to contact people.

This whole series is written to the scientific community.

So that's my target audience for the series of papers.

And I'm hoping that I can entice the scientific community to pick up this topic as a worthwhile topic of study and endeavor.

Can we, as a scientific community, address these issues, create designs, test designs, identify fitness

describe how community cognition works and what is how it works best and the conditions you know necessary are we are we ready to to pick up this topic and i'm hoping the answer is yes because it looks rich to me and on so many levels could be extremely valuable to society and obviously it's aimed at societal transformation and it's already quite clear that

that different groups, academic and otherwise, generally understand that bold change is necessary.

So this is one form of bold change.

Now, academics in particular, please do reach out if you think, if there's any number, if you have some funding, there's any number of small studies that could be done immediately.

This simulation could be expanded in a number of ways.

A study could be done just looking at, just asking the public what they think of deep transformation and what they would think of income equality or what they, you know, like laying out some possibilities to the public.

Or if you were in media, whether that's literature or music or movies or documentaries or whatever, please contact me because just getting the word out to the public that transformation in this sense might actually be viable and possible.

So that's important.

So if you got any idea about how to, an idea of how to contribute to this effort, then great.

You know, some, you know,


SPEAKER_00:
it's like either they can read it now and send you a note or hear about it later or not.

So over it goes.

John, thanks so much for these awesome sessions though, because it was great reading the papers and great to go through them again.

And we'll all be looking forward to speaking with you on the upcoming Tuesdays at 7 a.m.

Pacific.

So we'll talk to you soon.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

I really appreciate the opportunity.


SPEAKER_00:
Absolutely, John.

Talk to you

## mbEqoCV16q4

SPEAKER_02:
Hello and welcome everyone to Act-Inf Lab.

This is Act-Inf live stream number 21.1 and we're here with John Boyk and several other colleagues looking forward to a discussion today on this science-driven societal transformation series.

and project that we've been exploring and had several background sessions .01 through .04 with John.

And in the discussion today and next week, we're going to be looking to draw out some threads and include some new perspectives and hear from the questions that people may have.

And for these discussions, we're going to be using the same Jamboards that we were using for the discussions with just John and I. And we're going to jump around the Jamboards.

We're going to hear questions from anyone who wants to ask live or in the YouTube chat, and we'll have fun.

So we'll just start with introductions and then get a quick little recap and off we go.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I'll pass it first to Alex.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Hi, everyone.

I'm Alex.

I'm a researcher in Systems Management School in Moscow, Russia, and I pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Hi, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I do a lot of work with participatory theatre and community development, and I'm researching how social topographies can be used across scales of community psychology and other development practices.

And I'm going to pass it over to Lee.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Stephen.

I'm Lee.

I'm a researcher based at the University of York.

I'm studying systems transformation, and my supervisor is Yohan Faizi, who I think you've drawn a little bit, John, in a couple of these papers.

I was really, really happy to find someone else looking at systems transformation and active inference at the same time, although I think you're a lot further down the line than I am in thinking about this.

So I really look forward to this session.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Well, welcome, John.

Maybe you could give an introduction and start things off.


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

Thanks for having me, and thanks, everybody, for joining us.

My name is John Boyk.

I'm a courtesy faculty at Oregon State University, and the purpose of these talks is to discuss the series of papers that I just recently published in the journal Sustainability.

The title is Science-Driven Societal Transformation, Parts 1, 2, and 3.

And if you would go, we're going to do a quick recap of some of the material that we've discussed before.

We'll jump around a little bit just to catch some main highlights.

And, of course, feel free to jump in with any questions as we go.

So if you could turn to Jamboard 1, slide 1.

Yep.

You got it?

Okay, good.

So this just is the pictures of the different papers.

The links are down on the lower left, so in case anyone wants to check out the papers, please do.

They're all open source, freely available.

And we're going to focus today, we'll jump around a little bit and capture the main topics, but we're going to focus on part three, design, today.

All right, slide two, please.

And as we go through this, if there's more questions, if someone wants more materials, all of the links are available.

All the links to all the papers and some other materials are available at my website for this project, principledsocietiesproject.org.

And I might mention there's also an interactive model there that you can delete a framework, which we'll talk about, so you can see how the economic simulation goes.

Uh, slide five or slide four, excuse me.

Yes.

So what is the, what is the purpose of this?

What is the, what is the problem that this, this series is trying to solve?

Um, the problem that faces society or really human civilization is a host of very large so far intractable problems, including climate change, biodiversity laws, poverty,

income and wealth inequality, and soil depletion, groundwater depletion, pollution.

I mean, it's a long list of very serious problems that we face.

So serious, in fact, that it's not clear at this point how civilization will fare in the coming decades, even in the coming years.

I mean, the world is armed right now.

The world is armed to its teeth with nuclear weapons.

So, you know,

Any moment things could go awry or things could just deteriorate rapidly as climate change and biodiversity loss gain speed.

So hopefully we will solve our problems as societies.

Hopefully we will improve quality of life and quality of the environment.

But that is what we're shooting for in the series is pathways to do just that.

I would like to point out that this series is focused on transformation in the sense of de novo design of fundamentally new systems, societal systems, which I talk about six, I believe.

So economic systems, legal systems, financial systems, governance systems, things like that.

So the problem is the major,

constellation of problems that we face globally, and the proposed solution is to view society as a cognitive organism.

And just like any organism, it has an intrinsic purpose of achieving and maintaining vitality.

So how does it do that?

How does any organism survive?

It learns, it develops, it learns, it acts, it learns from its actions, and it adapts to new

conditions as necessary.

This series is actually an R&D proposal.

It's aimed at the global scientific body.

And my hope is to interest the scientific world in this problem of how do you transform?

How could we build a better society?

If we were to create

Any conceivable way to organize society, any conceivable economic systems or governance systems or legal systems, educational systems, what would be the best in terms of quality of life and quality of the environment and long-term sustainability?

I think that's a question that science is now capable of addressing.

Perhaps this is the first time in history that science had the tools and the skill and the background and the computational power to address these kinds of very, very large questions.

But I think that we can do it now.

The whole R&D program is described as a partnership between the global scientific community and local communities.

The idea here is to build, create, and test new systems at the local level in cooperation with local volunteer communities.

And I talk about implementing those systems and implementing field tests via a club model, which we'll discuss a little bit.

Okay, so that's a very quick overview.

Maybe onto slide five.


SPEAKER_02:
First, Stephen, with a question, and then anyone else who's raising their hands.

Just keep looking at the hands.

Yeah, go ahead, Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Yeah, just one question.

I noticed you mentioned

architecture.

So you've got the idea of architecture and you've got these different things that we have got in the constellation.

And I wonder if you could speak a little bit more to the idea of architecture and how that relates to architectures in the brain or maybe distributed systems of the brain, you know.


SPEAKER_04:
The brain is what I'm thinking of when I use the word architecture.

Well, a little bit.

I mean, people talk about computing frameworks and computing architectures too, but I really had in mind the way the brain functions.

And maybe I should make that even more broad because if climate change and biodiversity loss and these other major problems that we face are symptoms of a cognitive dysfunction at the societal level,

I mean, that's what I would call it, a societal dysfunction, a cognitive dysfunction, because we've known about these problems for decades.

You know, with climate change, we've known about it for more than 50 years, and yet we failed to adequately address the issues.

So I would say that all of these major problems are symptoms of a cognitive problem or symptoms of a cognitive dysfunction.

And then the question becomes, okay, well, if we're not cognating correctly, where do we look for better models?

Where do we look for ideas of how we might cognate better?

And I would say that in the world of biology, including the human brain, there's just a million or a large number of examples that we can learn from.

How does nature compute?

Nature's been at this for a very, very long time.

And how does it work in nature?

And maybe we can align ourselves with the same program, the same process that's going on all around us.

And if we do, then I would say there's the chance of building systems that are much more effective at achieving the intrinsic, you know, our goal, which is to achieve and maintain vitality far into the future.

Yeah, Stephen, and then Lee.


SPEAKER_01:
And I was just going to sort of build in on that because with active inference, one thing that sometimes comes up in the, you know, is that rather than the brain being like a computer per se, that it's a distributed and actually now maybe even not even functionally specialized in certain regions, but, you know, it's more of a distributed system.

of which, you know, we're not exactly sure exactly how all that works, but the idea of it being a dynamical sort of prediction engine.

So I'm wondering how that could, how much might that inform where you go with this?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, yeah, totally.

Because we're using the word brain, but even when I'm thinking brain, I'm thinking whole body and bodies connected to each other, other bodies in society, the

In part one of the series, the title is called Worldview, and I try to set up a context for all of this.

And as part of that context, I point out that everything is intelligent, like every piece of life is connected to every other piece of life, either strongly or weakly.

And the whole of life is processing information.

I mean, that's essentially what life is doing, is processing information.

reducing uncertainty about the future from the past.

So yes, absolutely.

We have the four E's, for example, and we have distributed... In part three, I use the analogy of between neurons and individuals in a society.

And so how do neurons associate with other and disassociate with other?

there's kind of a complement as to how people associate and disassociate with others in the process of societal cognition.

And so we have connections in the brain, we have connections to our bodies, connections to our emotions, connections to our feet and fingertips, and connections to everything that is happening around us in our immediate environments, connections to each other.

And all of that plays a role in cognitions.

So I'm talking about cognition in the large sense, not in the narrow sense.

And I'm certainly not talking about a computer model that tells everybody what to do.

That's not at all what this is about.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, John.

Lee, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_03:
It was more of an observation, really.

It's just when you were saying that you were drawing on the natural biological systems for inspiration, it kind of occurred to me that then what you're doing is a kind of a biomimicry of cognition.

But building on Stephen's point, it's not in the older sense of the mind is computer, but much more in the newer sense is biology at all levels being able to cognate.


SPEAKER_04:
Right, absolutely.

I think I read by Buckminster Fuller, he said something one day, he said, I think I'm a process, not a thing.

I'm paraphrasing there, but that's right.

It's like all of life is a process, an intelligent process.

Cool.

And those, just, you know, I'll say it again, but those ideas really are new to science in what the

I mean, you know, the mainstream science, new to mainstream science in just the last two decades or something like that.

I mean, fairly recent concepts of complex systems that, you know, cognitive systems, the interconnectedness of all things, the intelligence of all things, trees, communicating with other trees through, you know, through soil fungus.

And all of these, many of these ideas are actually quite recent in the science world.


SPEAKER_02:
And a funny note on that is that mainstream science is new in the social cognition world.

The professionalization of science is a new topic and a new genre.

And I really liked some of these points about distributed systems.

We can think about distributed systems within one level of analysis or one system of interest, like within the ant colony, it's a distributed system or within the brain, it's a distributed system.

But once you start thinking about brains,

john you mentioned the 4e the extended inactive embedded and cultured could be more e adjectives but that brings out the richness and says yes it's distributed system amongst the neurons in the brain and then the brain is interfacing with the body and the body with its niche and the tools and the social affordances and it's starting to sound like a lot of topics that we've talked about on active live streams

So it's so awesome to see how we're taking some threads from the past and weaving them together.

And I hope that we can draw this out, how a multi-scale distributed systems perspective on cognition coupled with a social transformation agenda and preference vectors representing policy can get combined through active inference into something that's applied.


SPEAKER_04:
Right, right.

How to act, how to make decisions under uncertainty.

That's what all of this is about.

As a counterpoint to some of that, or as a different view on some of what we just talked about, imagine if we can look at how our society treats individuals.

I mean, we can look at extreme inequalities of wealth and income, different levels of access to health care.

There's all these social issues that we face right now.

Imagine if your brain acted that way is somehow, you know, with, with different neurons where some neurons were just simply starved.

Some neurons were excluded from the computational process.

Some neurons were given very few resources, just barely enough to survive.

And others had so many resources that they were, they were like wasting their resources because they had so much.

I mean, imagine how well the brain or how poorly the brain might function.

If that's the way neurons interacted, if that was the community, if the community of neurons was anything like the community of individuals in our society, we wouldn't be able to make hardly any good decisions.

We'd be a mess.


SPEAKER_02:
It reminds me of Dennett's fame in the brain model.

And the firing rates of neurons are not identical.

Some are firing many times per second.

Others fire not even in a day, perhaps.

So there's a lot...

of distributions in these complex systems and how do we think about the whole distribution as an outcome of a complex process rather than just trying to identify some sort of an outlier or some sort of single phenomena it's it's uh not the leverage point that system interventions will be effective at so stephen and then any other raised hands


SPEAKER_01:
This also ties in, I think, nicely with the idea of post-normal science, the idea that in the post-normal science world where you're in high levels of uncertainty, you have to make decisions.

So COVID is a classic case, right?

We didn't – they had to make choices in January, February, March, April, even now, and you don't have the data, right?

You don't know.

And in the same way with active inference, the brain –

and different parts of the body are making action policy selections as is going to inform action.

And that's not quite the normal realm of where science is.

You're in this, but this is where we're going to be going as we hit climate change and all sorts of other complex questions.

So that also is quite an interesting tie-in because Friston, I don't know if you know, but he did some modeling on COVID-19 as well.

He got into that.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, John, maybe you could unpack that in the context of second-order science, which you discussed in the papers.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, or maybe I can just pass it to Lee, and he can say a few words.

Yeah, Lee.

He's the expert here.


SPEAKER_03:
No?

Thank you all for coming.

No, I'm happy to.

So the concept of second-order science really is just that the idea that the scientist can't be separated from the systems that they are studying.

So really where that's kind of led to in systems transformation research is that the only way that we can really understand systems is by engaging with them and learning how to change them ourselves.

So we can't kind of stand back and just try and focus on epistemic knowledge

alone, really.

And that also implies this kind of second order understanding of ourselves and how our own cognitive systems work as part of the systems that we are engaging with.


SPEAKER_04:
That was a value-driven science, where the scientist is part of the experiment with the stakeholders.

Absolutely.

Lee, while we have you here, that paper by Fazi was authored by a very large number of people, it seemed.

And can you just say if you know the story behind that?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, a little bit.

I think it was authored before I started studying with him, but there's a transformation community really, I guess, of researchers.

And I think it probably came out of one of the conferences that's been going on.

So it's sort of the product of a discussion between

many researchers, which is the way that they kind of prefer to write, really.

So again, like moving away from this idea of, you know, the single genius to let's kind of gather and figure this stuff out together.


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

I referenced Fazi's paper several times in my part number two, so readers can see how that fits into the bigger picture here.


SPEAKER_02:
And it's funny that that idea that the product of research is collaborative, it's a colony phenotype, it's a group phenotype, how well this paper is and how many people cite it and how much impact it have, it's not going to be reduced back down to a single person.

And so let's take that.

And then just like you brought up, Lee, the implications of of learn by doing is that we have to infer by acting, basically.

So then what does it mean for the scientist who's all in on that to be studying climate change on a coast or the conservation of a forest or sociology or anthropology?

very interesting questions that I hope a lot of different listeners can see resonating with their own situation.

So Steven, and then any other raised hands.


SPEAKER_01:
I think just also building on the idea of this distributed input is, and in many cases, it may end up a lot of the, may end up that a lot of the work is not in science anymore.

It's like science informed development or science informed, or even science informing a model.

And the model informs practices which inform the way that communities can get involved.

So now the real agent is actually the community and we're serving them.

So this interesting shift between where science fits in and can change, you know, I think that's quite interesting as well.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, yeah.

You know, I could have titled the entire series Science Influenced the Transformation because that is the concept I was going for.

I called it science-driven, but my

My idea there was similar.


SPEAKER_02:
And also the historical perspective, which includes many world knowledge traditions and hundreds and thousands of years and multiple continents, not just the story of Western academia, understanding that that has not been a steady state.

There's no stationarity with peer review.

Again, mainstream science, especially the second half of the 1900s and further,

That's new.

So science is in transformation and has always been in dialogue from 10,000 years ago.

So now, given the agency that we have and who we are and our affordances, our preferences, what's the move?

So we don't have any sort of a locked in phase to resist against.

That's not to say there's not inertia, but it is to say that there's actually a lot of agility in the system.

The question is, what are the leverage points

where we can actually make that impact and how my active inference come into play.


SPEAKER_04:
You know, maybe since we're on the topic, maybe we can just switch to jump ahead just a little bit, if I can find it.


SPEAKER_02:
You find the slide, and then Lee, go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Go ahead, Lee.

Just to pick up on your point there, Daniel, really, I mean, I've kind of been hesitant to say it,

in the active inference kind of, you know, Discord server and the like.

But I see such a huge amount of emphasis on active inference as a means to create AI and to improve AI.

And I can't help, I mean, I really spend a lot of time thinking about how can this knowledge be used to improve

you know, our own individual cognition and societal cognition, human cognition.

It doesn't seem to be, I mean, maybe I'm just missing some of the literature on that.

So if there is any, you know, point me towards it.

But it really seems to be that, you know, like the big assumption is, you know, we've got to put this stuff in AI because that's where all the progress is going to be, et cetera, et cetera.

And I kind of wonder, is that really a wise goal?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
I think active inference and several other paths, so not exclusive to active inference, it rethinks artificial part of artificial intelligence because it's part of our extended niche.

And so, yes, there's been a lot of focus on applying active inference to machine learning and to reinforcement learning, those types of areas.

And then what we're...

talking towards here is the integration of natural and artificial intelligence under a broader extended cognitive systems scope so humans in the loop or real-time computers just like every stoplight or every bank transaction is going to be every tweet is going to be designing those interfaces so that

Within each blanket, there's functional cognition, not viewed only from the outside in, but as part of a broader system.

And maybe we find out that we had good enough artificial intelligence, so-called algorithms in 2004.

and that we just had to hook them up in a different way.

Just like connecting different parts of piping could give you an engine that's more or less efficient, maybe it wasn't the case that we needed some sort of scaling on a larger data set, but we needed a new way to combine subcomponents, which is what biology does as well.

So, yeah, John?


SPEAKER_04:
Excellent.

Just a few more thoughts on that.

So the science world, and particularly this cognitive technology,

cognitive framework or concept of what is cognition, I think can be useful both at the societal level and at the individual level.

I mean, in the sense that if science can help direct the attention of the world to how intelligence happens all around us in nature, all around us every day, how, you know, how we evolve to, you know,

expand on the information process and the information processing, the capacity for information processing.

So it helps.

It helps in any, you know, it just helps an individual to understand a little better or have a different perspective on what am I doing?

What is, what am I, why am I here?

What am I doing?

Why, why am I, what am I?

You know, to a degree that these,

these new developments in cognitive science can help to shed some light on questions like that.

And at the same time for a society, like what are we doing here together?

What is our purpose together?

And if you know your purpose, it's a lot easier to know where to go next, how to frame things in a way that is suitable for your continued wellbeing.


SPEAKER_02:
And it's a bright line in some senses between first and second order science.

In the first order science literature, there might be a lot of sort of engineering type appeals to, well, we'll make the society more efficient or science informed policy will just simply be better.

And once we take that second order turn, we start to think,

we're going to have increased clarity about our values.

It's not going to be an easy conversation.

We might need to invent new ways of having the conversation or formalizing our values, but we need some sort of path that's going to bring us closer to clarity on our values rather than obscuring it with technical advances.

So Stephen, or John, go ahead, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_04:
I was just going to say obscuring it with technical details, but also obscuring it with

with incompatibilities between what the science world is saying and doing and what, say, the governance world is saying and doing or the economic world is saying and doing.

Obviously, if all of these systems are part of the cognitive architecture, you want to design them so that they are integrated with each other, so that the signals travel from one to the next, just as the signals in your body travel from one system to the next system.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Steven.

And I think this also ties into partly what this lab has been talking about quite a lot in trying to enable this possibility of making those transitions without losing the rigor of the modeling, because the modeling is seen as almost another way to get to empirical data.

It's not quite the same as science, but the challenge you have as things, unlike traditional science going towards engineering,

You do have this ability to embrace affects and values, but the challenge is how to stop things getting prematurely reified.

It's so easy things get reified and suddenly

effectively, you're just using another word for system boundary.

And you're kind of really doing the same paradigm work with some different window dressing, right?

So it's really, that's the challenge, I think, to, and I don't think anyone's quite managed to do that yet.

But I think that's definitely... No, we're on the cusp.


SPEAKER_04:
This is happening, you know, right now, this struggle of what does it mean?

And how do we do it?


SPEAKER_02:
And the premature reification, as you said, Stephen, it's basically, there's a perfect investing strategy.

If you had the time machine, you'd know exactly when to buy the dip, sell high.

We don't have that.

We're moving forward.

We don't have access to the future.

So there's two kinds of confidence errors.

There would be being overly confident.

So too early zoning in on a solution.

That's the premature reification.

And the other fallacy or the other side of that perfect strategy would be

waiting too long and so somewhere between waiting too long and acting too fast is that trade-off space that we have from so many different perspectives with not just finding the value of explore versus exploit that's going to be best but rethinking the explore and exploit outcomes as part of a process that might be doing something like balancing epistemic and pragmatic value for example in in the free energy principle

So it's a really awesome conversation.

And John, continue.


SPEAKER_04:
And altering how you measure fitness relative to those two differences.

Well, since we've been talking about science, the role of science in this, why don't we jump ahead to slide two, or join board two, slide 16, if you would.

Yep.

Oh, okay.

That was fast.

And while we get that rolling, just one more thought on second-order versus first-order science.

You know, Fasey's paper is great.

Really, I think, an important one.

But it's new.

I mean, it's new to the science world.

Most of the science world is very focused on what we would call first-order science, where the scientist is an observer of a system, not engaged with...

transformation of that system or achieving value driven goals in that system.

And first order science is fantastic.

We have learned a tremendous amount of knowledge, gained a tremendous amount of knowledge from first order science.

So it is fantastic for what it is and has to be continued.

But in addition to that, we can also start to be thinking about what is second order science?

How can the science world be engaged in a value-driven effort towards some better future?

And I suspect that there are lots of scientists who are frustrated, who are frustrated because they don't know how to, there's not an avenue for them to participate in really jumping in to make this world a better place.

Intelligent people look at our world and they see the enormous stress that we're under,

in this moment and are fearful of the even larger stress that is likely about to befall us.

So I think that there might be a tremendous amount of frustration in the science world of how do we use our capacities to actually fundamentally make things better as opposed to just passing off, you know,

sort of trivializing it a bit here, but just passing out a recommendation to some policy makers who then do whatever they do.

The scientist is then out of the loop.

So I think that this is the time for second order science to flourish.

This is the opportunity for the science community to really get engaged in these deep and important problems that civilization faces right now.

And in the series, I'm trying to propose an R&D program that is a path for the science world to get involved in these deeper questions and have a deeper impact on civilization.

So this slide is kind of a summary from my paper of why should science care about this and why should science get involved.

And we can talk about any number of these, but I'll just sort of jump through them a little bit just to highlight a few ideas.

The very first one is just this idea of societal cognition.

That's kind of new.

There's great potential for scientific discovery just on that question of does a society cognate?

How does it cognate?

in you know in what ways by what mechanisms by what features by in what with what characteristics i mean there's you know just as far as expanding the level of knowledge this question is really interesting um the second one so

We're talking about designing societal systems, and obviously this is a really complex issue.

This is not a simple, how do you build a better can opener, right?

This is difficult and complex issues.

And the science world has skills that can be really useful in addressing these questions and framing the movement towards how do we start?

How do we test?

What are the, how do we measure fitness?

How do we, what is the goal?

What is the purpose?

What are we doing?

You know, like the science world would have a lot to say about framing this entire question of what is societal transformation and how would we move, how would we move forward with it?

I might add too to this that, you know,

as I see it at least, one of the benefits of having the science world involved in this question of societal transformation is that the science world can provide objective and consistent metrics and frameworks to help guide the process.

That is, turned around, if this process of societal transformation, this program of societal transformation

was merely based on what a group, this group votes for this, let's do this.

And this other group votes for let's do this.

And it was just a popularity contest of whatever was most popular in the moment.

That's where transformation is going.

I don't think the science world would have any much interest in that.

popularity contests or that kind of, uh, that kind of effort that there, where's the sun, you know, where's the knowledge in that?

Where's the science in that?

I don't, it would be on the other hand, I think it would be very interesting to the science world.

If transformation was based on some kind of principled approach, some kind of, some kind of like we can agree, uh, to, uh, to an extent, at least we can agree what fitness might mean for society.

And some of that would be based on objective measures.

Some of it might be based on subjective measures, but intelligent people can get together and conceptualize what fitness for a society or for a societal system might look like.

You know, these are, of course, complicated problems, deep problems.

But if we could do that as a community, if we could, if we could

find some way to assess fitness in a reasonable way, a reasonably coherent way, a reasonably consistent way, then we have a path to move forward of different groups could try different ways to reach a high fitness.

And all of those experiments would be adding to the body of knowledge of how do we do this so that fitness improves, right?

I don't mean to say that coming up with fitness scores and fitness evaluations of new systems would be easy, but it is a topic that we can tackle.

And it's because of our capacity to conceptualize fitness and formalize fitness in the sense of a formal assessment, I'm hoping that makes the whole project

interesting to the science world because now this is science.

Now this is expanding knowledge.

This is using first principles and scientific principles to evaluate systems.

And it's not a popularity contest.

It's not, you know, this is adding to our understanding of how the world works and how intelligence works and how cognition works and expanding it out to the societal level.

I don't know, maybe there's some thoughts on that alone.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, Stephen, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just sort of a couple of questions around the idea of fitness landscapes and how that might be used.

I sense you're sort of proposing that you could use these kind of fitness landscapes, I suppose you could even have descent on free energy landscapes,

to try and help inform policy selection, i.e.

maybe which research streams you're going to go down.

Because at the moment, you know, we're kind of either tied into

what the market says or some other methods, but this could, because there's fitness, maybe you could sort of separate out, because I could see a couple of different ways you could look at that then.

Is it like an extra field of practice to inform choosing the policy of which research field to go down and which avenues, or is it also within the field?

Is it with the fields connecting to each other?

I just wondered how that might work.


SPEAKER_04:
You know, it's all of those because everything that we do ought to be serving our purpose.

You know, I mean, obviously there's a great room for play and exploration and all that kind of stuff.

I don't mean to make humans, you know, two-dimensional or something.

Humans are complex organisms.

They have complex needs, and all of those needs must be addressed, right?

But the fitness, the concept of fitness, I see that as permeating multiple levels, right?

Because, yes, we would want to choose policies that help us.

And then what does help mean?

What does it mean?

How does it look if it helps us?

What is that all about, right?

So in some sense, if we just say I want to help, we're already thinking I want to improve fitness somehow, right?

But not just policy, but even structural design of what is a system?

How does society make decisions?

How do we communicate?

What is our communication systems?

How do we get input from everyone into this process of decision-making?

So across the board, both in the structural design of systems and institutions,

and uh and even to some degree um uh uh social norms right through education systems like what kinds of social norms help us um and then obviously too then in in policy but then even in our individual lives like it helps i think it might help individuals to understand that

That what we want is improved quality of life, lower uncertainty.

How can I make decisions in my own life that bring me the things that I think might actually make me feel better, that actually might serve me on even a superficial and deep level, right?


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, John.

Lee, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just some thoughts on the fitness metrics, really.

So, and this kind of goes to the

goes to the point about the way that scientists need to engage with local communities, because there's quite a lot of work that's already starting in that area, and a lot of it is based around this idea of place.

So scale has already been taken into account, and there's this whole kind of sense of the emerging bioregional movement, which just essentially means aligning your political and governance boundaries with the boundaries of ecosystems.

um and that then naturally has the effect of it it partitions things in a way that's meaningful to local people um and then you can start to ask them you know like what is it they that they value within their place because they're already kind of connected to it in a way um uh and i mean

I suppose one thing for me is this idea of metrics, really, versus counterfactual simulation, because once you start putting a metric on something, you know, like, you have a number and then, you know, that's something that people can't really care about, whereas, you know, like, if they can imagine how their, you know, their local river system, for example, wouldn't be polluted by, you know, sewage being released from the sewage works or, you know, runoff from them, you know, and they could see, you know, that then has the sort of the effect of, you know,

of engaging people, I think, more in the actions that we would need to collaboratively take to make these kind of things happen.


SPEAKER_04:
Sure, sure.

Different people might react in different ways.

Some people might be more, you know, really appreciate the modeling aspect.

Other people might just appreciate the boots on the ground, local change aspect.

But I would say there's room for all of that.

And the bioregionalism concepts are great.

I've been a fan for a long time.

And who knows, maybe in the future we'll move more and more towards that so that communities are really localized in their environment and protecting their environment and all that kind of stuff.

That's great.

In some ways, science has to catch up with communities of change who have been working on this for a long time, these concepts.

And in other ways, science is already, you know, pulling, pulling communities, you know, helping to say more, there's more, there's more, there's more we can do.

There's a bigger picture we can serve here.

So it's a, it'll be a give and take, I think, between communities.

And just one more thing is the bioregionalism idea is great.

And a lot of work also has been done in alternatives to GDP.

So, you know, the metrics that people are talking about, about, you know, considering education and longevity and disease and all these other things as opposed to just a single GDP measure of societal quality.

So there's lots of work being done on multiple fields.


SPEAKER_02:
And to speak to the metrics from an active inference perspective, let's just say that we wanted a river that was unpolluted.

We wanted no toxins in the river.

So our preference in the active inference model would be that the river is clean.

That'd be in our preference vector.

Now, traditional reinforcement learning would look at the level and it would reinforce policies that reduce pollution locally, and then it would forget policies that didn't locally.

Now the question is, let's just say you start decreasing it and all of a sudden it starts creeping back up, your reinforcement learner is going to be quite confused.

So in active inference, we can say that our metric is actually our uncertainty around our generative model of the river's pollution.

So then what actions can we take if our uncertainty starts to get wider?

How can we increase our precision on our generative model of pollution?

And then of course, concordantly with our values that it be unpolluted, how can we act to reduce our uncertainty?

And so it's the reinforcement, economic maximization mindset.

Pick the metric, I want everyone to read.

That's the metric, reading.

Well, no, the preference is that everyone can read, but the metric in active inference is our uncertainty around our observations.

And it's an extremely subtle at first, but eventually very far reaching way to think about these systems and what fitness is.

Because a lot of times fitness metrics, people are going to be thinking, right, like GDP or right, like something that we want to see.

But we can actually now tease apart

our preferences from our affordances, from our uncertainty in our generative model, and several other features of active inference scale-free models.

And that is going to help us have a multi-stakeholder conversation in a new way.


SPEAKER_04:
That's great.


SPEAKER_02:
Great, great, great, great, great, great.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, John.

Yeah, can I just add to that?

I totally agree with what Daniel just mentioned there because

It's not an active inference per se on its own, but it's the ability of active inference to be used in this epistemic foraging way.

And I think the point that was made there about reinforcement learning, which we kind of think, oh, that's some machine learning method, but actually reinforcement learning is the dominant approach to development.

It's like it's the way humans have structured, in a way, their own thinking.

It's not exactly reinforcement learning in such a way, but it's so constrained and it's so goal-driven.

And the only integrating way to overcome it and why Thatcher then started saying there is no alternative is the market.

It's saying it can't deal with the complexity beyond a certain point, so you have to offload it to this market, which, again, you get into that kind of –

just becomes whatever's the favorite of the day and this gives us a way to get into this nuanced complexity gives us at least the chance to go some other route and plausibly deliver on that promise you know i think that's really cool it's right absolutely go go


SPEAKER_02:
To give like a spatial metaphor on reinforcement learning versus active inference, it's like if there's a mountain peak that we know that we want to get to, the reinforcement learner would say, okay, the goal and the reward is the elevation.

And so it can get trapped on a local elevation peak, but then it might not take a step backwards or down a few to get to the highest peak.

But again, if we do a trajectory of policy inference on getting to the top of a mountain, again, of course, as a preference that we have for ourselves in the future, we can ask, am I reducing my uncertainty about how I'm going to get there, when I'm going to get there and the way that we're going to do it together?

with potentially a group of hikers who have different capacities, instead of how are we going to get to the top of a little mole and then just stake out.

So it's a different conversation style.

Stephen, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And so building on that is when you have that come into play,

is the ability for the active inference approaches like you're talking about is magnified greatly when you don't just focus on the one person or the two people who are like the agents of change.

But you say, well, what about the local people who have no idea about the goal?

They have no ability to elevate.

They have no ability to contribute to the reinforcement learning.

But they know the slopes.

They can tell me the history.

They can tell me where people fell to their death in the past or where there's

And that then makes the place-based, community-based contributions much more plausible as why they enable the scientists and other people to do exactly what you're talking about.


SPEAKER_04:
Excellent.

Just to point out, so we're talking about reducing expected uncertainty about the future, right?

Think of all the ways that...

Think of all the implications of that in, say, design of systems or design of institutions or actions of humans facing some problem.

So one question that immediately arises is, do we have enough information?

Are we collecting the right information at the right frequency to even understand what's going on or to reduce our uncertainty?

Second is, how good are we at anticipating the future?

Can we do that with some accuracy?

Do we know what's going to happen next?

Do we have any idea what's going to happen next?

How good are our worldview concepts that lead to anticipation of the future?

And how good are our computational models about what's going to happen next?

How good is our information sharing capacities?

How are we communicating with each other?

Are we communicating the information

between groups and between individuals such that we can understand what's going to happen next and understand what our uncertainty levels are.

I could go on, but it seems like a simple proposition at first, and then you realize that proposition has enormous depth.

It implies all kinds of things about how a society might function and organize itself.


SPEAKER_02:
One thought on the wisdom of crowds and distributed computation.

There's a famous example from early in quantitative genetics where it was at a World's Fair and a crowd was asked, you know, you put in a raffle ticket and you can predict how much some cow weighs.

And then the average of the estimates was extremely accurate, although many individuals were, of course, distantly off the mark.

And a lot of people take that just straightforwardly as...

existence of the wisdom of crowds but there's a few pieces of that scenario that really matter the first is that the people attending may have had experience they may have been working in agricultural settings or have experience with getting feedback on their predictions and secondly the estimate was a bit bounded it wasn't that the cow was one pound or ten thousand pounds there was a an estimator and then it was still a cognitive diversity that contributed to that estimate so you couldn't just look at somebody who overestimates that well get rid of that guy he's wrong

like that's counterbalanced by someone on the other side of that curve that's how we're getting an estimate so having a distributional and a community perspective on decision making helps us recognize and encourage and foster diversity of opinion and also structure a resilient community so it's something that will be really interesting to see how and where these kinds of memes and ideas pop up


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, absolutely.

Valuing differences of opinion, valuing differences of perspective is one thing that you had said there.

Just to add something to that is in our polarized society today, there's like liberals and there's conservatives, at least in the US.

And they seem to be in two different universes almost, right?

But liberal and conservative,

at their best, is a little bit like exploration versus exploitation.

The necessary balance for any organism or for any decision-making process to balance exploration of the unknown and exploitation of what is already known, what is traditional, what is our history, what do we know works.

You know, at their best, liberal and conservatism are both important, just as exploration and exploitation are both important in problem solving.


SPEAKER_02:
And they're relative, just like left and right.

When you're spinning around and things are changing, it's hard to say.

And that's why we can pull back to some real pillars of biological systems instead of trying to scaffold further and further into the political or logistical ether

we can actually return to our grounding as a biological society.

So Lee, I saw your hand raised or maybe I didn't or Steven.

Oh yeah.

Steven.

And then anyone else who raised their hands.


SPEAKER_01:
That was quite interesting.

You made that point there about, you know, we look to explore the unknown.

And I think that in addition to that, because that's from the perspective of say the scientist or the person in the kind of,

the knowledge-generating game, so to speak.

That's their profession or whatever.

But there's also the exploring the known but not known that it's known, the tacit, the... So this is where communities can come in.

It's like there's... By realising that some of that unknown is participants in those environments know...

It just needs to be surfaced.

This is where some of the work with the environment side of the active inference, the niche, and these topographies that I'm quite interested in my side can come in because now they're exploring and revealing stuff and in a way which is networked and sort of not just isolated as single stories or experiences and fragmented.

So I think that connects with what you're saying.

Can you give one example of what you're thinking?

So one example, we did a project around water issues in rural areas of northern Maputo land in South Africa.

And so they had different areas of water catchment.

So some people were getting water from a lake, but the lake had hippos and, you know, crocodiles.

So it was a bit challenging for them in different ways.

And so you've got these different water catchment areas and it's like,

they had the lived experience of having to go there, having to get the water, having to boil it, because if the water is contaminated, you've got to boil it.

And what it means then if you're then doing that, if you've got someone at home who's got HIV on top of that, so then, you know, so they can't walk or they've got to have... So all these questions, so what they would do is they would create a fabric map the size of the room about all their different routes to water and then share the stories from eight different or whatever numbers of hotspots.

And then that became the sort of landscape.

So...

In doing so, that wasn't giving the answers, but it was informing another process maybe a week later, which was looking for innovations, looking for options for new approaches.

So that's one type of way that you could, like, reveal something from the local landscape, which would never have been available to an engineer from their own knowledge.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, great stuff.

Great stuff.

So some of what you're talking about is what is our individual narrative and what is our shared narrative, right?

Like what is our experience of life and what do I as an individual have, what knowledge and lived experience can I offer to this group that would help the group to eventually function better or make better decisions, right?

So that's a really interesting question to me for many reasons.

But one reason is how, suppose we were to move forward with this, this whole project was moving forward.

How do we communicate with each other richly?

I would argue that there is no system, no functional system right now

that a million people or 10,000 people can richly communicate their lived experience, their understanding of life, their understanding of what might happen if A, B, and C happen.

I don't think we have a, we're in need of tools to richly communicate.

I mean, we're in need of tools, yeah.

So that's an immediate opportunity for groups to get involved with is just that little question of how would we communicate and how would we make decisions together in some kind of collaborative fashion?

How do 10,000 people do that at once or a million people?

When you can't all fit in a room, you know, that's the question.

When you can't all fit in a room to really thoroughly discuss these issues and listen to each other, how do we do that at scale?


SPEAKER_02:
I think there could be answers to that.


SPEAKER_04:
That's not an impossible task.

That's a really interesting and doable task if we just put our minds to it.


SPEAKER_02:
It's related to regimes of attention and active inference perspectives on narratives, which were even our first Act-Inf livestream.

Number one was on narrative active inference because we think it's crucial.

And if there's going to be a social narrative like you had brought up, well, that's something that is not...

just sharded into a person's brain.

It's not a holograph where it's the same in the person's brain as it is at the social level.

Things that brains know that neurons don't.

It's not like each neuron is holding a little mini brain.

It's actually that there is differences amongst neurons.

Or if you think about like Star Wars or a movie, it's like each character doesn't know the whole omniscient scope.

And so we're part of a bigger story.

And so it's going to be interesting to explore what will it feel like as a person and what will it be like experientially with a personal narrative to be part of a broader societal narrative, but those will not be the same thing.

And the desire for those to be the same thing will lead to system fragility in many cases.

So Steven, and then any other comments?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think that ability to know certain things is a very important point.

And I think in active inference, something that I've increasingly been looking at is we've got external states and we've got hidden states, okay, in different ways.

So there's, from the perspective of the generative model of, say, a water engineer, there will be more, like there's hidden states from everything, right, from everyone to some extent, okay, as well as states that we can engage in.

And

So there will be this question about how do you engage the hidden states in a landscape as well as the external states of the regime of attention and where can someone else who's got a different lived experience contribute to opening up and maybe telling us where they think the meaningful aspects of their landscape are.

So I think that as well as modeling happening from

our own computational models and being able to maybe use some tools that we can model through participation in place-based, place-based.


SPEAKER_04:
Absolutely.

Absolutely.

So, so this tool I have in mind, it's, it's, I want to have my voice heard.

I, I have a story that is, that could be important to others.

That could be important to any particular situation that,

or topic that society is trying to decide upon, and I would very much like my voice to be heard, and not just a yes or no, or not just a choose A, B, or C way.

I have a rich experience that I want to communicate.

Now, another person sitting next to me might have a model of water quality, or whatever the issue is, and they might have something to say about what their model implies, but all of those voices should be heard.

All of those voices should be part of the

cognitive process of a society.

So certainly data-driven, you know, formal models of this and that, sure, that's great, that's fantastic.

It's an extension of our cognitive capacity.

And at the same time, I'm intelligent.

You know, I can do things a computer can't, at least today, you know, I can do many things a computer can't.

So whatever process, whatever communication system and process that develops out of this ought to be one

where every voice can be heard, can be registered, can be incorporated into this larger, really cognitive process.

You're talking about, you know, it's like sharing and we're discussing, but that's a cognitive process, right, for a group, because it's leading towards some better understanding of the world and, you know, improved decision-making about the world.


SPEAKER_02:
John, if I could, you mentioned data driven.

So to again, sort of distinguish and contrast with how you're potentially using data driven versus how it might be implicitly used in other settings, data driven, who's being driven?

Us, the data are driving us and our policy.

Oh, the policy is gonna be data driven.

Okay, well, how about it's human driven?

How about the policy and our affordances and the data are like a car and we're driving the car?

Do we need a better car?

Does it have too many wheels?

Where are we driving?

Whose turn is it to drive?

How are we choosing which music is being played in our human-driven car?

Not how are we going to fit into a data-driven human mode?

And it's just interesting that sometimes what is left unsaid

or unstated is where a lot of those values get swept under the rug.

It's data-driven.

What else do you want to talk about?

Oh, values?

Okay, well, there's time for values.

It's like, there has to be time for values, but the data-driven conversation makes it sound like it's the beginning and the end.

Right, right.


SPEAKER_04:
Today, yes, yes.

And I think that can be expanded greatly.

Right, so that's when I use the word richness.

That's a little bit of what I'm trying to imply is the richness of experience, the richness of perspectives, the richness of past information that I as an individual can bring to bear on this issue, whatever the issue is.

And then on top of that, what data do we have?

How frequently do we collect it?

What is its quality?

How can it contribute to this discussion?

Right.

So very much this, the, it's not that the computer has to decide what to do.

It's that human beings have to decide, you know, what to do, how to given all this information, what do we do?

How do we frame this?

How do we frame our problem?

How do we, are we even looking at the right problem?

Are we look, are we, are, is our focus too narrow or we, you know, or do we need to broaden our, our focus to understand better how all of these different problems.

So very much human in the human, in the center.

computation.


SPEAKER_02:
And to connect that to first and higher order science, and I'd be curious, Lee, what you think.

The first order project is like build a bridge.

The second order project is like, given what needs to happen, is a bridge the best solution?

Or maybe we can go about it a different way.

And the third order is, well, what really needs to be done here?

What do we value?

Who are we?

Those types of third order questions, which potentially even are on an escape trajectory from science.

Because we're not going to be looking to science in a narrow sense for the answer to that third order, truly human question.

But we do need to expand this discussion from what is the best way to build a bridge to how are we going to go about fulfilling transporting people from side to side.

or making a landmark for our city there's different reasons why we might want to build a bridge and people feel like a cog in the machine if they're just being instructed at the first order like do this right but when we're including people in higher orders then we're part of a multi-scale cognitive system we're not just a quote cog in a machine so elite event anyone else yeah i think this um i think it's a really important point and for me it touches on um


SPEAKER_03:
You know that Metzinger's transparency, opacity,

kind of, you know, are we, do we understand the beliefs and the frames consciously that we're operating out of?

So in the bridge metaphor, you know, you might say, you know, at the third level, the third order, it's really about how are we looking, how, you know, what's the ontology or the set of metaphors that we've been coming at this system through, and what effect are they having in shaping, you know, our, well, A, how we perceive it, and B, then our actions towards it.

So going right back to the beginning of this discussion, it was quite interesting when Stephen asked you, John, about architecture.

And I'm kind of thinking, is that a metaphor?

The architecture of the brain, is that a way of looking at the brain?

Or is it something?

And this parallels the discussions about Markov blankets, et cetera, et cetera.

You know, like, are these things that we're imposing on systems, or are they things that are really there?

I think the architecture one is really interesting, because it kind of comes from this, you know, whole constructivist tradition.

And I mean, I wonder more whether it's not so much whether it's about the right, you know, the most accurate way of seeing, but what particular sets of affordances does a model or a way of seeing offers in the face of this particular problem in this particular niche, perhaps?

So yeah, interesting stuff.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Lee.

John, continue, or Stephen, and then John, feel free to continue.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just one last piece.

I think that this, there's some areas that I'm trying to apply these isms now to sort of put some buckets on.

I think the social constructivism is an important one to think about.

Maybe science, in a way, kind of fits in that, in a way, as a human pursuit.

Pragmatism, I think, is very well aligned with the kind of

approach of active inference and this approach here, if you take pragmatism from a, you know, a human, not a humanistic perspective, from a, well, from the third one, which is an ecological perspective.

So, or ways of knowing as well, not even perspective.

So you can drop down into ways of knowing perspectives, you know, pragmatism, social constructivism, and ecological approaches.

And I think that nexus is quite important as a sort of,

way to hold some of these ideas.


SPEAKER_04:
This is a fantastic conversation.

And I would say that exactly the kind of conversation that would be needed to move such a project forward, it would be conversations like this between scientists, within the communities, between communities.

and touching on all these, you know, some superficial and some very deep and subtle issues and questions of what are we thinking?

How do we do this?

How do we measure success?

What do we want?

What is our purpose?

I mean, you know, we're just maybe starting that conversation here amongst us, but I would like to offer to the science world that this could be, you know,

a function in the science world of a pursuit of study, a pursuit of attention.

And if it were, I think that's all that's really necessary, actually, is to put our minds to this.

And intelligent people communicating amongst themselves and engaging all interested stakeholders could definitely make progress in this endeavor.

So great, great to watch.

Great to be part of.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, John, maybe if you want to go to another slide, but that leads to the question, how do we, in our dot one video, it's kind of an opening.

The dot one is where we've had our background with the dot zeros.

We've hopefully read the papers and digested them, written comments, written thoughts to ourselves, allowed that to reverberate.

And then we open the doors and we come together in a group discussion for point one.

And we also say, hey, the doors aren't closed.

more people can join this conversation, whether it's next week for point two or on a broader scale.

So I'm just wondering whether you answer now or later, who can be included and how can they be included in participating?


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

Well, I can say a few words.

Everyone is welcome in this conversation, in the world, in communities, in different types of communities, the science community, other communities.

mean this is this is a conversation for all of us to be had what what do we want what is our purpose what are we doing how can we how can we improve uh how can we reduce uncertainty uh you know about essential variables you know to put it more technically uh how to do that i don't know i'm open to suggestions of how we make the next step but you know i sort of put out put out what i

could put out in this series, and I'm hoping that these conversations might lead to some actions that engage a larger and larger sphere of individuals and organizations.

So I'm open.

If there's suggestions, I'm open.

Could you flip to, let's see, that would be slide two, talk two, slide eight?


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
So we've touched on all these ideas, and I thought maybe this might be a good moment to talk about some of the practical implications.

In our original discussions, this slide was coming after paper one, which was all about worldview and seeing life as a cognitive process and seeing individuals as overlapping processes of information flow.

And understanding that when we talk about a community improving its quality of life and quality of environment, we're talking about an extended individual and an extended community that really reaches all the way to the biosphere ultimately, right?

We're all connected with other individuals and all communities are connected with other communities.

All of life is connected.

We're connected with our local ecosystem and with this new ecosystem.

So when I talk about vitality, I'm talking about the vitality of the whole, really.

That's our purpose as a human.

We're intelligent.

Humans are very intelligent.

We can think a thousand years into the future of what might happen if we do something today.

And humans can use that capacity to

improve and reduce the uncertainty you know of the whole uh improve quality of life improve the quality of the environment and biodiversity and all that kind of stuff so uh with that kind of theory uh theoretical aspects in the past what are some of the practical implications like how how would we use any of that information to actually think about design for societal systems right so um

So this is a list of some items that we have talked about in previous talks and even touched on today.

And when we think about what does this mean practically, I would like to focus that to a different question, really, and that is how does any individual, any organism solve a problem?

Like what is necessary to solve a problem, whether you're a bacteria or you're a human community, right?

What do you do?

And on the left are, I would say, some of the universal aspects of cognition.

For example, you have to gather data.

I mean, an intelligent being is processing information, and information means that some kind of data or information has to come from the world, and then it can be processed.

It has to remember, for example.

It has to anticipate the future, forecast the future with some

accuracy in order to survive.

If I see a lion in my path, I might want to accurately forecast that if I don't get out of the way, I might be the lion's dinner, right?

I mean, anticipation is central to cognition.

So I've only talked about the first three in the list there, but already we can talk about what does that mean for a community then?

So how does a community gather data, for example?

And that might be through sensors, through getting the input of others in the community about some particular issue.

Remembering requires that that information be kept in some kind of accessible form, some kind of repository of information.

We can think already of ways that society does these now.

For example, the Census Bureau collects information annually and every 10 years, collects various kinds of information.

There's financial surveys done every few years.

Some of that information is put in repositories that at least researchers can access for different reasons.

But how would that differ?

How does what we do today, how might that differ from if we were really thinking of communities as cognitive organisms?

How might we improve on any of these processes, right?


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know if there's thoughts on that, but I can... Yeah, Stephen, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, one thing I think that's interesting is this actually points as well, though, to an interest in

I don't know if it's a dilemma, but certainly a challenge in the sense that these artifacts and these artifacts of knowledge that we have, we have the option in a community setting to place them in our environment because they can be equilibrium-based artifacts.

So for instance, if I create a book and I put it on a shelf,

It could be that 100 years, right?

And they'll come back and it's still a book, right?

So you've got this ability for that kind of storage.

Now, when I remember something, I'm with active influence, I'm establishing this kind of priors, an update of priors, which is generated on these lower level sensory flux pieces of sensorium, which I have

at higher levels potentially started to interpret as what you might call a signal.

But we get into this interesting question because it's like the error is kind of the signal in active inference.

Although it's possibly at higher levels of thinking, it gets a little bit different because we've been talking about that with some of the modeling.

But there's an interesting question around as you scale out,

where some of this sense data in active inference is kind of held in the kind of collective knowing of a community, which knows how to interact, for instance, with the artifacts, yet you've also got aspects, a bit like I've got my clothes and I've got other things that are kind of, are they part of me, are they not part of me, are they part of the environment?

So I think there's something quite interesting, and I think that's an area I'm really interested in exploring, is teasing that out.

So I wonder what your thoughts are on that.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I think part of what you're speaking about might be what I've been calling richness of information, right?

So obviously a census can collect information once a year about, you know, numbers and education levels and things like that.

That's one stream of information, a valid stream of information.

And yet another is very personal.

It's what is your gut, you know,

this situation or this, you know, this, this constellation of what's happening today?

What is your gut feeling of what's happening?

Right?

So how does the how does the community get, you know, process, sense and process all of that information together?

If you have a, you know, if we're a part of the community, and we're trying to decide on some issue, it would be good if we heard your gut

what is your gut telling you about this?

Is this good or bad?

Or is this direction good or bad?

Or, you know, even if, even if there's no like data data to back it up, what is your sense based on, you know, the, the, the, your, your complexity, your wholeness, your, like, we can't even put a word on it.

What you, what you are, where that information comes from maybe, but what is this?

What is the sense that you're having?

And I would like to share my sense too,

and everyone maybe could share their sense.

So how do we do that when there's 100,000 of us?

How do we do that?


SPEAKER_02:
uh to give just a few thoughts there's there's two sides to the conversation they're sharing communicating and then there's really engaging and listening which is part of the right of attention topic so a hundred thousand people speaking over each other is zero conversation that's not yeah yeah that's not conversation right exactly so how do we how do we do that and and i don't think that that's not you know like it's almost surprising in a way that


SPEAKER_04:
that we have such enormous technical capacity in today's society to do unbelievable things.

And yet this very basic question of how do we as a community of say 10,000 or 100,000, how do we richly share information in a way that all of us feels heard, that we can express our kind of like hard knowledge and gut knowledge

How do we participate together in describing our situation, describing our fears, describing our uncertainty, anticipating what is going to happen next if we take choice A, B, or C?

It's kind of interesting that that tool doesn't exist in spite of our technological process.

And there might be reasons why that, I mean, there might be political reasons and economic reasons why that tool doesn't exist.

Because if that tool did exist, people would want to participate.

You know, like, naturally, I want my story heard.

I want my community to understand what I know, because maybe it's going to help somebody.

And I want to hear what, you know, in a healthy conversation, in a healthy exchange, I really want to know what you're thinking.

I want to contextualize all this information in light of what our purpose is, what our goal is, what are we after?

What do we want?

Right.


SPEAKER_01:
Can I comment on that?

Cause I think this is a really important point.

And, and also though, as well as see, this is what I find.

I'm recasting speech as an action policy, as an extended cognition into a spatial,

landscape of semantics right so effectively it's actually words could be seen as in a virtual environment that we're projecting out and what that can kind of open up is that when i'm talking to someone and being heard right which basically means being words are being heard right so but there's there's certain things that

I can't communicate through words because they're not in that semantic landscape, which is the compression of my, a useful tool.

But the thing with tools is generally speaking, it's not very healthy to relate to tools, right?

It's like tools are things.

So one nonverbal work can be really powerful.

And we actually had that with our work with the non, the community who use alternative communication, you know, we've really pushed that.

So they, it's, it can take them five, three minutes to do three words because if they're using a head switch and they have to scan through each letter,

and then hit the head switch.

So we're really about how about it not being about the words and about being the look of the eye and that building up of non-verbal knowing between people, which at some point will probably be, well, we actually then

articulate that through fabric landscapes.

So then they start painting the room and do world building, and then you start making the words.

So there's something about, like you said, there may be something that, well, we need the tools, but also sometimes tools just can't go there.

So what do we do where we don't use tools?

And then when do we bring it into a tool-based environment?

I think this is a good point.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

And I think much of human communication actually happens non-verbally too.

If we can be in the same room and I'm watching your facial expressions, I'm getting a lot more information about you and your intent than if I was only hearing your voice, if I was only reading your words.

So, sure, there's non-verbal communication, there's artistic expression, there's poetic expression, you know, using words in a different way.

And

Obviously, again, as an individual, I want to be heard.

And maybe I'm expressing myself in words, maybe I'm expressing myself in how I'm raising my eyebrows, or maybe I don't even have words to express myself, but I have an image in my head that I want to communicate.

Somehow, we have to be able to communicate richly in mass.

And how do we do that?

And part of the answer to that might be we communicate in smaller groups, and that information then is sort of propagated up the hierarchy or something.

Maybe.

I mean, you know, the slate is wide open here.

So this is the question to the world.

How can we communicate richly in mass such that our purpose might be fulfilled?

You know, our purpose of achieving and maintaining vitality

into the future, right?

So that's the big picture.

And then what are the many tools or social norms or educational processes or, you know, any number of things that lead us to fulfilling our purpose, you know, our intrinsic purpose, I should say, you know, our biological purpose in a sense.


SPEAKER_02:
nice john i hope that people clip that out or hear your question and really consider it and what it makes me think about on this slide and to return it to active inference again is really like the rhetoric of participation because in a reward maximization culture

things like communicate it's like but not now we have decisions to make whereas when we reframe about reducing uncertainty on a multi-scale so individual and shared generative models it's like have we communicated enough to even know each other's generative model because once i know that your generative model includes this dietary restriction

I don't need 100 text messages a day.

I actually can generate recipes that are going to be compatible with you.

So it's not like we just need to have more communication or a different kind or these two people need to talk or some sort of secret trick.

It's actually that we can balance a lot of these sometimes locally contradictory needs like

choose two and you could find a situation where they align on this list and you could find a situation or imagine a situation where they diverge and the power comes from being able to have that goal directness and the epistemic gain and then potentially through peer mentorship or through extended cognitive architecture we could be able to mark you know where is there a yellow flag where is there a red flag where do we need to pull back and share more um about one person's generative model or

how are we working as part of an integrated unit that's reducing uncertainty given the preference vector rather than well if we each just make as much money as possible then the group will have as much money as possible right

So this is a different way that we can go about having that conversation.

And as hopefully we're, we're drawing out, it's something where everyone's perspective, uh, isn't just a, uh, goop to be formed.

Their perspective is their contribution and their value.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep.

Yeah.

Good.

Good.

We can also look to biology too.

How does, how does, uh, the cells of a body, uh, make decisions, you know, like how does the liver know what to do and when, when to act?

How does the heartbeat know when to speed up or slow down?

There's rich communication that happens multi-scale, some local, some distant, through hormones, through messengers.

There's enormously rich communication that happens between tissues and cells in order for all the pieces to understand what is necessary now.

Right?

So, I mean, we can...

This is an open question.

It's a clean slate.

There's great potential for the science world and other communities to move forward of this question of how do we richly communicate and make decisions together?

How do we do that?

And there's lots of biological examples for us to look at to gain inspiration from.


SPEAKER_02:
So a question from the chat just before Steven, from Yvonne, just about the tools.

How many people have used the kinds of tools that you're suggesting, or it sounded like you suggested that it didn't exist, but what is the preferred field for a startup from Yvonne?

Where does this tools, where is this coming out of this sort of tool for communication and collaboration?


SPEAKER_04:
I'm not sure I understand the question exactly.

Where is it coming from?


SPEAKER_02:
He asked, what is the preferred field to make a startup in for this kind of a tool?

Like, would it be in a field of industrial engineering?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, well, so I have ideas in my head of how we might start to build such tools.

And

the reason I'm thinking about it is for this very problem of how do communities communicate?

If we were to move forward with studying this club model and eventually developing a field trial with a club model, how does communication happen within that club model?

So that's my interest, is the application to this problem of societal transformation and demonstrating new ways of

of cognition at the local level via clubs.

But obviously if you had a tool that could do this, there would be tremendous opportunities for others to use the tool too.

This is just one example out of thousands you might think of, but I work in the utility industry and I've seen how messages get transferred from

You know, a caller calls in and says, you know, there's an accident, there's a wire down, there's sparks flying, there's children around.

You know, there's some kind of rich situation happening that others need to know about.

And by the time that message gets to the person in the field or in the truck, you know, it might be quite garbled.

It might be not unclear at all what the problem is or what the dangers are or what the situation is, right?

So that would just be one example of how industry might use a tool for better communication.

And there would be many, many more examples you could think of.

So my guess would be that if the science community move forward with this problem of how do you richly communicate with a large group,

that those tools and the concepts that would come out of that could be applicable to a wide variety of industries and to this particular question of how does the club model work and how do communities cognate?


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, John.

Stephen, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks.

This sort of reminds me of some of the principles.

Actually, systemic coaching can be an interesting area.

We're looking at coaching groups and the system.

It seems to be that

And I was just wondering if you've encountered the viable systems model, Stafford Beer's viable systems model, because I think that some of the active inference work can recast that, because you've got not just levels of regulation on the body, because it's based on the nervous system of a frog.

or different nervous systems.

But that doesn't necessarily have that bottom-up teleology that you get from active inference.

It doesn't necessarily have the idea that the lower levels also know something.

It tends to be the higher levels are regulating the lower levels.

But A, that might be something to look at as one area that would be interesting.

And yeah, I just thought I'd mention that in case you don't.


SPEAKER_04:
No, no, no, great.

You know, those are the kinds of ideas that you would want to explore as you build the kind of tools we've been discussing.

And on that topic, the goal is not to build one tool that does all of this, right?

We could have many tools.

We could, you know, different groups could explore a variety of approaches and tools and, you know, some depths of simplicity and complexity.

And, you know, there's room for a variety

many discussions on this topic.

One other, just to kind of continue with you, the idea of coaching.

I've been around enough folks in my life to realize that some groups and some people are really skilled at communicating and talking with others and facilitating group conversation and things like that.

And at

many times I've been just so impressed with the ability of certain groups or certain individuals to kind of facilitate communication and show by example what healthy communication looks like.

And at the same time, I watch TV or, you know, I've seen TV shows of terrible examples of how to communicate.

You know, examples of dishonesty, examples of manipulation, examples of

holding back, examples of confusion, examples of shallow thinking.

Social norms, part of this whole process would also be, like the club model, it would be to develop social norms that are useful for the community, right?

That are reinforced to healthy behaviors or healthy ways of communicating, healthy skill development that would help the community to better process the information it has, right?

So that kind of coaching is available too.


SPEAKER_02:
And this is something in the narrative as active inference.

We talked about when we see representations of communication, like they are upweighted, our priors are updated to think that those types of communication are more likely or that they're prevalent or even that they exist at all.

And then we fulfill that prediction by reducing our uncertainty about our own behavior and our own thinking through other minds of other people's behavior, thinking, well, what happens when there's two people and they need to, is they want the cuts in front.

and then you're not surprised when they do it you're not surprised when you do it but there's also a way to show representations of that not happening so that it will not surprise either person when they both slow down and that shows how our intersubjective

level of computation is something that is influenced by both the bottom up you know the sensory input and the top down with our cultural scaffolding and so systems in change need to be able to resonate from the small to the large or there's going to be some pathologies so steven and then any other comments so this actually could be an interesting


SPEAKER_01:
or could inform anyway, the types of questions that could pose to Carl Friston himself, you know, around some of these practical implications.

So we could have these in mind.

So I was just thinking, you know, do you have sort of, I wonder if you actually have thoughts about, oh, are there holes in this or are there questions around where this whole field of active inference is sort of going in the sort of global sense and whether you've thought, oh, I wonder what...

what Carl Friston would think about that.

Just a question to put out there.


SPEAKER_04:
Carl, if you're listening, feel free to join in.

No, I would love to.

One of the many ways to start this whole process off would be to have a conference where we get together some folks who have experience in these fields, in a variety of fields, who could offer their thoughts and cautions and encouragements

whatever they may be.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, John, on June 21st, 2021, Carl Friston will be joining us for a little symposium.

And in another sense, we have a nano symposium every week, but any type of logistics or organization that are the enabling architecture is what Act Inflab is there for.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

Fantastic.

Fantastic.


SPEAKER_02:
Fantastic.


SPEAKER_04:
You know, I maybe should say, too, we've been talking about active inference, and obviously all of us are interested in that topic, but, you know, it could be that the active inference 2.0 is called something else.

It goes, you know, like we learn something in the next decade or whatever, and active inference is no longer, you know, like we've moved beyond that, and now we're talking about some other thing, you know.

The important aspect of this for us is how does cognition happen?

How does

You know, how do biological organisms structure themselves and orient themselves and organize themselves in order to process information?

And, you know, how does that work?

So whether it's active inference or whether it's, you know, something else, sure, everything evolves.

We learn as we go.

So it might be, you know, next year it might be a different word.

But the concept is, how do we achieve and maintain vitality into the future?


SPEAKER_02:
How do we fulfill our purpose?

And even today, for different non-English human languages and for computer languages, the word is already not active inference.

And so that's why it's always so rewarding and valuable to be very clear on what active inference is, which parts are drawing from Bayesian statistics, from complex systems, from predictive processing, from all of these other areas, instead of thinking that we need to reinvent the wheel because we certainly don't.

We're also just a part of the cognitive architecture.

it'll be a quite interesting ride for sure.

So maybe in the last 15 minutes of this point one, John, help us via another slide or by raising another salient question.

What can we as listeners and participants think about in this next week to kind of simmer during this week between our two sessions?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

Okay.

Maybe next week we'll talk more about, you know, we've only covered two slides here.

We had, I think, like 60 slides we could have looked at.

We covered two of them or maybe three of them.

But the goal here was to talk about part three of the paper, which is design.

So I think maybe for our listeners, maybe the question of, like, how would you actually do this?

What would, in part three, I don't,

spend some time talking about a prototype called what I call the leader framework, local economic direct democracy association framework.

The emphasis there, the concept is a full integrated systems approach, but the emphasis in the simulation trial that I published is on economics.

So just take that alone.

What would a fundamentally different economic system look like?

how would it function and how could it apply to a club model, you know, like implemented at the local level?

What might that look like?

And when I say economic, I mean economic slash financial slash monetary, institutional, you know, like all of those things wrapped up into the word economic.

What, how would that look?

What are the possibilities?


SPEAKER_02:
Great question.

One thought is eco and ecosystem and economy.

It's like they start with the first three letters.

They're so close.

They're almost on the right track with an ecological perspective on economics.

Yet you add one more letter and it changes from ecology to economics.

And all of a sudden it's like never the twain shall meet.

So it's an awesome question to be rethinking how these different intertwined systems relate, just like intertwined systems in an ecosystem of primary producers, prey animals, predators, renewal, et cetera.


SPEAKER_04:
Right, right.

So on that, just to follow that up just a little more, what is an economic system?

Before we go about designing new ones, what is the purpose of an economic system?

we ought to ask that question first before we jump into potential designs, right?

So what is it supposed to achieve in the first place?

And I think for some listeners or for the general population, at least, if you ask that question, the answer would be like, duh, an economic system is about allocating resources back and forth, choosing who gets what and how resources are used.

But I would argue that that's not at all what an economic system, you know, like intrinsically, potentially, what an economic system is.

I would say an economic system is exactly what we've been talking about so far today.

It is a cognitive system.

It is a different variety of cognitive system that allows a community to cognate in a slightly different way.

Like a governance system allows its community to cognate in one way.

A legal system allows a community to cognate in a different way.

And an economic system allows it to cognate in a different way.

So if the goal is functional societal cognition, what does an economic system look like?


SPEAKER_02:
One thought on that and using the body's intertwined signaling systems like neurological, chemical, etc.

From the point of view of the ribosome, the protein translating machinery, insulin is just another peptide.

It's just linking the amino acids together and it's making a protein.

But to the point of view of a receptor, the insulin molecule is an affordance for binding.

And then to the point of view of the downstream signaling cascades inside of the cell, we start to see semantics enter into the picture.

And then there's a turnover for the insulin and there's lactate being shuttled from the muscles which are using it.

And they're calling out for help through these different mechanisms.

So it's like a cargo ship might be carrying

something and it's putting it in a box and it's just moving it like an encrypted message it's just moving the information it doesn't need the semantics to be able to relay the information and similarly when there's these intertwining systems it's like that one insulin peptide can be handled by a producer by a transporter by a signal detector by a degrading enzyme and the idea that all of those pieces are uh you know you could just change one out or you could remove one

it wouldn't be the same system as a whole.

So Steven, then any other thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
I like the hormone, um,

reference, as I think that the nature of the hormone system where the hormone gets released into the blood, let's say the blood, and it travels around the body, it is actually maybe closer to this idea of a message passing kind of signal going out there, you know, sort of sense in sort of a general way, which is, and maybe this is something that the economic system does, right, is

And you can't do that so easily through necessarily just dynamical processes with people, right?

It's like, okay, you can, you can kind of infer things, you can sort of build things up, but okay, you set up a pipeline of value distribution, or at least the information in relation to value distribution and how that can be processed and you can release

your hormones which is basically money or budgetary predictions into that system and it flows right it flows around it and it gets picked up and it becomes more like a traditional signal that can be computed um but you can't put out the dynamical system information because it

It's not a thing.

It is dynamical.

So there's something interesting there, I think, around that analogy to that.


SPEAKER_02:
It's the system we're working with to be able to explore how message passing algorithms instrumentally used by us as curious and motivated investigators allow us to act in the world to reduce our uncertainty about blood sugar.


SPEAKER_04:
So following on that, the question two for the public is what is money?

You know, like in its best sense, what is money?

So we'll try to tackle some of that next week when we meet again.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

So just on a closing note, we heard two big questions right there at the end.

How can we actually do it?

And it would be awesome if people could read especially the third paper in the series and look at the Leta framework that John has proposed.

And there's a simulation there and it's a scaffold for a lot of rich discussion.

So on the how can we actually do this?

we want to hear many perspectives as well as people's thoughts on the third section of the paper and then the second question what is money which is of course a fascinating question for history anthropology game theory so many different areas converge on what is money and it's a system in flux as we see quite literally day to day depending on how closely you follow crypto right

Thank you, everybody, for joining us.


SPEAKER_04:
This has been fantastic.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome discussion.

So everybody who's watching live, thanks so much for participating.

And next week in number 21.2, we'll have a follow-up discussion with you, John.

So thanks again for your engagement and for really giving us this foundation with the multiple precursor videos because it really helped.

And I think this is going to be a great conversation sequence.

So peace out, everybody.

See you later.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

Bye.

Thanks.

Bye-bye.

## i5WwQ4WXGNo

SPEAKER_06:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome.

Thanks for joining ACT-INF Lab.

This is live stream number 21.2, I think.

And this is our sixth discussion with John.

The first four were background discussions where John and I worked through these Jamboards and through the three-part series that John had written, Science-Driven Societal Transformation.

And now here we are today,

on May 11th, 2021 in our second participatory group discussion.

So this is gonna be an unpacking and an extension and an opportunity to share perspectives and ask John questions.

So thanks to all who have joined live and who will be joining live.

And also if you're watching on YouTube, feel free to leave a question in the chat and we will relay that to you.

So we're just going to go around with a quick round of introductions.

Maybe each of us could just say hello and something that they're thinking of or something that they're excited to talk about today.

And then we will pass back to John and just start off on this road together.

So I'm Daniel and I'm in California.

I will pass to Lee.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, I'm Lee.

I'm in London at the minute, although I'm a PhD researcher at the University of York.

John, today I'm interested to talk about maybe a minimum viable prototype for one of the clubs, and also a little bit around the metaphor of the superorganism a bit as well, if we have a chance.

And I'll pass to Scott, Scott, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

My name is Scott David.

I'm at the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab, where I'm the Director of Information Risk and Synthetic Intelligence Research Initiative.

Delighted to be here today.

And I'm also very, very interested in chatting about the scale-independent variables and how the

interventions at one scale can help to alter system performances at other scales due to the fractal nature of some of the affordances we're talking about would be of great interest to me.

And I'll pass it to Dave.


SPEAKER_05:
Dave Douglas.

I'm in the Philippines, 120 miles North of Manila, where it's cool because it's a mile high city.

And I just came across the answer to a question.

What is a state in the parcels and particles paper?

Dr. Friston says a state is a particle.

So yes, it really is monads, not only all the way up, but all the way down to, and, uh,

Who's left, Daniel?

We already know you.


SPEAKER_06:
We'll go to John.

Thanks for the spicy introduction, Dave.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm John Boyk.

Daniel, if you go to set two, slide one.

This series, these numerous talks are on the topic of science-driven societal transformation.

That's the title of a three-part series that I recently published in the journal Sustainability.

Part one is worldview, part two is motivation and strategy, and part three is design.

I'm looking at societal transformation through a particular lens in this series, and that lens is the de novo development of fundamentally new systems.

So when I say systems, I'm talking about economic systems, governance systems, legal systems, etc.

We're going to focus today, I think, on maybe some of the practical aspects, like how would this be done?

And I would like to just start by saying just a few words about the kind of theory of change that I talk about, especially in paper number two.

If I were brilliant, which I'm not, and I came up with this amazing new design for societal systems, new governance systems, et cetera, if there were no way to actually practically implement that, then it would have just been an academic exercise.

So part of this series is arguing that there actually is a reasonable way to move forward, a viable path to move forward that is doable, that actually could be put into practice

into implementation.

So this the series is is itself is is essentially outlining an R&D program for the development of this

framework to study and create and develop and test new integrated systems.

And that happens at, according to this theory of change, that happens at the local level.

So the concept is that this R&D program is a collaboration between the global science community and local communities.

And the new systems are implemented at the local level on a volunteer basis in what I call a club model.

So the concept there is that the scientific community would have developed the tools and technologies and resources and things necessary to make these new systems work well.

And the local communities

some volunteer local community somewhere in the world would look at the results of all the computer simulations and all the studies that have been done and say, that looks interesting.

Gee, it looks like our community might really benefit from this.

Let's give it a field trial.

Let's give it a try.

And so that's the partnership.

And then the community itself, now this could be,

I really mean like perhaps a subset of a city.

So say just a thousand people or something like that might be enough to start a club.

And the club would function, everyone in the club would function as normal in society, except that on top of, you know, there's another layer of organization on top of the normal layer of organization.

And that's this club level.

So a civic club, you can think of it as a civic club.

And the Civic Club has all these ways that they go about decision-making and exchanging currencies and various things that allow them then to test out these new frameworks of societal systems.

So that's the gist of it.

And I just want to say a few things about this club model before we really get going, just so we're kind of all on the same page on that.

But just before I do that, maybe go to slide two of that same deck.

I'll point people to principledsocietiesproject.org if they're looking for more information on this.

All of our videos are posted there, and the papers are posted there, and there's some other materials posted there.

So for information, go to PSP.

And let's go to slide 17.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, that is not quite the right one.

I wanted the theory of change one, and that's not it.


SPEAKER_06:
Theory of change and strategy.

Which slide is that you're looking at?

17 on number two.

Yep.


SPEAKER_02:
Theory of change.

Somehow I'm... Oh, here we go.

Yes, change and strategy.

So this is just kind of capturing what I just said that the idea is to implement new fundamentally new systems at the club level.

I'll call the club a community, but this community could be relatively small and just a portion of the city.

And one of the reasons I'm looking at the club level is because I see it as kind of the Goldilocks level.

It's the smallest size organization of a community that could make the club able to replicate and function.

So if we were instead just looking at, say, an individual business, that business, like say I was promoting

that business would have to function within the wider set of businesses and would have to compete in the normal market for the consumer's attention.

And it would have a hard time doing that because it's operating according to some different set of rules than a normal business.

So at the club level, I see that as just large enough that all of these new functional systems can be tested and it's large enough that the

can be self-replicating it can grow in a local area and the idea can spread to other local areas um uh all right uh slide 19 please can we just go to lee and then scott just because we're getting hands raised on each of these slides so yeah so lee and then scott sure uh john what are the um


SPEAKER_04:
In order to start a club, what are the minimum requirements that are needed?

Does it need any funding or are there other set of conditions that it might need?


SPEAKER_02:
Ideally, there wouldn't be any requirements.

Ideally, there would be support from the global community to start a club, but the clubs are designed such, or at least later today we'll talk about a simulation I did of a club model.

a particular framework I called the LIDA framework.

But I designed that so that it could bootstrap its own growth.

So there was no, it was not necessary to have millions of dollars, say, to start the club or anything like that.

It really just grew step by step exponentially fast.

So in the first few years, hardly anything was happening.

And then it started to grow very rapidly after that.

So what would be necessary?

Mostly just the individuals that look at the, by the time a field trial would ever be started, there would have been, let's say hundreds of papers, scientific papers on simulations and all other aspects of this.

So everyone would know what they're getting into.

This would be very clear what the new systems are and what they do and how they function.

And then at that point, all that would really be necessary is for some community somewhere in the world to say, oh, that looks really interesting.

Let's do a field trial.

You know, we have 1,000 people in our community that are interested in this, and let's give it a shot.

So that's the main thing.

I mean, maybe a little bit of funding would be necessary, but not an extreme amount.

So it sounds...


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, it sounds almost like there's a prelude phase, which is what we're in.

And then the stage will be set for proper emergence for a community to then take that next step.

But it's a really interesting question about the viable system.

So I hope that we pursue that line as well.


SPEAKER_02:
John, anything else?

I just maybe will add that by the time the first field trial ever starts, there really should be no surprises about any of this.

I mean, the community would

conduct the trial, but it should be a foregone conclusion what's going to happen as far as how it works and what the benefits are, because this should have been worked out very well already.

It's not like here's a new

here's a new machine, tractor or something.

Now see if you can drive it.

It's not quite like that because there would be, you know, training involved.

We would realize what the purpose of the tractor is, what we're going to accomplish with the tractor, how it works, how you repair it.

You know, like there would be a,

again, there should be very few surprises by the time the first field trial starts.

That doesn't mean a community wouldn't be able to make decisions on what it funds and how it functions.

Of course, a community would make decisions about the kinds of jobs it creates and things like that.

But the fundamental mechanics of the system should be pretty well worked out.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, Lee, any other thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_04:
Just very quickly then, so if the particular community, so you've got this prelude phase where you're kind of working out all the details of the de novo design, is that done with the community?


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, partly.

I mean, that would be with any communities, like globally in a sense.

That prelude part is the global science community and any individuals or communities anywhere in the world that want to participate, provide feedback, do user testing, etc.

All the little parts of the systems would be also tested in various groups.

There would be really just a ton of testing that would occur before the first formal field trial ever started.

That particular community could have input on what particular design elements it might want in its system.

That's actually a good point.

I'm glad you said that because I also wanted to say that

purpose of this R&D program is not to build one system that fits all.

It's to build, it's an ongoing exploration of the different pieces and approaches and ways you might create systems such that they fulfill their purpose.

So there could be a wide variety of

you know, parts to choose from or ways to do things or, you know, hopefully there would be numerous kinds and types and pieces of systems that would be tested over time that communities could, you know, implement then.

And all with the purpose of, you know, fit for purpose, you know, all with the concept of fit for purpose behind this.


SPEAKER_06:
Scott, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
I just wanted to go back.

You were talking a little bit about the size of groups in the clubs.

The optimization is going to be really interesting because you might have a Dunbar's number involved there, that Dunbar's number concept being the most people you can have as your friend kind of idea.

So whatever is 120 or something.

But one of the things that's interesting also, you have the internal voice dynamics of the club plus the external voice dynamics of the club.

So as the club coheres an internal voice,

It will have a more coherent external voice, which will allow it to entrain and harmonically couple other systems more effectively, right?

Because it will be more coherent.

One of the things that I'd like to get into later in the conversation is

is we have some ideas we've been working on on scaling how legislative, judicial, and executive function, the three functions of all governance systems, have rulemaking, enforcement of the rules, and operation of the rules, how those naturally layer on just as a function of scale.

As you increase in scale from rulemaking, you have to go into different abstractions for enforcement and operation under those rules.

And so that would be very interesting to look at the dynamics of club growth

as an internal process of internal voice and a recognition of the layering on of governance that occurs internally, and then how that governance then needs to expand into the external environment in order to be more effective.

The bottom line is if you have a system, a club, where we say we are the free speech club, we have the rights to free speech, and there's no other club that has a duty to respect that, then you don't have a right to free speech outside of the club.

and say, how do you iterate the story outside of the club so that it becomes a reality that's shared so it can be enjoyed?

Right, right, right.

A lot to talk about there.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, there's a ton there that we could go through.

I have these concepts in mind as I was designing these systems or designing the framework, so all good points.

Just a little bit on size.

I'll try to talk about a couple of things briefly that you raised.

A little bit on size.

So, so in our brains, we have a community of neurons that are, that are functioning to help the body make decisions.

And that, that community of neurons is very much connected with the rest of the body also beat and the liver and the heart and everything else.

Well, how does all of that, you know, how does, how do all those cells and tissues and organisms cooperate together to make the body function the way the body functions?

One thing that happens is there's a very rich stream of communication that is passing between all these different cells and tissues and things, hormonal signals and small molecule signals and blood is circulating.

And there's all these, this awash in signals and communication.

So communication is one of the prerequisites for any kind of large organized, you know,

set of individuals, whether they're cells or whether they're people, to function together.

So one of the questions that we can talk about today is what kinds of tools are necessary to allow for rich communication to occur in, say, a group of, let's just say, 10,000 people or 100,000 people or a million people?

How does a large group of people come together, richly communicate their

narrative, their story.

I want to tell my group what is happening for me, what I anticipate will happen if we choose A over B over C, where this might lead in the short run, where this might lead in the long run, how this fits into other issues, issues D and E and F. I mean,

you know i'm an intelligent person everyone else has intelligence and um that intelligence can be used in the group uh cognitive you know the group cognition in order for the group to make wise choices about you know actions and and where they want to put their attention

so so the tool question is a big one and i would say that that currently there are no tools that allow a large group of individuals to come together to collaborate via rich communication and rich storytelling right we that doesn't exist yet i would say and i have ideas on how we might

create that, but that's one of the tasks that would have to happen over the first several years of the program is addressing that particular problem of how does a group virtually communicate.

and making decisions.

So if we're just talking, to get to your point now, if we just have a small group and we're just talking, we're working out things, we're making decisions together, well, maybe that group can't be more than a few people before it starts to fall apart.

Or maybe it can't be more than 10 or 20 or 100 people or something.

um but if we have some way to richly communicate then maybe we can scale that you know we can scale that communication uh to a larger group to thousands or ten thousands and still there might be some limit beyond what a club wouldn't you know like maybe a club should never be more than a hundred thousand or never more than a million or never more than ten thousand you know who knows

And so that's between individuals in a club, and then there should be similar communication between clubs.

That must happen.

And that's getting to a, that's touching on another point that you raised is how does a club reach the, you know, interact with the wider world and the both in the,

my framing both with other clubs, how does decision-making occur between clubs?

How does communication happen between clubs?

And then also how does communication happen with the rest of the world?


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks, John.

Stephen, and then Scott, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, thanks.

I think I'm interested by this, the word purpose.

You know, we think about purpose in all of this.

And clubs tend to have a particular...

focus or purpose as you're mentioning and I think it's interesting you're bringing in the science intentionality you know the intentionality of the science community to enable sort of seeding so I'm wondering how that might you might think about that sitting alongside

say, community organisations or community hubs, for instance, or multi-service agencies in the community or nodes of support, those types of things.

This might be something which could fit in there and give this kind of club purpose that might complement

Or is it different, similar to some of those types of service provisions that exist out in towns and cities?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm not exactly sure the question you're pointing to, but let me say a few things and maybe I'm going to touch on it.

So in the abstract,

the concept behind this whole program is that an organism has an intrinsic purpose, and that intrinsic purpose is to thrive both now and in the future, so expected thriving.

And in order to do that, it uses cognition, right?

And via cognition, and we've talked about how active inference fits into that whole picture,

really reduces the uncertainty about its capacity to thrive.

It's the essential variables that it needs, the world it functions in, and whether its true needs will be met, right?

So that's an organism and I'm viewing a society as an organism, right?

So in the sort of the larger picture, the abstract, a little abstract, the question is, you know, is a community functioning in a way, is a new system functioning in a way that is reducing uncertainty about the capacity to thrive?

So that would be implemented in a way via some kind of fitness metrics.

So just like in normal society, in a regular society, we have, say, GDP.

BP and other various types of met, you know information we gather and metrics that we use There would be a set of metrics that would go along with this whole program so that a community would know how it's doing and how it How it can expect to be doing two years from now and five years from now ten years from now You know, maybe even 20 years from now so so

There may be many subgroups within, say that there's a club and the club is 10,000 people, for example.

Clearly there would be subgroups within that club that would be interested in various aspects of, you know, topics or ways of doing things or various kinds of communication.

And, you know, maybe some subgroups are really focused on

The social components, the community components, the, you know, maybe emotional components, social components, and then other groups are interested in technical components and modeling or whatever, you know, other groups are interested in the environmental components, for example.

Well, that's great.

That's, you know, association between groups is a part of cognition.

Our neurons associate in ways that allows for cognition of the whole.

And in the same way, you know, a club in a community would do the same.

So there could be all kinds of subgroups that are all functioning, but the umbrella purpose would be present, right?

Because it would be reported daily, say, or even hourly or weekly, you know, there would be, everyone would know how

how we're doing as a whole, and that we're all in this together to raise our joint capacity to thrive and maintain our ability to thrive.

So yes, there would be all kinds of groups that would focus on different aspects of this and the umbrella

you know, reporting and collecting of information would be happening still across groups, across the community, so that there would be some sense of how are we doing and what's going to happen next.


SPEAKER_07:
Got you.

Could I just reply slightly to that?

Yeah.

Just that's really interesting.

It sounds as well, this could tie in with a kind of another type of evaluative capacity or ongoing rolling evaluative capacity, but with an agent-based or active inference-based approach

engine so to speak so that it's giving this update to communities around how they are progressing so to speak when that may help them in other areas some of which may be outside of the clubs

more bounded area, you know, it gets into the niche and complexity.

So the interesting, if you thought about this might be how this might link in with some of the new developments in evaluative evaluation going on, and that might be quite a good avenue.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, there would be, I mean, if you were going to collect information,

Uh, and, and assess how we're doing and what's going to happen next.

There would be all kinds of evaluation that would have to occur, not just on the simple things.

Like you could think of some simple things right off the bat.

I'm like, do we have enough food?

Do we have enough water?

Well, fine.

But humans are complex organisms.

We have complex needs, uh, social needs, uh, you know, emotional needs, uh, you know, like physical needs, you know, and all of those needs should be taken into account.

And some kind of comprehensive evaluation of how are we doing and what's going to happen next.

And obviously, any organism has to know that.

Every organism wants to know.

It needs to assess its status.

Like, how am I?

How am I doing?

Am I too cold?

Am I too hot?

Am I unhappy?

Am I happy?

Every organism needs to do that.

And a community as an organism needs to do that.


SPEAKER_06:
cool thanks john also welcome blue and on the the goldilocks note and this narrative note i really like what scott had said about the internal and external communications and as internal communications become structured from a connections perspective but also from a narrative perspective the external

interfaces and narratives can be structured.

So Goldilocks doesn't just evoke the sort of upside down U curve.

I mean, this is something that we know from pharmacology, from temperature, everything.

There's too much and there's too little.

And there's a failure mode on either side, just like a bowling alley.

And of course the middle solution is gonna be better.

It just wears the middle.

But Goldilocks also reminds us that that middle solution

has to be more like a child's story rather than some sort of abstruse optimization problem.

So it's kind of a fun reference that it should be comprehensible internally and also externally in order to be functional.


SPEAKER_02:
Right, right, right.

So yeah, and maybe just to touch on that, you know, from this, say the scientific

fitness, you know, in terms of metrics and statistics and things like that.

But other people won't relate maybe so much to that kind of assessment.

So everyone who's involved has to, there has to be a way to communicate the ideas of how are we doing and, you know, what is our status in ways that are meaningful to everyone involved, or else if it's not

So some people might discuss status in very technical terms, and other people might discuss status in more, say, emotional terms or social terms or something like that.

But the general sense, the general purpose has to make sense to everyone or else why be a part of this?

One other thing on the Goldilocks question is...

To be clear, it's not my intent that a club, say a club started in Houston, Texas with a thousand people.

It's not my intent.

that the club would stay at 1,000 people, it would grow.

The whole concept of this is that if this new model, this new club model, these new frameworks actually work, if they actually empower a community to do better, to be more secure, to have a higher quality of life, to have economic security, in numerous ways, if these clubs benefit the population the way I think it would,

why don't we use typewriters anymore?

Because we have computers that work so much better.

I mean, they're just so much better.

Who would want to use a typewriter?

You know, that kind of thing.

So that's the concept of this.

It should be so easy to join a club.

It should be so easy to participate that, like, why not?

My life will be better if I participate in a club.

And if that

works as advertised, then clubs will grow and the club model will spread to other places.

And then instead of having a club of 10,000 or 1,000, you have a club of 100,000 and every city has a club.

And pretty soon, much of the world is starting to function along with these new systems.

Much of the world is engaging with them or enough of the world is engaging with them that the ideas behind them suddenly start to become the dominant ideas.

So the goal is not to help a community so much.

The goal is to actually transform globally society, or at least semi-globally.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks, John.

I'm gonna ask a question from the chat and then Steven and Lee.

So in the chat, Natalia writes, I read in the paper, thanks for reading the paper, Natalia, that people would keep their income when not working.

I'm curious what role motivation plays in the success of the system and what kinds of structures are in place to manage that.

So agent level motivations,

And how do we design incentive structures and ecosystems for participation that are able to incentivize various kinds of participants?


SPEAKER_02:
All right.

Okay, so what motivates us today in our economy?

you know, a variety of things.

We're complex organisms.

We're motivated by a variety of things.

But a large one, because of the way the system is designed, is that if you don't participate, if you don't go out there and get some kind of job, you're going to be in the street.

You know, there's this like, this kind of, you know, you're forced to participate.

And if you don't, you're going to be in trouble.

Well, that's not very useful for many reasons.

Far more useful is to offer people what they actually really want, what humans tend to really want, which is a variety of things.

They want to help each other.

They want to be part of a community.

They want to learn.

They want to develop skills.

They want to do any number of things that engage them with each other, and they want to

to solve problems.

They want to be a part of a problem-solving process.

They want to cooperate.

It makes us happy to cooperate.

All of nature is cooperating.

Cooperation is the rule rather than the exception in nature.

So how can we build a system that just allows us to really be ourselves, to really get what we want, most want, right?

Like, I want to be in a kind and cooperative and functional setting, a group.

I want to work with each other.

I want to work with the people around me and help each other, and they want to help me.

So how do we make that happen at scale?

That's the question.

And so the motivation isn't to get rich.

I mean, we'll talk about the leader framework in a little while.

And that's just one example of a way to organize an economic system.

But that particular system actually achieves income equality over time.

So clearly the motivation isn't to make money.

Like that's not why you're engaged in the economic system.

The economic system is only a, it's really a, it's a cognitive system, not a money system.

Money is just a tool that's used as a way to share information, right?

So in the leader framework,


SPEAKER_07:
incomes equalize over time and the motivation to engage is to be to fulfill all these deeper human needs that we all have thanks for the response john so stephen and then lee yeah i'll just sort of carry on a bit from what you're just saying there with um the community getting involved and their benefits to the purpose and to their motivation

At the community level, that is a missing link at the moment in terms of, and it probably was much more present even a hundred years ago, 80 years ago, you'd have had the women's Institute and you had all sorts of different.

So we professionalize an awful lot of roles.

Okay.

And you see that with nursing and all sorts of professions where they've increasingly professionalized and trained.

So the question I've got there is.

How do you bring in the motivations of the professionals who have another niche that they're trying to optimize around, maybe writing papers, getting a career, and things like this?

And do they have to be humble in some way to honor the input from this community?

Because obviously, you're trying to invert

some of the assumptions about where everything should be located i.e it doesn't need to all be driven by professions and just keep driving more and more professions that you can bring in community input and wisdom to also be part of that through these clubs but how do you marry the the types of niches that people are in and the competition for their time and


SPEAKER_02:
Right, right.

I don't actually see that as too much of a problem.

Let's just pick a profession, say nursing or something like that.

And then the question becomes, let's say that I live in Houston and a club has started and why would I want to, you know, I'm a professional, I'd make a reasonable salary, let's say.

Well, there might be numerous reasons.

I might understand the potential of the club.

I mean, you know, there's this whole body of literature now, these simulations and other literature that suggests that this club model might actually empower the people who belong to a club to make better decisions, to achieve, you know...

higher environmental quality and higher social quality so i might be interested uh just to join for that reason because i see it as a beneficial thing for the larger community right i can engage with these people and make decisions and together we can you know make beautiful things happen

But now let's focus just on the economic aspect.

And again, there might be any number of ways to design any of these systems, economic systems, governance systems.

There could be all kinds of concepts that the R&D program could assess and try and test out.

But in the leader framework, the kind of prototypical economic system that we hopefully will get to talking about here,

And the question becomes, how do we get from here to there?

Like, how do we get from today's society and incomes and structure to some other structure, you know, down the road, right?

So I try to show that in this simulation, that model that I published, it goes over a 30 year period.

So

So again, the kind of the expansion of the club and its activities is exponential.

So maybe in the first few years, there's not a whole lot happening.

People join, but you know, there's not big effects, but then these bootstraps itself economically and otherwise, and then they're starting to be bigger effects.

So, you know, just kind of jumping to the chase a little bit,

In the LIDA framework, it's designed so that incomes rise over time, right?

And the people in the simulation, people only join if they're going to be better off economically.

Otherwise, there's no reason to join in the simulation.

So let's say I'm a nurse.

I have a pretty good income.

Why would I join?

Well, if I join at any point, I will get a – and my income is high.

Let's say the lowest target income is rising, but my income is still higher than that.

I can still join, and I'll get kind of a –

I'll get a small bonus.

That's not the word I use in the paper, but it's kind of like that.

I'll get, say, I don't know, let's just say $1,000 a year for joining.

Well, that's $1,000 a year that I didn't have otherwise.

So even though my income is high relative to where this income target is growing, I still get a benefit from it.

And then I get to use that money and part of it is a local currency.

So I get to use the dollar currency, the national currency, and this local currency in the decision-making process, and I'm engaged.

I have some skin in the game now.

And then as that income rises, at some point, it's likely to reach mine or go above what my current income is.

And then for sure, I want to join because if I join, my annual income is going to rise maybe substantially.

So in the simulation, the income target rises up to about somewhere around the equivalent of about $110,000 per year per family.

So that's more than some nurses make.

And especially for those nurses that are at the bottom level, bottom economic level, or teachers, or firemen, or police, or whatever,

There would be motivation to join because your income is going to not only increase, but become stable.

If you lose your job, there's no worries.

You're going to be taken care of.

The system is circulating currency in such a way that once you're in, you're okay.

It doesn't matter if you're working or not.


SPEAKER_06:
It's John, it's a way to rethink this driven by money versus not driven by money, because you've really said it both ways.

You've said people are not motivated by money, yet you've repeatedly appealed to the idea that every person will gain more money and implicitly that that's what is important.

And so it's actually just, it is what it is.

And that's where active inference and all these other techniques and extended cognition come into play because there'll be a variety of narratives for people who are in different

positions.

So we'll go to Lee, and then Scott, and then I'll ask a question in the chat.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so it's kind of a related point, actually.

So in the paper, I remember you were reading that at one point, you're talking about, you know, effectively, as the de novo system starts to outcompete the native system, you know, there are going to be winners and losers effectively.

So you know, if you're a franchise owner of a

the mcdonald's or something you know your cheap labor disappeared so on a larger scale right that means that you know they're um well i guess what i'm what i'm i'm asking is do you anticipate that ultimately the current system you know with lots of vested interest to remain the way it is is going to start pushing back once you realize it that this kind of club model is potentially uh


SPEAKER_02:
a threat to it yeah so right so it's true there's winners and losers in this and the and in a sense if if if you're measuring winners and losers by does this civilization survive and thrive well then there's hardly any losers because you know the the whole concept of this is so that it's just

societies and civilization can thrive into the future right and that's not and you know just as a counterpoint that's not our current system you know we're our current system is essentially on a suicide uh route you know trajectory of destroying life on the planet so the current system is not working uh and you know it's not working in the sense of our

or insecurity about will we even be here in 100 years is quite high, right?

But in another sense, yes, there will be losers and winners.

So the idea is that this R&D program is creating and testing new ways of organizing society that really function well.

And any organism that functions well is going to outcompete other organisms that are not functioning well in that sense.

a community say that is using these tools and using these systems and it's really flourishing.

probably will be doing flourishing more than other communities that aren't.

And that's the reason that other communities might say, hey, that looks good.

Let's do that.

Now, you have a subset of, say, you know, multimillionaires and billionaires.

And at least on some perspective, they will be losers because, you know, that's not going to work.

That's not going to be compatible with this new way of doing things.

And you raised one of the reasons why it wouldn't be compatible is that where are they going to get their low-wage workers to work in their factories and stuff?

Where are they going to come from if all the other folks are having high-wage jobs in these new systems, these new frameworks?

conventional business model will start to falter.

And as it should, because what are we doing here?

What are we doing in society, right?

Don't we want to flourish?

Don't we want systems that help us to reduce our uncertainty and flourish into the future?

Well, I would think we do overall, right?

So systems that don't do that really have to fall by the wayside or

transform themselves into new systems that do function better.

And the long-term aim of this R&D program isn't necessarily that the world will be using these kinds of systems.

Another option, another potential future is that current governance systems, current legal systems, current financial systems,

all of our current systems might learn from these experiments everywhere and go, you know what?

That's actually a good idea.

That works well.

Let's incorporate that into our structure and we'll be better off.

Everyone will be better off.

That would be fun.

Maybe the clubs,

grow to a point around the world and they just, the ideas just assimilate out into the larger world and are taken up and then everyone is still doing better.

So that would be great.

Or maybe it doesn't go that way.

Maybe it becomes, you know, like us against them in a sense.

There's the clubs that are growing, the

The native systems, the current systems are not doing well.

They refuse to learn from these experiments.

They're not interested in change.

Well, then they probably will be dinosaurs.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I was just thinking about, so there are examples of community energy generation, for example.

So those solutions start to exist.

And then there are examples of invested interests where they've kind of seen that as a potential threat and moved to outlaw them.

So, I mean, it's just those kind of, you know, it's those kind of conflicts that I was wondering whether you might... Yeah, you know, of course those kinds of conflicts will happen.


SPEAKER_02:
And the R&D program and the people involved in creating this whole system have to think these things through carefully to try to avoid, you know, problems that might be foreseen, right?

Obviously.

So these are very important questions and we would have to give a lot of thought as to how we...

skirt past these problems.

That's to be done.

That's work to be done.

I have a few ideas.

And I can say that's one of the reasons I wanted the global science community as a kind of a co-leader in this whole process because it is, for one thing, it's global, right?

It's not limited to the laws of a particular nation.

And it's authoritative in the sense that we can write papers and we can do simulations and we can talk with some authority of would this be a good –

do that we can we're independent of any particular nation in a sense um and and then suppose that there's a nation that says no way this is against the law you can't do it here okay you can't do it there but there were the other nations that wouldn't have those rules and this club model can thrive wherever it's allowed to thrive right and you would think that there would be some nation somewhere in this world where there might be some allowance

for these kinds of social experiments to occur.

And once it works, that's the thing, that's the concept, is that once it's shown to work, you know, first in one community, say, and then maybe in two and then four and then eight, you know, once it looks like this actually works, then there's a whole other slew of papers and simulations showing, you know, assessing that, and that information is broadcast to the world

And at some point it becomes harder and harder for a society to keep it out because no country uses typewriters anymore.


SPEAKER_06:
Except the hipster countries.


SPEAKER_02:
Except the hipsters.


SPEAKER_06:
They'll say, I want that good old fashioned government.

So Scott, and then a question from chat, and then Dave.


SPEAKER_01:
So great conversation.

Thank you.

This is so fascinating.

So a couple of book references and a couple of things.

I'm going to talk a little bit about money and risk here, going back to what we were talking about a little while ago and that move from money and prosperity.

You know, there's a book by, I think it's Hannesman called Doing Money, where the author suggests that money is a universal risk consolidator.

And so I'll hold up here.


SPEAKER_06:
20 billion.


SPEAKER_01:
OK.

Due to the bearer upon.

So it only is as good as the narrative.

Right.

So I always carry Zimbabwe money around because it's inflation protected in the United States.

We can't get near the inflation rates of this.

So the reason I raise that is money.

You know, we there's a book called The Past is a Foreign Country where we think people in the past, oh, they just didn't get it.

And then we look at this and go, you know, money, actually, it's interesting.

When people want to accumulate money, there's a lot of theories of money, this Smith and Wixel and Hume, but money is a form of communication between people.

It's an encoding of risk, in a sense, right?

It's what we look at in decoding of risk and a universal risk encoding, in a sense.

And it's kind of interesting because then it becomes abstracted into its own end, right?

that's when comes the commodity of money, right?

And so it's not a medium of communication and exchange anymore, but its own gain, its own, because it's used generically against all risks.

I can de-risk so many universal risks.

That's pretty true.

It's like a universal solvent of water.

You know, it becomes something that's biologically very dynamic.

And so the idea of the medium of exchange is a fascinating one here.

So I just wanted to

plus without a little bit.

And then, so if you look at it that way, then the meaning of,

So this is Zimbabwe local community meaning, and then there's United States local community meaning.

And they're different because the community is what generates the value, not the money.

This is a piece of paper has exactly the same value as a U.S.

dollar, but it's the symbol of a system.

And the system is the community and the communities where the value comes from, not from the piece of paper.

So that's the intrinsic uncovering.

One of the things that I've been fussing with just to share on this point is, so the past people have been doing money and maybe they're not so stupid.

Maybe they've been doing clubs.

Maybe this is a money club.

And so one of the challenges is, well, now maybe we need a redistribution idea among the clubs.

And I think one of the things that's really appealing about the way you're describing things is the intrinsic transparency that comes with the exponential increase in interaction volumes.

So it's impossible to suppress transparency among so many interactions.

It's very similar to after 2008 financial break.

where there were calls to get rid of the rating agencies because that was one-stop shop for conflicts of interest.

You pay them more money, you get a better rating.

And they said, instead, let's get rid of the rating agencies and let's use the spreads in credit default swap markets because it tells you the same information.

Will the company pay its debts as they become due?

That's what the rating agency tell you.

And that's what the spreads in credit default swap markets tell you.

But the difference is in the credit default swap markets, those are set by thousands of interactions.

So you can't game them.

So that's what distributed governance looks like.

And that's what intrinsically, it feels like you're building that from the bottom up, but not just vis-a-vis financial instruments, but vis-a-vis anything.

Community as the source of trust and knowledge.

And then I call it the community trust, community information boomerang.

Because then when you want to authenticate or audit, you go back to the community because that's the ultimate source of trust.

Because that's where it came from in the first place.

Because it didn't come from the data passing through it.

It came from the fact of the meaning in the community drenching and enriching the information as it goes through.

So I really love the way you're talking about it.

I just wanted to make those few comments on it.

No, this is...

that abstraction of money is kind of an interesting thing that you get to levels of abstraction where abstraction itself becomes a form of violence because it reduces the granularity with which a system sees the individual.

And so just last point, Kandinsky, the folks on this phone have heard this already, but Kandinsky made it, the painter said once that violent societies yield abstract art.

And one of the things I always wondered is, is that reversal, is abstraction itself violence?

And to me, it feels like getting to a certain scale, it feels like violence.

Try dealing with Verizon.

The other day I was...

I was so frustrated.

I wanted to slam my phone down, the receiver down, but I only had a cell phone.

I don't have an old-style phone, so I couldn't slam it down with drama.

Anyway.


SPEAKER_02:
These are, you've raised a whole series of really interesting and important points.

So, first,

you know, if we're going to design new systems, including new economic systems, new financial systems, new monetary systems, what is money?

What is its function in a club or in a society, right?

Well, already in what I call native

systems, money is a voting tool.

If I have a billion dollars, I get to vote for any number of things that I want.

I can make whole organizations do fulfill my, you know, desires because I have enormous voting power.

Now, obviously, that voting power is not democratic.

It's not transparent.

It's, you know, it's really dysfunctional flow of information.

And quite obviously, if we're going to design new systems, it's fine that money is used as an information tool, but that information tool should be completely transparent, fairly distributed.

It should actually function as a way for all of us to share our desires, our fears, our

our, you know, our viewpoints, our preferences to the community.

You know, it's redesigned money that serves an informational purpose and is transparent and is, you know, deeply democratic in its function.

That would be a useful way to communicate, you know.

So that's part of the task, is how do we do that?

How do we design an economic system that functions that way?

Where money is no longer even viewed as money in the normal way.

As a matter of fact, economics, like the economic profession, say, for a club, does not even resemble economics.

Because suddenly we're not talking about economics, we're talking about cognition.

we're talking about a societal, this is all about decision-making under uncertainty in reference to some fitness, you know, vitality score of like, how do, this is cognition.

How do we, how do we, it's no longer economics.

Now it's a, now it's a new field called cognition that happens to use a voting tool that we might call money.

Oh, sorry.

Just a couple things on that.

So, you know, a club can't redesign the, say, national currency.

It can't redesign the dollar or anything like that.

But it can create a currency for its own use within its own milieu that functions exactly the way that I'm describing, that is transparent, that is, you know, does all the things that we've just been describing.

So I take a shot at that in my design of the leader framework and

If we get to it, I'll try to show you conceptually how that works.


SPEAKER_01:
Just a quick follow-up.

That's one of the elements of sovereignty, right, is the tax and the money issuance.

The M1 supply, you can't use a Starbucks card everywhere because that would intrude on the sovereign supply of money on the fiat.

And so the exertion of authority into every interaction has three parties in it because the trading medium is a declaration by the sovereign that they are there to help.

But it's like von Munchausen by proxy syndrome, right?

They keep people weak in their interactions in order for themselves to be strong.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.


SPEAKER_05:
very interesting just because there's a bunch of questions in the chat and a lot of raised hands so i want to get to everyone in order so um dave and then i'm going to ask a question in the chat and then blue and steven yeah it's not uh self-evident what the relations of property intellectual property occupation competence uh in the u.s there seems to be a um

an insistence that the traditional money relationship structures everything else.

Your competence is determined by who writes your paycheck.

Your credibility is determined by that.

It isn't that way every place.

In Mexico, the right to professional association and voluntary association is written into the Constitution.

In the Philippines, the government is constitutionally obligated not just to tolerate, but to actively promote professional associations and voluntary associations.

And reading some of the things, and by no means all of the things that Robert David Steele says, Denmark apparently is doing a fabulous job of managing the knowledge economy and moving more and more all the time to open source everything, except maybe initiation of government force, out and out violence to preserve

of buildings and children and things like that.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks for the comment.

Sure.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, have you looked at Steele's proposals for setting up a very much more transparent way of exchanging knowledge and vetting competence?


SPEAKER_02:
No, I'm not familiar.


SPEAKER_06:
Let's share that.


SPEAKER_02:
It sounds interesting that


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, cool.

And part of this prelude in the research and development phase is certainly to take stock of various proposals that address different aspects related to transparency, accountability, information propagation, value exchange, crypto economics, NFTs.

All these things are going to be woven together in a new tapestry that hopefully is our parachute slash trampoline.

So Yvonne...

Yvonne asked a question in the chat.

He says, hello, thanks John for the second stream, sixth stream.

It is excellent.

My question is, does the club model imply a governance where two or more clubs come into confrontation in their ways of acting?

So early stage club development or late stage, let's just say two clubs don't just believe different things.

They don't just infer differently, but they act differently.

What do we do?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

Okay.

So, um,

So in the R&D program, maybe the first task will just be to work out how cognition, societal cognition can happen in a club setting, you know, and then all the different systems that support that.

But very quickly, you know, once progress is being made towards that end, the next big question is how do clubs cognate?

How do

How do they communicate?

So just as there would be systems and technologies and frameworks that allow individuals in a club to communicate and cognate together and make decisions together, whether they're economic decisions or whether they're governance decisions or whatever kind of legal decisions, whatever that is, there would be a similar kind of overlay to the

between club setting, right?

So maybe it would be similar technologies.

Maybe they would be adapted a little bit for the club-to-club interactions.

But the same kind of concept holds is that the community of clubs is a cognitive community, is an organism, a cognitive organism.

So how does it make decisions and view the world and act?

Now, it might be that, let's say that down the road there are hundreds of clubs or thousands of clubs, and one club says, you know what, we really like this slavery idea.

That's going to work really well for us, and we're going to go off on this tangent.

Or, you know, some say destructive tangents.

Well, I mean, how does a healthy family or a healthy group of friends deal with issues like this?

How do organisms deal with issues like this?

You can put pressure in various ways on an organism that is being antisocial or an individual in your family.

a brother that's being anti-violent or anti-social, there's various ways you can try to pressure them maybe to behave more socially appropriately or something.

So that would be part of the conceptualizing and the design of these frameworks is how do you deal with problems when some club is misbehaving or some individual in a club is misbehaving?

That ought to be well thought out so you have a

procedure that you follow when things like that happen, right?

But just off the top of my head, there would be many things you might do.

Say a club was, you know, somehow turned rogue, like a cancer in this community.

Well, you can decide not to trade with it.

You can, all the other clubs can say, you know what, this is not part of our larger community.

This isn't right.

This doesn't work.

And we're going to exile you.

I mean, various things you might do, but all of these have to be given thought of how do you deal with situations that arise.

And there could well be reasonable ways that through communication, through other means that you could start to harmonize the whole if it's in a state of disharmony.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, obviously, obviously the human body does that, right?

I mean, the human, there's trillions of cells in the human body and somehow they basically all work together.

And on a rare occasion, some cells decide not to the, the, and we might call that a cancer.

So, you know, that cancers can happen.

And how do you then, you know, the question becomes, how do you prevent cancer from happening?

And obviously, I would say, obviously, one way is to keep the organism healthy, you know, keep it all healthy.

And that helps.

Keep communications open, you know, that helps.

And then if cancer still arises, then, you know, then we have to have a way to deal with it.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks, John.

So, Blue, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
So John, I just want to say thanks.

I've really enjoyed all of your streams thus far.

And this is like a huge problem that you've attempted to tackle here.

And so I don't want to like approach it in a way like it seems like I'm a naysayer or like I'm boohooing.

I just, there's some extra components here that I think, you know, maybe you have thought about or have approached it in a very delicate way.

So the concentration of wealth and power

or I feel in this country, and this is definitely personal opinion, or maybe in the world, it stems from some kind of spiritual bankruptcy.

And we've always had authority.

You talked about authority and societal cognition in the last paper, and you talked about how authority comes from either voluntary deference or coercion.

And previously, from the beginning of written record until now, and maybe even still now, that

A voluntary deference and coercion both can come from religion and religious groups.

And we've seen the God gene, right?

And so I know that like you've kind of sidestepped and produced a very agnostic platform.

And I mean, I know that you also did talk about like the interconnectedness of all things and kind of bringing that forward in an education way and not a religious way.

And I definitely appreciate that.

But do you think...

that it's possible that we're hardwired.

You know, we have this God gene, right?

Like that we're hardwired to need something beyond.

And that if we had that something beyond, maybe the concentration of wealth and power, if we all gave, you know, if we all did tithing 10% of all of our salary, I mean, I think that that would equal out the world just that, right?

So, I mean, is it possible that religion is absent and maybe plays a more central role in society than...


SPEAKER_02:
you've allotted for here yeah i've i've not talked about religion much at all in any of the papers nor in the series uh these discussions and i don't i don't really want to um um i i i think this program can go can continue can move forward and reach its aims fine without

without focusing on the topic of religion.

Because people belong to all kinds of organizations, including religious organizations.

People get meaning from all kinds of organizations and associations.

So good.

Fine.

That's fine.

The topic here is how does a community cognate?

How does it make decisions?

How can we create systems that favor beneficial and healthy cognition, right?

So those two things can exist at the same time.

You know, people can belong to religions and participate in healthier systems at the same time.

As far as meaning goes, some people find meaning in religion, but I think it's useful for this project to also consider some of the ideas that I had in my first paper, Worldview, because those ideas of how we are all interconnected, how we are...

really, in some sense, transcendent ideas that have scientific, you know, rationale behind them, right?

That's useful to consider those points in the worldview paper, because that, at least in my thinking, those concepts are central to

If we're together in a society, what are we doing?

What is our purpose?

If we don't have a purpose, why are we even associating with each other?

Just randomly?

Or just to take advantage of each other?

Why are we even in a community together?

Whether it's a large community or a small community.

So I'm suggesting, particularly in the first paper, that if we come together with a purpose,

and that purpose is to thrive now and in the future, then we can do something about that.

We can create systems that allow us to fulfill that purpose, that are true to purpose, the technology, in a sense, that functions the way it's supposed to function.

And the concept of purpose comes from this larger worldview of what is a human?

What is an individual?

How are we all related to all of life?

You know, that's at least in my mind, that's kind of where the idea of purpose comes from.

Like, you know, we're actually together as a society.

We're an organism and an organism is connected to all.

all other organisms and all of life is connected all the way up to the biosphere and our purpose can include all of that so you could call that a trans you know a transcendent perspective perhaps and that might be i'm i'm hoping that might be meaningful to folks who might want to be involved in this kind of project

Um, because, uh, you know, if it is, there's scientific reasons for all of that, you know, there's a rationale for all of that, that we can explore all of that scientifically and otherwise, you know?

Uh, so, so yes, people belong to religions and they can continue to belong to religions.

And, and, and from my perspective, that, that, you know, those organizations will, will continue to exist as long as they're useful.

Just like any organization, just like any association, it should continue to exist as long as it's useful.

That can happen in the club setting.

Some people might be religiously oriented.

That's fine.

But that's not really the club focus, the R&D project, the design of new systems, the engagement of people in a societal cognition framework.

That can all happen whether someone is religious or not, I would say.

So just as a- Did I sidestep it well enough there?


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just ask a quick follow up?

So definitely in the societal cognition, I mean, I just think that we have to factor in the role that religion plays in the societal cognition because we do voluntary deference and coercion through religion.

And I think that it's something that if people ascribe to a religious practice, that we have to allow for that and examine what role that will have on societal cognition at large, like whether they're part of a religious organization or not or whatever.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, sure.

Those are fine questions.

Does religion, A, in some ways impact the capacity of these systems to function?

function in the way we're thinking they could function?

That's a fair question.

That's a scientific question.


SPEAKER_00:
Or perhaps examining the framework through the lens of each religion would be maybe useful.


SPEAKER_02:
And that would be useful also.

That would be part of the question of like, you know, is there some impact that religion A is having on this system?

And if so, let's talk about how does this group see the world?

How does that, you know, what's our differences of the way we see the world?

You know, those are all fine questions.

And all of those questions can be addressed in a kind of a scientific manner.


SPEAKER_06:
When Scott mentioned that there's the buyer and the seller, but also there's like the umbrella of the trust in the sovereign in the fiat, you know, fiat lux is how the book begins in some ways.

It's a lot like a marriage partnership where there is a third party and that third party is the context and various religions have different ways to talk about that third entity.

But it's so interesting how when we're dealing with identity and communication and trust,

it is like we need to have a higher level scaffold now can nature provide that can so-called science today or in the future provide that that's what we're going to discover and discuss so um stephen and then lee and then dave yeah this this idea of um the environment and how we connect in to say a shared epistemic niche a way of understanding and


SPEAKER_07:
And Kristen talks about that in some of his interviews around, you know, even religion can help us have a shared, I think it's an epistemic framework or an epistemic niche for how we can align.

And that then ties into, you know, how do we treat hidden states if we're going to have active influence?

So as well as cognition, dynamical system in the brain and body, you know, the niche

And where we are in the niche becomes a big part of that.

And of course, what we're seeing over the last 200 years is there's more and more states that are being fixed in the environment.

The things that we say we know are mechanical objects which will take over and get rid of uncertainty.

The markets will supposedly deal with all of that.

All these different, and it leaves less of a role for trying to attune to hidden states beyond.

So that may be one of those questions around money being a classic case of that.

How much do we trust in the economics?

And that will solve, just vote for the best economics and it will deal with everything.

But where is that?

Is that really a deontic cue?

Like Friston talks about deontic cues, cues in the environment like traffic lights, that we just build all the traffic lights and then we just work to do what they tell us.

But that's where that violence can come in that I think was also mentioned is because

Deontic cues will always win, if they're very strong, over active inference in a community.

Because active inference in a community needs integration.

It needs time to actually listen to the landscape.

And if you can have deontic cues that say, well, that's not needed, you kill a lot of that.

So in some ways, that might be relevant here is showing the benefit of epistemic niches.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

In some ways, these conversations are related to some of the points that Blue was picking up on.

So she tried to talk a little bit about this.

So religion is a part of culture.

You can think of that as religious groups, as there are different cultural groups, kind of, social cultural groups.

You know, culture is really useful.

Cultural norms are really useful or can be useful.

They can draw our attention.

the things that in the world that are most important and help us to avoid danger and you know healthy culture is is a part of cognition it's a way to offload my cognitive burden onto the you know the the history of this culture that has learned as it has gone through life what works and what doesn't work you know so um so

So it is good that, say we had a large club with multiple subsets, so cultural subsets in it.

Again, the purpose of the club is societal cognition, right?

And we should have ways to measure

that's functional or dysfunctional both in are we achieving a quality of high quality of life are we you know are we are we is our uncertainty about the future high or low or you know how are we doing so so part of that is is engaging with cultural groups of some

the community right the idea of all of this what you know like what is the idea of cognition well cognition requires communication there's no that cells in the brain don't function if there's not communication that's going back and forth rich rich communication right so we can decide as a as a as a group you know we can we can we can we can study different kind of

designs for systems, we can measure their success, we can apply a kind of a scientific method to come up with good ways to ensure that we can all thrive.

But part of that is also

allowing for and providing for and facilitating the communication between group associations that are subsets of any club or any society, right?

I mean, the idea has to be communication in a cooperative sense, right?

Or else there's no cognition to begin with.

You know, then you just have rules that God knows.

those who made those rules in the first place you know so we're just all we're doing is like just just look at how cognition works and let's be honest about it let's be transparent about it let's

You know, let's just peel it, peel back the covers and see how social cognition works and see how cognition works in biology and learn what we can learn from it.

And let's bring the richness of that out and make it all transparent and fair.

So that allows for subgroups to have cultural differences.

And that's important because cultural subgroups will have a different perspective on

how to do things or what's important or where we should focus our attention, you know, that's all good.

Right?

As long as as long as it's set up such that we're all able to openly

communicate and tell our story and tell our narrative, whether that's as an individual or whether that's as a cultural subgroup.

There's a narrative to express.

There's concerns, there's desires, there's needs.

Again, humans are very complex organisms.

We have very complex needs.

And all of those, all the core needs need to be fulfilled in whatever healthy society we build.

The need for association, the need for love, the need for helping each other.

We want to help each other.

we have to address all of that.

And it just has to be open and transparent and openly discussed about what we're doing and how this works and how people, you know, how, how these tools and approaches facilitate cooperation and cognition or hinder it.

You know, that's the experiment.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks, John Lee.

And then anyone else with a question?


SPEAKER_04:
Uh, yeah, I think this is, um, a related question.

Um, I'm just going to read out just one thing from your paper, actually, because, um,

So in this paragraph, you say, in a second-order approach to active inference, if a society understands itself as a cognitive organism, if it understands its cognitive processes reducing uncertainty for the purpose of achieving a sustainably maintaining vitality, and understands its social systems as a cognitive architecture, then given those beliefs, what kind of societal systems might it develop and employ?

Um, so that got me thinking is that all those beliefs prerequisite then for everybody in the club, does it need to be that level of shared understanding or can it be just held within a kind of a subsystem?

You know, is it, is that something that perhaps the, the scientists who are doing the simulation, et cetera.


SPEAKER_02:
Good question.

Now, I think we should allow that if this R&D program were to go forward, that, you know, it might start small and focused and there might be a focus group involved of those people who are interested in this kind of thing, right?

And if it started to work and, you know, proved to be beneficial to communities, then it might grow and other people would get involved.

And so we can think of this whole thing as progression.

I think that's fair.

That's the way it would naturally play out.

And, you know, if the scientific community is involved in this, and if the scientific community is involved in creating and helping to, you know, co-designing new systems, well, then there's going to certainly be a focus on the scientific viewpoint in order to do that.

Communities obviously would have their input into the R&D program and, you know, it would, between the two, it would move forward.

But I would guess though,

that early participants and early efforts would be focused, you know, would more or less align with what I have in the worldview paper, or else they, why would they be interested in participating in the first place?

You know, like they would maybe only be interested because they can see some alignment with the goals of the program and the way the program is oriented and

what it's trying to achieve, right?

So quite likely the early participants in this whole thing, whether they're scientists or community members might be kind of more or less aligned with ideas in the worldview paper and especially the purpose of, you know, the purpose of a club or the purpose of societal cognition.

Now, suppose down the road, you know, 20 years from now,

I live in Los Angeles, and I don't care at all about any of that stuff.

I just want to live my life and make sure I have a roof over my head and stuff.

But this club is up and going and is doing well, and they're all there.

They're actually doing well.

My neighbor is a part of it, and his life has improved in some way.

So I don't care about any of that.

They got a nice scene going on there that's beneficial.

So I'm going to join anyway.

And so to a degree, the culture of it would change.

It would evolve.

But hopefully, it would start in a healthy, functional way, aligned with the purpose of the whole project.

And then it would evolve the way it evolves.

I would guess that if it's beneficial, those beneficial ideas would continue to be the

you know, at its core somehow.

But how it exactly evolves, you know, as decades goes on, and as you know, as 100 years from now, it's maybe maybe, you know, we if this exists 100 years from now, and if it's spread widely, maybe we're using very different language to talk about it, and we see it differently, perhaps.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks, John.

Now, as the author, it is up to you.

Would you like to shift the second slide for today?

These are awesome questions.

Thanks everyone in the chat and for participating because it's a conversation and John's initial inroads are tripartite.

and very provocative, and we're seeing that play out.

And so it's a great beginning to a discussion, even though it's our dot two video.

So John, where would you like to take it for the last section?


SPEAKER_02:
Obviously there's a lot of ideas in this whole series.

There's just a ton of ideas, both superficial and deep.

And if this goes forward, it's gonna take a lot of discussion and it's gonna take a lot of people involved to bring different perspectives to kind of bring this whole concept to fruition, right?

So we're just scratching the surface.

That's all we're doing.

We're just putting out some of the big ideas and then, you know, there's a ton of work that has to happen to make this real.

So can you go to four,

Number four.

Group four slides.

Maybe slide seven, six, if you will.


SPEAKER_06:
Seven integrated components on slide six.


SPEAKER_02:
Six.

Yeah.

Seven integrated components.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

So maybe in the last little remaining time, we'll just touch on this lead up.

it's really the the idea of the leader is more than just an economic system it is actually the idea of it that is put out in the in in my book economic direct democracy talks about the whole picture the larger picture but there is as you can see from the slide there's seven components to that

And they really touch on all six overarching systems that I talk about in the series.

So economic, governance, legal, analytical, education, and health.

It's all in there somewhere.

So the idea of the LIDA, that's Local Economic Direct Democracy Association, the idea of the LIDA is an integrated framework of cognitive systems.

The simulation really focuses more just on the economic aspect because that really was just the easiest piece to pick up first.

And in particular, it focuses on what I call the token exchange system, which is the first three in the list.

So a token is a local digital currency that the community creates and uses.

There's the token monetary system.

There's what I call the crowd-based financial system.

And there's a market system, local markets, people sell, you know, create it.

goods and sell them in local markets.

They also obviously sell distantly to people who are either in the local area, but not a part of the club, but also far distant that are not a part of the club.

So those first three things constitute the token exchange system.

And we'll just maybe talk a little bit about the simulation and some of the results and how that works.

Maybe slide eight.

Yeah.

Yep.

So in the simulation, there's five aggregate agents.

There's organizations, persons, the crowd-based financial system, local government, and then the rest of the world, which I call rest of counties.

The data for the simulation, the initial data, it was from

the US Census for Eugene, Oregon, relatively small community, small county population, 100,000 or something like that.

And I used starting income values from the census data for Eugene County from 2014 or something like that.

This paper was published, I believe, in 2014.

So I probably used a little earlier data to get things rolling.

OK, so the simulation just really illustrates.

It doesn't predict how the system would work.

It just illustrates my thinking about how a system could work.

And in particular, I wanted to design a system that could bootstrap itself up without large influx of cash or other things from outside.

So that was part of the idea.

How can a system bootstrap itself up

start with very little and grow from there.

Second was I wanted to create an economic system for the club model where over time incomes became equal, income and wealth equalized.

And the thinking there is that money and the whole economic and financial aspects of that really is part of the community's cognitive system.

So we're using money as a very transparent voting tool.

It's like votes.

It's carrying information about people's desires and fears and everything.

Yeah, so that's, I wanted to show that using a stock flow consistent model, agent-based stock flow consistent model, I just wanted to show that the numbers add up correctly, right?

Like I'm not creating dollars out of nowhere.

There's a logical way this plays out and all the numbers add up.

agent, one of these major agents.

Any flow from one agent goes somewhere.

It just doesn't disappear.

So very briefly, the lines in blue are the flow of tokens and dollars.

So a community is creating tokens as it goes.

As it grows, it creates more tokens.

The concept is that the value of a token would be sort of the

of a dollar.

And it's made to be non-inflationary.

So let's just say for 2014, the value of a token is the value of a dollar.

Purchasing power of a token is that of a dollar in 2014.

And the community would create tokens a little bit in the first year, a little bit more in the second year.

As more people get engaged, there's more use for tokens.

There's more ways to use them in the local markets than

and the volume of tokens in the local community would grow.

And salaries, for those who were members of the club, salaries would be paid both in tokens and in dollars.

So maybe in the first year, you would just get a few tokens, and then over time, your share of tokens in your wages would go up.

And the same would be true even if you're just, say, you yourself own a business.

You know, people, you would sell your, if you're a member of the community, you would sell things to other members of the community and they would pay you in both dollars and tokens.

I'm using dollar as the national currency.

So organizations, just to look at the blue lines again, organizations pay wages to persons.

The persons might be employed or unemployed.

I also call unemployed, there's some people who are unemployed

And members who receive dollars and tokens as part of their wages and as part of their income would naturally have to contribute a certain fraction to the crowd-based financial system.

And that's the blue line for contributions to the CBFS.

And from the CBFS, if I'm an organization or I'm an individual and I have some idea to start a business or I need loans for my business or I'm a nonprofit and I want grants, I can go to the CBFS and apply for a grant or a subsidy or donations.

And once as a person, once some of my currency is in the CBFS, I more or less get to decide how that money is used.

Like I want to support schools or I like this idea of a new light bulb.

I like that business idea that this person came up with.

I'd like to give them a subsidy or I'd like to give them a loan or a donation or something like that.

Again, this is all very transparent.

And again, as time goes on, incomes become more equal.

And because incomes become more equal, everyone has equal amount of power in the CBFS to direct how the community spends its money.

The green lines in this figure are dollars.

And obviously, you have to pay taxes and dollars.

The government's not going to accept tokens, so you pay taxes and dollars.

The government also provides some income support for people who are unemployed.

That's natural, normal.

The government also provides some grants and contracts and subsidies to organizations.

That's quite normal.

And the organizations that are members also have to deal with the outside world.

They have to sell their goods and exchange goods and services using dollars.

So those are the green lines.

So that's how the basic system works, and then as the system evolves over a period of 28 years in the simulation, and I'll show you what the results are as everything goes round and round.

We only have a few minutes left, so I'm going to kind of have to just get to the point here.

There's some assumptions on the next slide.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, John, can I just ask, which of these agents are active inference agents or where does active inference come into play or could come into play with later versions of this simulation?


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so again, the leader framework is an integrated system that has a governance component.

The governance component has a legislative component and

you know, all the major six overarching systems are addressed in some way.

I'm only simulating the economic part, right?

So if you were in a real club and a real club looked anything like the leader, there would be a governance system that you would be, you know, participating in some kind of collaborative governance system to help decide, you know, what should happen in the community.

There'd be a legislative system and legal system and so on, education system and everything.

So that's one way that active inference would be involved just in the process of decision making under uncertainty, right?

And in the in this particular simulation, you know, obviously, businesses are having to make decisions and choose choose what they do with their resources.

So that's another way that cognition is happening.

And then the maybe the main in this economic picture, maybe the main

agent is the CBFS.

That's a financial system where everyone is able to participate in a transparent and democratic way to fund those things that they think are useful to their community, that create the kind of jobs that they want to

As a community, do we want lots of non-profit jobs?

Do we want for-profit jobs?

Do we want jobs in the manufacturing sector?

Do we want to support this kind of business?

Do we want to support that kind of business?

These are all decisions that the community makes through the CDFS.

And then if the community decides, yeah, we want this bakery, this would be great, or this bookstore, or this farm, or whatever it is,

then the community can associate within the CBFS and say, okay, there's a thousand of us.

We like this idea for this farm.

Here's funding for it.

So, you know, go for it.

So active inference particularly would be happening in the CBFS.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, Stephen, a question.

And then anyone else with a question?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I suppose in a way you've seen a mix here between like in the red boxes, you could have active inference, like the dynamical,

non-linear systems of inference and then you've got this message passing which to some extent is then the aggregated system the sort of steady equilibrium system i the pile of money or the spreadsheet and a message passing where data goes from one to another but then within that

there may have to be another process of inference that happens, assuming people have any agency, and it's not just all automated.

So it's like, to me, that's probably where you've got system dynamics in that diagram, and then you've got these inside that nonlinear dynamical systems, i.e.

the inference processes embedded inside.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, there obviously is a lot going on there that we're not going to have time to talk about because we have like five minutes left or 10 minutes left.

But just to give you one example of that,

Suppose that a group in the community wants to create some kind of business and they want to produce some kind of product, right?

So they come to the CDFS and say, hey, we want to make this new thing.

Well, a lot of information has to go back and forth, right?

This is an information-rich system.

So if I'm going to support this with my resources in the CBFS, I want to know where are you getting the raw materials?

How is that impacting the environment?

How is your product going to improve or harm my sense of community or any one of the metrics that we're measuring?

Is there any pollution?

How are you going to deal with your waste?

How much energy do you need?

Do we have that level of energy, like electricity or whatever, as a community?

Do we have that resource?

I mean, there's an enormous amount of discussion and information has to flow between these different parties in order to make the kind of decisions that, you know, intelligent decisions that you would want to make in the CBFS.

Okay, so in the few minutes that we have remaining, if you could turn to slide 15, please.


SPEAKER_06:
All right, go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
So these are some of the results.

And I should say that right at the get-go, as a community is forming, as a club is forming, they would be choosing their trajectory.

They would be choosing that they want income to rise to a certain level over time, that they want participation to happen in this club at a certain rate over time.

They want, in particular, the lower left there, they want the income target to rise at a certain rate over time.

And obviously you can't just flood a community with money on day one and expect that to work because there's no place, say with digital currency, because there's no place to spend it.

It's a tool for voting and if there's no place to vote, the tool is useless, right?

So that's partly why things grow slowly over time so that there becomes outlets for using the currency to create the kind of

economy and economic system that the community wants.

So some of these things would be decided ahead of time.

Like, here's what we want as a trajectory.

Here's what we're doing as a community using the system.

This is where we're going.

This is what we're going to do.

This is how it works.

And if we all cooperate in this way, that's exactly how it's going to happen.

You know, that's the concept.

So it's not just here's a system, use it however you want.

Let's see how it goes.

It's really more, you know, we're a community that we have a goal.

And here's how we intend to reach our goal.

We want, say, for example, we want incomes to rise to a certain level over time.

And this is, you know, can this system do that?

And if the answer is yes, well, then here's how we're going to do it.

We're going to increase it a certain amount every year.

It's all going to work out.

And so in that sense, some of this should be no, there should be no surprises for the community as they do a field trial.

It should be working exactly the way they intended it to work, bringing them where they wanna go.

For example, when you drive a car on a trip, you know where you wanna go.

If you're halfway there, if it's a two day trip and on day one, you're halfway there, then you know you're moving in the right direction.

It's all going just where you intended to go.

Okay.

On this slide, maybe on the lower right-hand corner, this is what happens over 30 years as the simulation moves forward.

This is showing average family income in the membership.

It starts at a fairly low level.

This is from the census data.

This is where they start.

on year zero at year zero, and every year the average family income increases.

Essentially, the leader is paying people to join, either because the income target is rising and my wages are going up as the income target goes up, or I actually make a lot of money, but I'm joining anyway just to get that bonus, whatever it is, $1,000 a year in tokens or whatever that bonus is.

So people are joining because it is in their economic best interest to join.

And as it goes on, the income target rises.

And then family income, you can see the blue line there.

Family income, average family income more than doubles over the 30-year period.

So the average family is

between tokens and dollars, the average family income is over, it's around $110,000 annually as time goes on.

Now, I might note that the dollar aspect, obviously the community needs to bring in dollars in order for this to happen because some of the income is paid and some of the wages are paid in dollars and some are paid in tokens.

So part of what this community is doing is they're adjusting their outflows, they're adjusting their

transactions with the rest of the world such that they're keeping dollars in circulation longer than would otherwise be natural.

So, for example, there's like a buy local program.

There's ways to support local businesses and keep money, keep dollars circulating in their local economy longer.

And in the end, what happens

happens is the community is increasing the number of dollars in circulation locally up to the point where their average dollar income is the national dollar, average national dollar income.

So like today in today's world, the incomes are very, very unequal.

There's a few extremely wealthy people and most everyone else is

not making very much.

But there is an average dollar, you know, average dollar income over the country.

And what the leader is doing over time is is kind of pulling dollars into their local system such that they're just reaching the average over time.

So they're reaching the average dollar income, which is about $70,000 or so.

And then they also have on top of that an income in tokens, which the community is creating.

So between the tokens and dollars, eventually they get to the point where they're having a family income of about $110,000.

So somebody had said earlier that, you know, maybe it was you, Daniel, that I'm both saying that money is a different animal in this system and motivations are different.

And in the next breath, I'm saying, oh, this is a motivation.

You can make more money.

So like both of those things are true at the same time.

And there's a transition period where we go from here to there, right?

I mean, this whole

thing just doesn't happen overnight.

If we want to transform society, it takes time.

And so in this transition period, we might be well, you might be thinking of money and income in both ways, like, in the more traditional sense of I need money to pay my rent.

And then in the new sense of money as a voting tool, and we all need to have more or less equal income so that we have more or less equal voting power in this community.

And now what happened

After 30 years or 50 years, maybe our understanding of all of this deepens and widens and maybe the current concepts of money and economy fall away over time in exchange for this new focus on cognition and well-being and value of community, depending on how well it's thriving.


SPEAKER_06:
John, is the code or the formalism available?

Because people might tweak a parameter and get a totally different response.

They might include another variable or another function, get a totally different outcome.

So how can we version this in an open source way so that we can be working together on something that's transparent?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, the code was made open source, but made available publicly back in 2014.

And also there's a

interactive simulation on the website.

It needs a little work, but it functions.

So you can go to the website,

to some degree, you can type in some different numbers and see how that all works out.

So you can play with it a little bit on the website.

But beyond that, this simulation is really quite simple.

And if I were to recode it, I might recode it in a different way today than I did back in 2014.

But the simulation is really quite simple.

This is just a first glance of a conceptual glance of how this could work.

And it needs all kinds of work.

There's all kinds of ways that we could expand this.

that there's a lot of questions that need to be answered.

And we could expand the simulation to answer questions better or address more questions.

So you can download the code that I put up in 2014.

But ideally, I think we would move forward and develop a more functional framework for this that we could try out different approaches and different ways to do it.

Maybe on this slide 16 in these last few minutes, this is maybe one of the kicker slides.

You can see on the right the histogram of this is the starting distribution of income in the county.

And then below is the income distribution at the end of the 30-year period.

And you can see practically everybody is making this $110,000 in currency per year.

On the left, you can see how the unemployment rate changes.

It starts at about 7% or so in the county and drops down to essentially full employment.

On the next slide, slide 17, on the top left is the curve of how much money is in circulation in the CBFS over time.

And you can see that about $6 billion in currency circulates annually at the end of 30 years in the CBFS.

Again, this is a highly transparent, deeply democratic and collaborative way to decide how money should be spent in the community.

And imagine, and this is a very small community of like 100,000 people or something like that.

So this is $6 billion for 100,000 people to decide how they want to, you know,

what they want for their community, what kind of jobs they want, what kind of, you know, how many nonprofits they want versus for-profits, what they want.

Like, you know, that's a lot of money.

And with that much money, a community would have enormous flexibility and capacity to make the kinds of decisions that it would want to make about how it lives its life.

Maybe that's maybe the main slides, the main results, essentially income more than doubles, enormous amount of money circulates annually in the CBFS and the community gets to decide in a very transparent and deeply democratic way how that money is spent.

So maybe we'll end there since we're out of time, but there's obviously a lot more details in the simulation paper and anyone can read that to pick up more.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks so much, John.

So we'll chill for a few more minutes.

People can drop off whenever they want to, but maybe if anyone who wants to raise their hand and give a final thought, but it's awesome that the code is posted.

Maybe you can add that in a YouTube comment because it'd be awesome to see maybe where this even plays nicely with the active inference models that we've been exploring in these recent discussions.

So anyone wants to raise their hand, give a few more seconds for that.

Also one note about communication.

And Steven was talking about like the agents, active inference agents and message passing between agents.

Also, we know that message passing is a mechanism by which active inference can be computed within an agent.

There's a lot of cool papers on that.

And it reminded me of some work that I had done in the eusocial insects in the ants, which investigated how physiological mechanisms that were inside of a solitary insect's body, like related to the regulation of foraging,

over evolutionary time in the colony context become rewired to be playing out across multiple bodies so the regulation of foraging for a solitary insect is all on board the fly but the regulation of foraging for the ant colony is something that's distributed and it

got there through evolution and hundreds of millions of years of it working so yes there are failures just because one is seeking a goal doesn't mean that they reach the goal most ant species of course are extinct but it does point to this way where the kinds of connections that are inside of an agent can be of one kind and then the communications between agents can be different we see that with neurons with ants with societies and by having a scale free framework like active inference

we could rethink how communication happens inside and outside so that we can take some agency ourselves in designing our niche in our evolutionary transitions upcoming.

So Dave, and then Lee.


SPEAKER_05:
I see some data from

the actual physical economy in Eugene.

Is there any interest in setting up Leontief matrices and running an actual physical simulation of the economy so you don't just swap everything into money, but actually use physical activity and see whether you're exceeding break-even over a period of decades?


SPEAKER_02:
If you mean by physical, you mean like an actual club.

Yes, that's where all of this is going.

In whatever it would take, six years, ten years, whenever this is ready, yes, let's do a field trial in a real club and see how this works.

But if you're talking about more...

Like in silico, sure, all I'm looking at here is just some simple metrics about the exchange of currency.

But there's all kinds of things that have to be exchanged and considered.

There's energy, there's waste, there's pollutants, there's...

there's raw materials there's human resources there's like all of these things all of the components could become part of a simulation model and should become part of simulation models over time so again this is a very very simple simulation and there's tremendous opportunities to expand it and make it more meaningful thanks lee i am sorry um


SPEAKER_04:
I'm going to try and get two questions for the price of one.

So my first question is, given that you see this kind of prelude phase,


SPEAKER_02:
what what would you see as uh priorities initial priorities for for research then to get this really moving yeah i mean good question and and and i wish i had a you know a clear path to let's do a b c and d and then it's all going to work out but i don't so we have to decide that together really i mean i could i could come up with a list of ideas that we could all discuss together uh you know

kinds of simulation models could be expanded but there's other things too for example it would be really interesting to just do a survey either of the general population in you know in one country or maybe multiple countries or do a simulation of the global in the global science community and just say to scientists you know if this kind of r d program were

were available or were activated and there was funding available, would you be interested in participating in this?

It would be really interesting to know, is there support for this in the scientific community and in the public?

Is the public interested in fundamentally new systems?

You know, those would be interesting questions.

There could be media.

You know, somebody should make a documentary about the concept of society as a cognitive organism and what we could become.

You know, there could be art projects.

There could be media projects.

There could be literature projects.

There could be simulations.

There could be surveys, there could be assessments of, say, you know, choose some community, maybe a smallish community, and assess what is their, how do we apply metrics to their current fitness?

What kind of metrics, there could be work on metrics, there could be work on applying metrics to an existing community just to get a background of, like, where are we now?

And how would we collect this information?

on computer models to be like, if we had 50 metrics, how do we combine them into something meaningful for making decisions?

Or on the topic of tools, what kind of tool would allow 10,000 people to richly communicate and make decisions together and

How can I tell my story to 1,000 people or 10,000 people?

How can I tell my story, my narrative, my understanding of things in some rich way such that it is computed and used by the whole in a meaningful way?

A few ideas.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, thanks for the answer.

And live stream is a new affordance.

It allows those to speak.

But with 100,000 people, there isn't enough hours in the life to linearly hear from everyone.

And so when we want to speak and we want to hear and listen, active listening, passive speaking, all these things, how are we going to make that happen at scale?

So awesome questions you're raising, Stephen and anyone else, and then we'll close out.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I think the scale question keeps coming up, right?

That's the start to realize that's everywhere, but often is not talked about.

One thing just to sort of to finish off was there's the inferences about how to act in the world, but there's also the ways to get an insight into the inferences that we're making.

So in some ways, I almost think this is giving a way to look more deeply and go beyond system dynamics, which is used quite a lot in population work, but to go into this kind of way to sort of say, okay, we're not necessarily creating these clubs to tell you what to do and to replace other governance structures, but to give

other ways to get insights into what is going on in the inference process here.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, excellent.

So this whole concept is potentially useful for actually making decisions for the future by a group, but also for individuals and a group to understand

How do we cognate?

How are we cognating?

How could we cognate better or how do we cognate?

How do we actually function?

All of these are questions and all of these are open to assessment.

I could imagine thousands, if this went forward, there could be thousands of papers on all kinds of topics.

Not just about cognition, but, you know, that would include cognition.

But how does it actually work?

How do humans associate and cognate together?


SPEAKER_06:
What a time it will be.

So thank you, John.

It was great to have you on and the six appearances were just the tip of the iceberg.

So we look forward to continuing the discussion with you with seeing you in our tools, organizational unit, where we're really inspired to be working towards developing some of those things that you're suggesting that there's a need for.

So thanks everyone for joining live and for watching and for the awesome questions, Yvonne, Natalia, et cetera.

So we'll see you in the coming weeks with future papers and future discussions.

So see you later.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks much.
