## _JCaic5Cxms

Yep. All right. Thanks, Daniel, for having me, everyone at the Active Inference Lab.
Sorry for canceling twice. Life's been kind of crazy with finishing this book that this talk will
be about and having a kid. I'm six months old and I got sick like a week ago, like right
leading up to like, you know, didn't want to cancel a third time and look crazy. So
this is a very rushed presentation. It'll be better if it's more of like a conversation since
I haven't even gone through the slides myself once. And it's going to get into a lot of things
like immediately, like open up bags of worms, like there's just philosophical issues, things that
people won't agree about, like immediately. But yeah, so this is just going to be like a small
introduction to the thesis in the book. And yeah, I'll explain more, I guess, after I begin. So
yeah, it's called this the integrated evolutionary synthesis, compared to like the modern synthesis,
or even the extended evolutionary synthesis. This is integrated because it kind of reconceptualizes
evolution, biology and evolution in terms of thermodynamics and information theory or energy
flows, energy and information flows takes from cybernetics. So yeah, it's a non reductive theory
of everything that includes emergent phenomena like life, mind and civilization. I say that because most
theories of everything we're used to are fundamental physics theories that don't have anything to say about
life and consciousness. They ignore them. And I don't think those should be called theories of
everything because theories of everything should be an explanation for everything. And if you leave
the things that we care about most out, then it's not much of a theory of everything. So this is the book
I've spent the last two to three years writing obsessively. And it's available for pre-order now. So if you want to check that out,
you can find it with a Google search. Here's the table of contents. So the book is broken into three sections.
Part one talks about the origins of life and part two, about evolution, while part three focuses on
consciousness and free will and the fate of life in the universe. So these like really big questions,
but we're going to focus on part two and give a pretty like a superficial overview of part two.
But you can feel free to ask me any questions about any of the other topics that are related. And I'll try to see
what I can answer without going into like all of the information that I would, I would need to explain those things.
So Thomas Huxley, known as Darwin's bulldog,
because he was such a strong advocate for Darwin's theory, said that the question of questions for mankind,
the problem which underlies all others is more deeply interesting than any other, is the
ascertainment and of the place which man occupies in nature and of his relations to the universe of things.
So where do we fit into the grand cosmic scheme? Most scientists in the 20th century, and I would even
say now, believe that we are an accident. So Jacques Manot, a French biochemist who won the Nobel Prize for
physiology and medicine, wrote a book called Chance and Necessity, which was really influential. And
he was just as reductionist as you can get. Man at last knows that he is alone in the unfeeling
immensity of the universe, out of which he emerged only by chance. Neither, so some of the words are
covered by Daniel. So neither is his destiny spelled out nor his duty have been written down. I think
there's something wrong with that quote. But so if there are times where I'm trying to read something
where the picture's over, I might have to skip. You can move that because it looks different on my
side. It looks fine. Thank you. Great. Yeah. Neither his destiny nor his duty have been written down.
So that was kind of based on this old idea that the emergence of life was a product of chance assembly.
So like this just statistical fluctuation that brought together all the molecules needed to create the
first cell. We now know that that's probably not what happened. It's this gradual process of
self-organization. Jeremy England has been in the media a lot about his theory of dissipative adaptation.
So let's see. So we will see this is kind of like a different point of view. Not everybody
was convinced by a monitor. Carl Sagan said the origin of life must be a highly probable affair. As
soon as conditions permit, up it pops. So this is an important question. Whether life was improbable
or inevitable. So if life is highly improbable, we're likely to be alone in the universe. But if the
emergence of life is inevitable, given a certain set of common physical conditions, then it's likely that
we have life, at least on planets that are sufficiently Earth-like, specifically have geochemistry like the
Earth's, have a star, some like the Earth's, because that's what provides the energy that pushes it far from
equilibrium. So we're going to get in to all that stuff pretty soon. Christian Didou, this quote is kind of a
response to Stephen Jay Gould, who just really emphasized to both Mano and Stephen Jay Gould,
the importance of chance in nature, and that everything is basically, you know, a contingency
that came from a chance process. Where Didou says that, you know, you can have this inevitability
that some philosophers would see as teleology. But it doesn't mean that this inevitable progress is
being driven by a supernatural force. He explains that the natural constraints within which chance
operates are such that evolution in the direction of increasing complexity was virtually bound to take
place. If given the opportunity, chance does not exclude inevitability. So he was also a Nobel Prize winning
biologist, the same category as Mano, but had the complete opposite opinion. And we can talk about that too.
Basically, when systems are open systems, and they're pushed far from equilibrium, by a flow of energy,
you basically get something like a statistical bias away from what we would expect with isolated systems,
closed systems that aren't open to energy will relax the thermodynamic equilibrium. And when a system is
being pushed far from equilibrium, it will naturally organize because organization happens under the flow of
energy. And we're going to see exactly why it's a Darwinian process. But basically, you get inevitability if
you have the right ingredients. So we'll talk about to kind of frame this, we already kind of mentioned those
two worldviews. So the first worldview would be the reductionist worldview. And I should be clear that
reductionism is also it's a method and an ideology. And we shouldn't confuse those two things.
And Daniel, I guess, just so I'm, you know, know where I'm at, maybe when you when I've gone 30 minutes,
you can let me know.
Daniel Kahneman Okay, I'll hoot.
Daniel Kahneman Okay, great. So reductionism, the method, basically says that reality can be
understood by breaking down all physical phenomena into their simplest parts so that we may observe
the basic behavior of the fundamental constituents of nature. So I'm just gonna plug in this charger,
I might need to do that in a bit. But basically, the method is how science works. If we want to
understand emergence, we also have to understand how the components that systems are made of work in
isolation. So it's an essential part of the story, but it's not the whole part, we'll see. So the method
inspired an ideology and ideology is, is, is just that it's, it's an ideology, and it's rigid,
and basically, the method doesn't really imply that the ideology is true. So when I'm attacking
reductionism, I'm not attacking the method, I'm attacking the worldview. And so that worldview,
we can say that, basically, so hard determinism is, is part of the reductionist worldview. So thought
experiment that some people are familiar with, I'm sure, Laplace's demon, but basically, Laplace was
French mathematician that took Newton's kind of model of reality, and applied it to everything.
Newton himself was kind of a mystic, when it comes to life, he didn't really think that physics apply to
organisms, or at least to humans. But Laplace really, you know,
came up with the idea that like, basically, the evolution of the universe is just this like,
clockwork universe, where it's like, a machine with cogs that are just turning. So there are no,
there's no room for agency and free will, in that picture. When Boltzmann came along, in the 19th century,
theory and came up with statistical mechanics, the clockwork universe, kind of became the billiard
ball universe, but it's just the idea that everything in the universe is made of atoms, and that these
atoms are interacting, and that's the whole picture. So the ideology says we're nothing more than our
atoms. So we don't make decisions. Consciousness is just an epiphenomenon, and it feels to us like we
are, but actually, this trajectory was determined, basically, not basically from the moment of the
Big Bang. And there's kind of no freedom in anything, and no future, other than what was determined from
the beginning. So the second law of thermodynamics also sort of shaped the reductionist world abuse as the
universe is becoming increasingly disordered. There's actually kind of two different interpretations of
the second law. The first one kind of emerged from the work of Carnot and Clausius, the kind of
original thermodynamics work where entropy was about a measure of energy that can't be used for work. So
a kind of measure of like useless energy, where later with Boltzmann, he tried to
put the second law on like a statistical basis based on like atomic theory. So basically,
people applied Boltzmann statistical interpretation of the second law to the universe and came up with this
notion that the universe is becoming increasingly disordered, which isn't great for life because
it means that life is transient and likely cosmically insignificant. And this worldview is associated with
materialism, which doesn't recognize consciousness is real certainly doesn't recognize it as having
causal power. And historically, it often ignored, apparently, immaterial phenomena like energy and information,
mental processes. I am just going to grab my charger. So
Sounds good.

This doesn't die, but I will be right back.
Take your time.
So those who are watching live, please feel free to leave a comment or a question. I'm writing some things down.
I'm writing some things down. We'll look forward to the return of electrical power to Bobby.
All right, my first live stream, I will be more prepared. I return to part two. That's something else
I've told Daniel is that this is kind of like part one that I'd like to come back and talk about
the ideas that come after. So
It will have 15.2. It'll be awesome. It's an infinite sequence. It's the sequence is always yours.
Great. Okay. So reductionist worldview says that all life forms, including humans are nothing more
than collections of atoms obligatorily following fixed and arbitrary mechanical trajectories determined
solely by math and not by mind. So this worldview, if you convince someone that they don't have free will,
because you tell them about the reductionist worldview.
There was actually a study where they did this and they read participants passage from Francis Crick
explaining that it appears that we don't have any free will.
The participants actually on subsequent tests were more likely to cheat on the test
because they felt like they didn't have any personal responsibility. They weren't making the decisions.
Therefore, they could cheat. That's kind of funny because they are actually you can see that like,
by what they're like, being told there they are changing their behavior. So it is having some kind of
effect. If we do in fact have agency or free will, and we're kind of talking about agency, we don't really
get into free will, but those are related topics. But if that's not true, then that's really bad that the
majority of scientists are telling people we don't have free will because the people that believe this,
it's having negative effects on, for example, mental health. Other studies have shown that belief in no
free will can lead to depression and belief in free will can have all these positive effects.
So, of course, as soon as I start talking about free will, I'm sure a lot of people have objections,
might think that there's no way that we can have room for free will in a physical worldview. But that's
exactly what we're going to begin to talk about today, the causal power of information. And that
basically organisms are agents that are cybernetic control units. So as controllers, we do have agency.
So in the belief that we're accidents of nature, rather than natural manifestations of physical laws,
I'm sure also impacts our sense of well being just so you know, I'm not making this up. I can
I'll give you some quotes from really famous physicists, who are kind of militant reductionists.
So Brian Greene says, I think it's very important to face up to the truth of reality, which is in fact
that life and consciousness is a fleeting phenomenon on the entire cosmological timeline.
Brian Greene just came out with a book, and he's like, going on interviews just saying this. And it's
really interesting, because some other famous physicists don't agree at all. And he's stating
it like it's complete facts. So for example, David Deutsch would not agree with this. And we'll get
into that. Sabine Halstenfelder is another person. I know some of the some of my friends in the community,
who are these people, you know, working on emergence and causation stuff, get bothered by her
statements, because she is also very ultra reductionistic. So I wish people would stop
insisting they have free will. It's terribly annoying insisting that free will exists is bad
science, like insisting that horoscopes tell you something about the future. It's not compatible with
our knowledge about nature. So I'm saying that's wrong. We won't get into free will that much. But
if you have questions at the end, we will talk about how information adaptive information gets built up by
evolution in adaptive systems, complex adaptive systems. And you will see how these systems actually
do control their own future. So Sam Harris is another anti free will person says, you're not controlling the
storm, and you are not lost in it, you are the storm. So it's kind of funny, because he's using a
metaphor here. But what this story kind of reveals, is that yes, we are a storm, that's right, we are a
dissipative structure, like a storm emerges to dissipate an energy gradient. And we're not really
going to talk about that. That's what the first part of the book is about the origins part. But I'm just
pointing it out, because it's interesting, because we are like a storm in that aspect. But we also differ from
a storm, because a storm does not have agency, a storm does not have the ability to seek out new energy
gradients, it's just kind of being pushed around by these gradients in nature where organisms are actually
controllers. And so you are storm, but you do have control over the storm.
So these people are kind of have the opposite view. So Giulio Tononi, creator of integrated information
theory says there is true free will, a great lecture that just popped up, I think, months ago, where he
gives a two hour talk on basically integrate information and how it shows that systems do have
causal power and in a way, have free will. So depending on your definition of free will.
We do have free will, according to his model. David Deutsch said in an interview with John Horgan, just
a year ago or so, I'm sure we have free will. Christophe Koch says explains how you know, there are
a lot of experiments, the Labette experiments, which we will talk about next time, that basically,
some people interpret it as not having free will, but actually, we will see later, when you deliberate,
that's actually an act of free will, these choices where we're actually where you bring your entire
conscious being to that question and try to analyze it under all the various conditions. And actually,
there was a study Koch did that kind of showed that the Labette study was kind of interpreted wrong.
And for anyone who understands that stuff, the readiness potential that was supposed to be
that the proof that there was no free will disappeared when the decisions involved deliberation.
So yeah, that's kind of meandering. But I'm sure a lot of people are interested in this bigger picture of
why this emergence paradigm is so radically different from the reductionist paradigm. It kind of
puts information front and center and systems that process information, complex adaptive systems are
computational systems. And these systems in the with these systems information actually does have
causal power, we're going to explain what we mean by that. So paradigm of emergence, the collective
says the collective behavior of interacting parts, not simply how they function in isolation is key to
understanding the emergence and evolution of all the fascinating organisms and ecosystems that make up
the biosphere. So it's really not about just like particles, it's about the patterns that emerge when
these systems find these certain configurations through basically Darwinian mechanisms. And we'll see that
self organization to has a Darwinian dynamic. Each emergence in the cosmic self organization process is
brought about by higher order phase transition that moves life ever further away from a state of
thermodynamic equilibrium and total disorder. I'm assuming the audience knows that what thermodynamic
equilibrium is, it's basically if you have, for example, Boltzmann took a model of an ideal gas and
explain that for example, if the gas molecules are bunched up in the corner, naturally, it's going, the gas is going to
spread out until there's no pattern. And basically, it's like a completely mixed up state.
So equilibrium is associated with death and disorder, because systems naturally tend toward this more
more mixed up, unpatterned, completely chaotic state. Of course, later, we're going to talk about why open systems
that that rule doesn't apply basically, systems that are open to the flow of energy can resist this tendency
towards the disorder. And that's really what the whole story is kind of based on. So through a nested series of such phase
transitions, these are also called these higher order phase transitions are major evolutionary transitions,
John Maynard Smith talked about them and meta system transitions by the cyberneticist, Valentin Turchin,
basically the same concept with some subtle differences. So the idea is that cosmic self organization
is a series of these transitions where functional things come together to make larger functional ones,
which come together to even to make even larger ones, and so on. And through this process, adaptive complexity,
or life, so that's a more general way to talk about life becomes better equipped to dominate the cosmos.
Life requires an organization that is increasingly hierarchical and integrated and therefore more resilient
and computationally powerful.
So here are just a couple of figures. You see this hierarchy in this structural hierarchy of matter and
life. This was adapted from a big physics journal. I can't remember which one it was, but basically,
you know, physicists are recognizing this hierarchy, even when it extends to life. So Jeffrey West's book,
scale comes to mind. And so we see the hierarchy of science kind of naturally mirror this hierarchy of
matter and life. And the reductionist picture would say that these things at the top here are kind of
insignificant parts of the story, transient. But we will see that this, you know, the more we go up,
the more influence on cosmic evolution, the phenomena have. So Thomas Huxley's question about man's place in
the cosmos is basically the emergence of paradigm, the paradigm of emergence, I'm going to discuss and
actually, this is kind of maybe like in a specific or a new paradigm of emergence, because it includes all
this stuff about thermodynamics and information theory, says that emergence, the emergence and
evolution of life, mind, societies and technology are all part of one thermodynamic process, one
evolutionary process, one computational process, unified by the concept of knowledge. So this theory is a
theory of knowledge creation. And so knowledge is going to be the unifying theme. And we'll briefly talk
about epistemology, I wanted to talk about it more, but it just would have been too long. Cosmic evolution
in this paradigm is a universal process of becoming as opposed to being so the universe isn't this static
thing. It's actually evolving very much like an organism or a complex adaptive system. So it's not a
panpsychic theory in this theory consciousness emerges, that's very important. But you might call it
emergent panpsychism. Because as this evolutionary process proceeds, inanimate matter as life spreads,
gets converted into animate matter. So in this picture, humans are neither a cosmic accident, nor the end
goal of evolution. So we are instead a step on the evolutionary ladder of becoming. And we are also
potentially an essential driver of increasing cosmic complexity. So this big idea is that the universe
is undergoing this majestic self organizing process. And at this moment of time, at least in this corner
of the universe, we are the stars of the show. This picture is from Eric Cheson's book, The Rise of
Complexity, Cosmic Evolution, The Rise of Complexity. He's a Harvard astrophysicist. But I just used a Freeman Dyson
quote here because it seemed irrelevant. It's conceivable that life may have a larger role to play
than we have yet imagined life may succeed against all odds and molding the universe to its own purpose.
So I guess Brian Greene doesn't buy that at all. But if that's true, then as cosmologists have to
think about the role of life, there's a lot of people who have said similar things like Seth Lloyd and
famously Ray Kerr as well. So just a couple quotes here. So you know, you know, when when people hear
these terms progress, there's just the stigma. Immediately, they thought like, oh, someone's trying to sneak in
religion, or some intelligent design theory. So you see these trusted names of physics here, David Deutsch
has narrowly conceived evolutionary theory considers as mere vehicles for the replication of our genes or means. And it
refuses to address the question of why evolution has tended to create ever greater adaptive complexity,
or the role that such complexity plays in the wider scheme of things. So there is clearly implying that
adaptive complexity does have this larger role to play. We now see how it is possible for the universe to
increase both organization and entropy at the same time, the optimistic and pessimistic arrows of time can
coexist the universe can display creative unit erection, you need erection progress, even in the face of the
second law, because Paul Davies says that. So that's really kind of a key point. In this is that
the second law actually is in a sense driving this increasing progress. So not only can we have
unit directional progress in the face of the second law, it seems that this progress requires the second law,
because we'll see that the second law is the basically the natural selection pressure for self-organizing
systems. So in a sense, the second law is both Shiva the Destroyer and Brahma the Creator. So a goal of this
unifying theory of reality, I've been calling the great consilience, it was actually a name suggested by
Marco Lin, who is a is a Fristonian and influenced some of this talk. So basically, the unifying theory
of reality illuminates the connection between complexity, cognition, consciousness and cosmic evolution or
matter, mind and cosmos. And it's really based on complexity science, it's a lot broader than complexity
science. But I guess that name kind of, in a way includes everything. So it's the unification of
major sciences of our time, including but not limited to physics, biology, neuroscience, computer
science, evolutionary theory and statistics. And basically, it describes complex adaptive systems of
all scales in terms of energy and information flows. So it uses statistical thermodynamics, information
theory and cybernetics. So we will talk about those a bit coming up. So if you want to see kind of like a
a map of what sort of informs this non reductive theory of everything.
Here you go. So I know this is a lot of information. So I'll kind of try to simplify this for everyone.
There are some unifying paradigms that have emerged. So basically, this theory is nothing new. It's
basically evolutionary epistemology. After that came universal Darwinism. And later, right now,
we're seeing this kind of revolution with like Bayesian inference and these ideas being applied
to everything. So being informed by these
these paradigms and combining those paradigms are updating them, I should say with information from
non equilibrium thermodynamics that we're talking about the thermodynamics of open systems,
information theory. So Shannon's theory,
some of you will know that information theory is related very closely to non equilibrium thermodynamics and
basically Boltzmann statistical entropy is mathematically the same as Shannon entropy or information entropy,
which is a measure of uncertainty.
So if I had more time, I would go through thermodynamics and the different types of entropy, but we don't have time for that.
But if anyone has any questions, I can clarify.
Cybernetics was basically information theory applied to biology adaptive systems. It was the first science of adaptive systems, really.
And it's funny, while writing this, I found out because, you know, I hadn't, I had heard the name cybernetics, but it wasn't clear how important it was.
And a talk by Jim Crutchfeld, Santa Fe Institute basically revealed that because cybernetics got associated with like the Russian, like during the Cold War, kind of like the Russian agenda, cybernetics was used to design like heat seeking missiles.
Norbert Wiener's theory was almost immediately applied for military uses. And because of that, it stopped being taught in American
colleges. So yeah, it's really important. And it was actually emerging at the same time as information theory, people were already thinking about systems in terms of information flows, but it's more than information theory, but it's a science of feedback.
So dynamical systems theory or complex adaptive systems is kind of like an offshoot of that. All of these inform what I've called universal Bayesianism.
I'm not the only person to call it that. I had searched that term and found Adam Saffron's paper on integrated world modeling theory that used that same term.
But John Campbell has been a researcher who has done a lot to show this equivalence between evolutionary processes and processes of Bayesian inference. We're going to talk about that in a little bit.
John Campbell is a professor of the university. So yeah, if anybody has any questions about that, but really all of these things origin of life research, integrated evolutionary theory.
If you haven't checked out the work of these people, like everybody here is worth reading their work.
So from that we get the unifying theory of reality that is based on what I call the evolutionary epistemology, universal Darwinism, universal Bayesianism framework. That's a long name.
I'm aware of that, but it's just to show that these three theories are basically the same theory.
So universal Darwinism says that the universe is evolving at every scale through both competitive evolution and through self-organization, which is cooperative evolution among agents that have formed a collective unit.
So it started with Richard Dawkins and his concept of the meme and the selfish gene that memes were these cultural units that were equivalent to genes.
And so we started to see how information was this paradigm that could be extended beyond biology.
And then we had Dan Dennett and Darwin's dangerous idea really extend this to like everything to self-organizing systems to cultural and technological systems.
Evolutionary epistemology came before that. It was based on Karl Popper's philosophy, but it was actually invented by cognitive psychologist, Donald Campbell.
And basically that said that the evolutionary process is a problem solving procedure that creates knowledge.
So the information stored in genomes and in brains and cultural memory.
Basically that all that knowledge accumulates from an evolutionary process.
And it's really helpful to think of it as knowledge, especially when we start to talk about this in the context of thermodynamics and information,
that's the information because basically this knowledge is what allows life adaptive systems to stay far from equilibrium.
They can resist this tendency towards decay. Life can continue to persist if it can acquire the knowledge that it needs to essentially to find free energy that will allow it to sustain itself.
So we'll talk about that in a second more.
So universal Bayesianism is a Bayesian update of the first two paradigms knowledge is encoded.
So the knowledge that evolutionary epistemology can describe, it's actually encoded in biological systems in the form of a world model.
So this model is an internal representation and statistical mapping of the environment, which gets updated through adaptation and adaptive learning.
So we're going to talk about that process.
Really the whole Bayesian brain hypothesis and free energy principle is inspired by cybernetics heavily.
So Ross Ashby's good regulator theorem and the law of requisite variety, which we'll talk about,
was kind of the first talk of systems having models and having to model the environment.
So Carl Pristen says inference is actually quite close to a theory of everything, including evolution, consciousness and life itself.
We're not going to go into those bigger implications that would be at the end of the book in the last chapter.
But basically, this isn't just a theory about evolution.
Well, it is evolution, but evolution applied way more broadly.
So quantum mechanics has an interpretation that's consistent with this and bigger problems like the fine tuning of the constants and parameters that allow for the emergence of life in the universe.
We can actually probably have the best explanation for the fine tuning problem and the measurement problem of quantum mechanics with this theory.
We won't talk about it, but just so you know, next time, cosmological natural selection by Lee Smolin is the theory that kind of addresses the fine tuning problem from a universal Darwinism perspective,
while quantum Darwinism addresses the measurement problem.
So we will save that for next time, but feel free to ask questions about any of those.
So what does this do?
I have this name poetic metanaturalism.
I meant to take that out, but next time we'll get into why I chose that name.
It's actually, it sounds kind of like, you know, like complex or buzzword or jargony,
but there's actually very practical reasons for having that name.
So this unifying theory bridges matter with mind.
So universal Darwinism gives us a picture of the open ended complexity growth that this whole idea is based on the idea that evolution keeps producing increasingly complex intelligent forms of life.
Excuse me.
So universal Bayesianism is the link that kind of connects those paradigms with consciousness.
So again, we won't get into that today, but when you understand that knowledge is stored in the form of a world model,
that a system that models itself can experience, then we start to get a better understanding of like what consciousness is.
Consciousness is it's a, it's a mental model.
So it's not a traditional pan psychic theory, even though I know first in and 11, and some of his colleagues have kind of been flirting with pan psychism.
This theory would say that's wrong.
And it's kind of, uh, reduces consciousness to something trivial, um, by saying that it's in everything like, um,
a proton is conscious because it's a triad of quarks that have to be in a certain configuration.
So there is some minimal level of integrated information.
Um, that's not enough, uh, to get a conscious experience again, observer.
Um, so Saffron's integrated world modeling theory says that you need a model with spatial, temporal and causal coherence.
I would also argue that it requires self modeling capacity.
Talk about that a little bit at the end if anyone's interested.
Um, but this theory is supposed to bridge mind with cosmic evolution.
So the story starts with the second law.
Um, Daniel, if there's any questions about that, like intro, let me know.
Yeah.
If not, I can just proceed.
Could I ask two questions from the chat?
Sure.
Okay.
The first question is from blue blue wrote.
Do you think that non-living autonomous agents with multiple competing priorities,
such as self-driving cars have free will?
If not, what is the defining difference between these systems and humans?
Uh, no, I don't think they have free will.
So, um, adaptive information is a special type of information.
I do think those things, and this is kind of following Sarah Walker's lead, um,
who's at Arizona state.
I think she's also SFI faculty now, but basically, um, to have self-driving cars,
you first need life.
So anything like a self-driving car, that's like this information processing system.
Uh, if you were to come across, uh,
uh, broken down self-driving car on some planet, and you saw that you would have to infer that there
was also life there because life is part of the trajectory to get to that.
But I wouldn't say that it has free will because it's just this input output machine, uh, with a
defined set of algorithms and, uh, adaptive systems are more flexible.
Uh, and there, okay.
So in the next, next time, we'll talk about actually the emergence of agency, uh, which occurs with the
origin of life or abiogenesis.
And you basically, um, because this self-organized system that would be kind of like the protocell,
um, is evolving through a mechanism that a Darwinian dynamic for self-organization that
we'll explain in a bit, it builds up information.
And at some point there's a phase transition where the information that's getting built up in the system,
uh, basically, uh, gains what Sarah Walker and Paul Davies call informational control.
So there's a point where information actually starts calling the shots.
And you can see the difference between, uh, systems that where there is informational control.
Uh, so living systems and inanimate systems, because for example, um, inanimate systems,
uh, their movement can be predicted with Newton's laws.
So anyone who's taken first year physics, uh, probably had to do an exercise where, uh,
you're trying to predict the movement of some macroscopic system, like a ball that gets kicked
or pushed by a gust of wind.
And what you do is you, um, you have to draw out all the forces acting on the system.
And then you can understand where the system's going to go with life.
You don't need an external force for it to start, for example, climbing uphill.
Um, that's internally generated.
Of course, it's not magic.
Uh, the adaptive system, the agent, uh, has stored energy that it's extracted from the environment.
So for example, humans that have eaten food and there's a metabolic process that's driving this,
but, uh, still, yeah, you, with living systems that where information has causal power, uh, basically
the trajectory of the system can't be predicted by these fundamental laws of physics.
Um, Philip Ball, uh, journalist that has been talking about this, um, his recent article,
which caused a lot of controversy between like the reductionists, like talking about free will and agency.
Um, and there's a lot of confusion around that.
So people like Jerry Coyne were like trying to shoot it down and yeah, hopefully I can talk about that.
Um, I guess we'll talk about that next time because there's a lot of, uh, confusion about what we're
saying when we say something has agency or free will.
But his example is if you throw, throw a ball and a bird off the tower and you can predict
what one is going to do.
You can't predict what the other is going to do.
Um, interestingly though, I would say that the bird's not completely unpredictable.
You can predict that it's not going to hit the ground.
It's not going to splat on the ground.
It's going to fly away.
Uh, you have to understand the bird in terms of its goals.
So you have to understand, you know, the bird and its environment and the information that
got built up through evolution.
And then we can start to predict the bird, uh, its statistical behavior.
So inanimate systems, you can pretty much precisely predict the movement unless they're chaotic systems,
which is another story.
But with life, um, yeah, it's not predictable in that same way with like low level laws of physics.
But, uh, I'm arguing that actually life is more predictable than we thought.
But you need things like, uh, non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and for example, uh, free energy principle.
Um, so you can say that, you know, an organism will try to minimize free energy or, uh, minimize the
difference between, uh, its models prediction and reality.
So it'll try to minimize prediction error.
And that's a way that we can start to describe, uh, behaviors statistically.
So, um, yeah, was there another one?
Yep.
Can I ask the second question?
Yeah, I know I didn't completely answer that, but, uh, that will require like the, all of the points that I would get into in the second talk, but it's a great question.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I would have written in a larger margin if I had more time.
The second question is from Joseph Clark, who wrote, uh, first complimented your talk and let you knew that you were an interesting guy.
So then the question was how far do you think the universe can organize itself?
And what does that look like?
Okay, great.
That's a perfect question to lead into the next part.
And hopefully by the end of this, uh, we will have some sort of answer for that, which is good because I, when I started making the beginning of the presentation, I was going to get to consciousness and free will.
And I ran out of time.
So there's been a lot of talk about things that I won't get to, but that we will get to.
Um, so, uh, the story starts with the second law.
Um, so the second law of thermodynamics as popularly, popularly understood says that, uh, systems naturally become increasingly disordered.
Um, that's really just because of the large scale effects of chance.
So there are many ways to be disordered and there are relatively fewer ways to be patterned.
Um, so a system that's this collective of particles.
So this evolving ensemble of particles, uh, will naturally tend to move towards a configuration that's completely spread out and mixed up.
There are no, uh, energy gradients.
So nowhere it can be extracted.
That's a state of equilibrium.
So we are going to use this word thermodynamic equilibrium, uh, to mean death in disorder.
So life wants to resist the tendency towards equilibrium.
It wants to stay ordered.
Uh, what's interesting about this is that it applies to all.
This is kind of like where the free energy principle.
And for instance, Bayesian brain hypothesis, it, it, it frames everything this way.
So I thought it was a good way to kind of frame it here is that you start with the second law in any conceivable system, any ordered system for it to continue to persist has to resist this, uh, tendency.
So, um, basically, uh, Schrodinger.
Uh, Schrodinger.
The guy everybody knows from quantum mechanics and the, and the cat thought experiment.
And he wrote a book called what is life in the forties.
Uh, basically kind of solved this paradox.
Like if there's the second law and things become more disordered than what's with life and what's with the biosphere and all of this complexity that we see around us.
And he explained, actually Boltzmann explained this before him.
Um, but Boltzmann said a lot to contradict this as well.
Um, or just didn't follow this to its implications.
But, uh, Schrodinger explained that open systems, uh, by feeding off, uh, free energy in the environment.
So free energy is just energy that, uh, you can extract work from.
So it's ordered energy as opposed to energy that's been dissipated in the form of heat.
You can't extract energy, uh, uh, useful energy from that energy.
It's still there.
It's just spread out and it's, it's, you can't harness it.
Collecting it would cost more than you'd get out of it.
So, um, Schrodinger explained that, uh, if a system can get free energy, which he called negative entropy or energy, uh, negentropies was called by, uh, someone later.
Um, so to understand how ordered systems stay ordered, uh, you basically need to understand that they have to, uh, constantly be extracting free energy from the environment.
So, um, basically, uh, the second law is not violated by life because, um, in this effort to stay far from equilibrium life, it keeps extracting that ordered free energy and keeps dissipating it as heat.
So, uh, so it's basically exporting entropy into the environment.
So the order, um, that is maintained, uh, is paid for by the dissipated energy, which come becomes thermal entropy.
So there are multiple definitions of entropy.
So you have thermal entropy, which is heat entropy and then statistical entropy, uh, which explains thermal entropy, but it has a broader domain of application.
So you can talk about shuffling a deck of cards and you can talk about like the statistical entropy increasing, uh, if the deck is ordered and it starts becoming mixed up through the shuffling.
But the deck of cards, the thermal entropy, uh, isn't changing much at all.
So there's different types of entropy.
There's also information entropy, which has to do with the, um, uh, the number of messages that can be sent across the channel instead of, um, the number of states that a system can be in.
The number of microstates without changing the macro state macro state or, uh, uh, the kind of, um, collective properties of the system.
And there's a really neat relationship between statistical entropy and information entropy, which I won't talk about here.
It was really fleshed out by, uh, E.T.
Janes.
Uh, but yeah, so information and entropy like go hand in hand.
Um, just to give a little more context before we get into the details, uh, David Deutsch in this great TED talk, um, called after billions of years of monotony, the universe is waking up.
Says if one can speak of a cosmic war, it's a war between monotony and novelty between stasis and creativity.
And in this war, our side is not destined to lose.
If we choose to apply our unique capacity to create explanatory knowledge, we could win.
So that's very different than Brian Greene's story.
And it kind of gets at the second question that was asked there.
How, how far can this complexity increase go?
And so this kind of foreshadows that maybe it doesn't have a limit.
And that seems, you know, most people think that would go against the second law of thermodynamics.
We're going to see why that's not necessarily true.
Um, but you can also see this cosmic war as this fight between order versus disorder, life versus entropy and knowledge versus uncertainty or ignorance.
Um, but is life's battle against disorder, uh, good versus evil or yin and yang?
So I'm going to kind of argue that these two things kind of have this, uh, you can describe their relationship as causally dependent.
And it's kind of like this dialectic between life and, uh, disorder.
Um, and it is through this sort of, uh, interaction that, uh, creates progress.
So we have some Eastern ideas mentioned again.
Um, but I, when I was writing the book, a friend that practices Buddhism called me and told me about this interdependent co-arising idea, which I thought was really cool.
So we're going to come up with this, what we call Popper's principle, which is, uh, problems create progress.
We're going to see that this problem of entropy, that this tendency towards decay is what actually, uh, forces systems to evolve.
Basically it forces them to search what's called the configuration space for the phase space for the state space to find configurations that are good at extracting energy.
And that allows it to stay far from equilibrium.
So we're going to have some figures soon.
So this stuff that's kind of abstract becomes a little bit more concrete.
So, just out of respect to the earlier request, how about you check the time and feel then how fast you'd like to continue, however much you want to present.
And then if you want to take any questions, but first just check the time and let just,
I, I, how I didn't, uh, I didn't, uh, notice when we started.
So about how long have I been going?
I would say five, zero minutes.
Really?
Okay.
How long can we go?
We can go another, uh, 99 minutes.
Okay.
Um, I'll try to go through it a little bit faster.
Um, but yeah, so, um, but if we use all the time, I told you yesterday that I was feeling, uh, oh, I had a sore throat and, uh, the sore throat's better today.
I'm hopped up on cold medicine.
I'm sure I'm going to, I'm going to pay for it tomorrow.
Um, but, um, yeah, if we use all the time with questions, that would be good.
Uh, so.
Um, so, uh, in our everyday experiment experience, things don't naturally become ordered unless someone intervenes.
Rooms get messier buildings, the road.
Uh, so we already talked about this Schrodinger's solution.
So we can think of life as a game.
Uh, so life has always been playing a game against the second law of thermodynamics.
There is another narrative that I won't go into, but life is also an energy flow channel.
Life by existing and computing and trying to stay far from equilibrium is also increasing entropy.
Uh, actually the universe of life will increase entropy at a faster rate than a universe without life.
Um, which is pretty interesting.
So it's again, not necessarily that life is like battling against entropy and in many ways it increases entropy, but there's also this story, I guess what it's trying to battle is the tendency towards disorder.
So it depends on what type of entropy you're talking about.
Um, so the challenge in the game of life, which applies to you as well as other simpler adaptive systems is to resist that tendency.
So this gives life a goal or a teleology.
So teleology was associated with kind of this mystical thing, but basically we'll, we're seeing that teleology is just, uh, agency.
It's just a result goal oriented behavior as a result of the information that's been accumulated over evolution.
So teleology, uh, the book, uh, tries to naturalize teleology and just say that there are these goal oriented systems that behave different, uh, because they are acquiring information through Darwinian evolution.
Um, so life has to attract free energy.
That's how it stays in the game of life.
And to extract free energy, it's, it's not a simple task.
So the computational task of extracting free energy, uh, requires that the, uh, system acquire information about its environment.
Otherwise it can't find energy.
Uh, it also requires that the system model its environment.
So the information is creating this predictive model, this generative model.
And it is, um, that model that allows it to continuously find free energy.
Um, so we will explain that life strategy is it searches through a configuration space for solutions to the problem of survival through trial and error search, uh, variation and selection.
So we, we know about evolution.
There's this genetic variation in natural selection.
And, uh, we're gonna argue that that process, that mechanism is much broader.
The evolutionary mechanism is actually the mechanism of the scientific method and of adaptive learning.
Um, and that mechanism is also a process that accumulates evidence-based knowledge.
So it's also a process of Bayesian inference.
We're gonna explain why.
So here we have those different mechanisms with different names.
Um, so it's not included here, but, uh, so if life is a game, there are levels to this game.
Uh, and the levels we're gonna see are these, uh, evolutionary transitions.
Every time life graduates to this, uh, more, uh, complex, uh, hierarchical system, like when single-celled organisms come together to form a multicellular organism and multicellular organisms come together to form communities like societies, uh, that you can, uh, view these evolutionary transitions as, as life graduating to a new level.
So, um, we're gonna talk about how adaptive information gets built up through evolution and, uh, we're calling that knowledge.
It's nice to have that word knowledge because this process of an adaptive system acquiring this information is actually reducing its uncertainty about the environment.
So it's, it's reducing its ignorance about all the ways the surrounding world could potentially surprise it.
Uh, so knowledge is a nice word.
Some philosophers, like old school philosophers might have issue with that.
Um, because in some teachings, like knowledge is something that like conscious beings with like awareness have, but we're calling any adaptive information knowledge.
And it's that more of a technical definition because knowledge is that information, which reduces, uh, uncertainty.
And you could actually quantify this process of evolution.
Terence Deacon has talked a lot about how you can do that with, uh, information measures.
Um, so just to explain this, why is knowledge something that matters?
Like, does it have causal power or is it all just this, this billiard ball universe where it's like these particles bumping into each other?
And you can basically use, uh, fundamental laws of physics to describe like the trajectory of all the particles in the universe.
This is saying, no, that, uh, the information that gets built up through evolution has causal power, such that these systems start to behave in ways that are different than what would be predicted from, uh, something like Newton's laws.
So we also have this process of anti accretion that Sarah Walker likes to talk about.
Uh, but anti, so anti accretion is, uh, basically we're familiar with, uh, planets pulling in matter.
So bodies like asteroids, because, uh, gravity pulls matter in naturally, but anti accretion is when a planet is ejecting matter.
And, uh, in many cases, what, well, so the, the only time we really see anti accretion, uh, is when you have a planet with life on it.
So, um, right now, uh, bits of biosphere.
So humans and space rockets are being sent to other celestial bodies.
So that's a form of anti accretion, uh, sending up satellites.
You won't see a satellite get sent out.
If you see that in the universe, uh, like you're looking at some other solar system and you see a body, uh, sent out and put into orbit from a planet, that's an indication that life is there.
That's a bio signature.
Um, so she says that anti accretion requires comprehenders specifically the existence of physical systems with knowledge of Newton's laws.
Um, so what does it all mean?
Um, it means we need knowledge, uh, to, uh, keep us out of thermodynamic equilibrium.
Um, so how do we acquire knowledge?
Uh, science is the most, uh, is the most salient example of the causal power of knowledge.
So science, uh, has, uh, eradicated lethal diseases, built a global communication network called the internet and created weapons of apocalyptic power.
It's not always good, this power of knowledge, but, um, uh, we see that there's something about the scientific method, which is efficient at, uh, accumulating knowledge.
So we're going to talk about why, and that's where we get into Karl Popper and evolutionary epistemology.
Um, so we know knowledge is important.
Karl Popper says we're always faced with practical problems and out of these grow sometimes theoretical problems for we try to solve some of our problems by proposing theories.
Karl Popper stresses that all of science starts with a problem, either theoretical or practical.
Um, and it is that problem that forces us to seek out a solution.
So we can already see why this principle that I've called Popper's principle, uh, uh, says that problems create progress.
Karl Popper says we're going to be in progress.
So some of these theories that we make to try to solve our problems will be wrong.
They'll be errors.
Um, but the idea with science is that those errors get filtered out by a process of testing your theories and a peer review process, which gives criticism.
So, uh, knowledge is really, uh, for knowledge, for us to know that some piece of information is knowledge.
It really needs to be tested.
And, uh, we call that evidence-based knowledge or evidence-based information.
So it's really the only true kind of knowledge because you don't know if something's true until you test it.
For example, um, the world doesn't look round from a naive perspective.
It looks flat.
If it looks flat.
So for example, um, someone who had the first idea, you know, and I'm sure it was before anybody famous.
We knew someone had this idea and probably people blew it off.
But, um, uh, some things that are true about reality are not immediate immediately apparent from like sensory observation from since data.
So we really need to test our theories if we are going to be sure about them.
Um, so what Popper found out was the scientific method is an algorithm.
He called that algorithm conjecture and refutation.
And, uh, basically this is the method of hypothesis testing.
So you have a problem you believe can be solved.
You make an informed guess or conjecture to see if your theory can be refuted, uh, prove false by testing its predictions.
So, uh, people have pointed out like John Campbell, uh, Karl Friston, that, uh, science is a process of inference.
So he recognizes statistical patterns and trends in nature that we can use to make increasingly accurate predictions.
Um, it would not be an accurate thing to say that the function or purpose of science is to generate predictive knowledge.
Um, and we can care characterize that as process of inference, which basically means that scientists draw logical conclusions about the way the world works,
uh, based on evidence based information acquired in the past, but with never present awareness that the information can and will lead to,
um, to new conclusions and deeper understanding.
So when we recognize this, we also have to recognize that all of our models will have uncertainty.
Um, so we should never think that our model's right.
Every model is going to be proved wrong in some way, but through the scientific process,
uh, the idea is that we get closer and closer to truth.
So we can never reach perfect truth, but in this model, you can actually get closer to it.
So in some senses, it's different than like postmodernist philosophy that says there is no objective truth.
There is an objective truth.
Um, uh, but we can never know it, but we can get closer to it.
Uh, so once Popper understood that knowledge, the knowledge generating mechanism behind science success was conjecture refutation.
He realized that human learning, which begins at birth and continues to death uses the same problem solving algorithm.
Although the developmental psychology literature called the method trial and error.
So because life is constantly presenting us with new challenges, such as the need to get from one place to another,
a problem that inspires babies to learn to walk.
We must constantly try out new behavioral solutions.
We can think of these actions as guesses about how to survive, or if you prefer experiments innovating equilibrium or predictions for persistence, and they will often fail.
Um, so this is Dan Dennett's idea of life exploring this design space.
We're going to talk about how it does so through evolution, but we're still talking about science here and adaptive learning on an abstract level.
We can imagine a certain practical problem as a challenge one with the solution that exists somewhere out there in the space of possibilities, just waiting to be found by someone sufficiently motivated and clever.
It may take some time, but if the possibility space, the space of possible solutions is continuously explored in an efficient way, eventually a solution will be discovered.
So, excuse me, trial and error learning explores the solution space.
So just to give you a clear example of how adaptive learning is kind of this form of hypothesis testing.
So whenever we have a problem in life, and we don't know the correct solution to a problem in advance, we naturally begin with those potential solutions that are closer to our starting point in the solution space for sampling.
So for example, if a baby reaches for its bottle and barely misses, it'll adjust its behavior slightly, which minimizes the chances of making an error.
So our instincts may nudges in the general direction of a solution, but the instinct alone is not enough.
We have to try out what you could call a behavioral conjecture, and when it fails, we try something new.
So that's kind of like a new theory.
And it's essentially the old one, but with a little twist.
And if that behavioral solution is remembered, then it gets stored for future use, ready to be repeated, but also adapted if necessary.
But in humans, so the baby example reaching for the bottle, let's say it misses the bottle, it won't get a reward signal.
It won't get a little surge of dopamine.
So if it corrects and it gets closer, it gets a little reward signal.
This is reinforcement learning.
But basically this adaptive learning process is a process of making theories and eliminating those theories that are errors.
So Popper saw that scientific knowledge and the evolutionary process were also connected.
So not only is science adaptive learning, both of those things are extensions of the evolutionary process.
So he says, in science, theories are highly competitive.
We discuss them critically, we test them, and we eliminate those theories which we judge to be less good in solving the problems which we wish to solve.
So only the best theories, those which are most fit, survive in the struggle.
This is the way science grows.
So that's kind of nice, like showing you really how this is an evolutionary process.
Not only is science an evolutionary process, the converse is true.
Evolution is a scientific process.
So it is clear, this is another quote, it is clear that this view of the progress of science is very similar to Darwin's view of natural selection by the way of the elimination of the unfit.
So it's clear that this is a theory of the evolution of life, the errors in the attempts of adaptation, which is a trial and error process.
Analogously, science works by trial, theory making, and by the elimination of errors.
So I might pause in a second just to see if everybody understands this, but I have a few more slides.
So evolutionary algorithms also use this mechanism, but it's called generate and test.
So I didn't mention this, the mechanism of evolution is variation and selection.
So we have these algorithms that are equivalent conjecture and error mutation, trial and error, variation and selection.
We also have generate and test.
So machine learning evolutionary algorithms have this method generate and test.
Possible solutions are generated into an actual solution is found.
And these solutions accumulate in some memory store while the errors are filtered out and forgotten.
In science solutions are theories or models that accurately predict some natural phenomenon.
And the successful ones accumulate in peer reviewed journals and textbooks.
So we see that these processes are equivalent or actually going to see that it's this Bayesian process.
That adaptation is also a process of the model of the organism becoming optimized, decreasing its prediction error
so that it can more efficiently extract free energy from an itch to stay ordered.
So we get this principle that all evolutionary processes are learning processes and all learning processes are evolutionary processes.
Conrad Lorenz, a Nobel Prize winning zoologist, was also a pioneer of evolutionary epistemology.
And he made the statement life is a cognitive process.
So if this is true and there's this functional equivalence between the mechanisms driving evolution, learning and science,
then that implies that adaptation or the genetic information that corresponds to those physical adaptations are equivalent, is equivalent to scientific knowledge.
They're actually the same thing. So to kind of make this relationship clear.
Biological adaptation represents knowledge of the environment and the knowledge we acquire through learning and science reflects adaptation to the environment.
So we see that there's no meaningful distinction between adaptive information and scientific knowledge, both allow life to predict an uncertain world, control matter,
constrain chaos, constrain chaos, and construct order from disorder.
So the very same property that is responsible for organic matter leaving the planet in spaceships.
So this anti-accretion is the same property that allows organisms to climb uphill, seemingly defying the force of gravity.
Of course, the laws of physics aren't violated in any way, but living systems are not constrained by the laws of physics the way inanimate systems are.
So some examples, a dolphin streamlined design, which is a product of the information stored in its genome, contains the knowledge of hydrodynamics.
An eagle's wing design contains the knowledge of aerodynamics.
An eagle's wing design contains the knowledge of aerodynamics.
Not only can we be certain that engineers see knowledge in these functional structures, there should be little doubt that they inspired our machines.
And without that information, I don't think we would have come to those inventions, at least not any time soon.
Camouflage on an organism represents knowledge of the environment.
So kind of bridging this idea of evolutionary epistemology that evolution builds up knowledge and that science is an extension of the evolutionary process.
So making a bridge between that and Bayesian inference requires this relationship between adaptation and statistical correlation.
So physicist Carlo Rovelli, who has gotten really interested in explaining how this information that underlies agency, that behavior that we see with living systems, gets built up through evolution.
He wrote a great essay.
He wrote a great essay.
He won the Foundational Questions Institute essay contest a few years ago.
But this work was based on the work of David Wolpert and Artemy Kolchinsky and basically shows how this adaptation builds up information in the system.
That information is really statistical correlation between the organism and its environment.
So here's the simplest example.
It's a bacterium performing chemotaxis.
So a bacteria, so chemotaxis is basically a bacterium will swim in the direction of food and swim away from toxins.
So basically it's detecting this chemical gradient that follows.
But so we can see in this example, and this isn't the case for all species, but you can imagine that a bacterium that swims to the left when nutrients are on the left,
prospers compared to a bacterium that swims at random.
So with this behavior where it's swimming towards food, that is the product of a chance mutation.
So in some sense, it's an accident.
But when it discovers that solution, that organism is more likely to reproduce.
So that solution gets retained in the population, it gets sort of frozen, hardwired in.
And so the process of adaptation is a process that builds up a statistical correlation between the system, the agent and its environment.
And so that shared correlation represents mutual information.
So mutual information is information that's shared between the environment and the organism.
And just to explain that a little bit more, this correlation, basically, as this correlation gets built up, it's creating predictive knowledge.
So John Maynard Smith cites Fred Dretsky, who did kind of the pioneering work applying Shannon's information theory to try to quantify evolution.
So Dretsky argues that if some variable A is correlated with the second variable B, then we can say that B carries information about A.
For example, if the occurrence of rain is correlated with a particular cloud, then the type of cloud tells us whether it would rain.
So that's from a great essay called the concept of information biology.
So we can see that you have this little rhyming equation here.
adaptation equals statistical correlation equals mutual information.
And because that shared information allows the organism to predict its environment better, this process is also a process of model optimization.
So the predictive model of the organism as it adapts starts to become more accurate.
And so this whole process can be seen as a free energy minimization process.
Of course, that's information theoretic free energy.
It's the free energy of, for instance, principle, we're not talking about thermodynamic free energy.
Anyone wants to ask a question or gets confused about that.
Let me know.
But it's basically those things are related.
It's something that's not mentioned enough.
Minimizing information theoretic free energy, which is just minimizing the prediction error of your model is what allows the organism to minimize environmental free energy.
So by acquiring information, reducing the information theoretic free energy allows the organism to extract energy and reduce thermodynamic free energy.
It minimizes the free energy in the environment and converts it into entropy.
So we kind of see how this is getting into universal Bayesianism as it becomes more correlated.
It gains information about its niche and therefore becomes a better predictor of that niche.
So that's what adaptation is.
It's the genome of the species accumulating information that reduces the average organism's uncertainty regarding the environment.
So the genome is a knowledge repository of solutions to environmental challenges that allows an organism with no brain and no mind to anticipate events in the environment.
So in this theory, as I mentioned before, consciousness comes later.
It comes with self modeling capacity and a bacterium would be kind of a zombie agent.
It would have agency and it would move with purpose.
But that is not enough for mind or at least mind defined as consciousness.
If you want to say that mind is just information processing, then, yes, there is mind in these systems.
But that's very different than saying that the system has a subjective experience and a first person perspective that will come in the next talk.
But that it's it's harder.
So that information sort of memory is integrated into a statistical or predictive model that determines the causal control systems behavioral repertoire or the full range of behaviors an organism is capable of.
And it is this mapping of sensory inputs to motor outputs that makes the organism move in ways that we normally associate with mind or consciousness.
I'm Karl Fursten in a great Eon article says all biological processes can be construed as performing some form of inference.
I think I already read that.
But the free energy principle for those aren't familiar.
We've already explained it, but the Bayesian brain hypothesis and the free energy principle are the same thing.
The difference is that the free energy principle applies to all other adaptive systems where the other one is just focusing on brains.
But first and realize that this is a model and a process that applies to any system that's trying to resist the tendency towards disorder.
So any system to stay to continue persisting longer than we would expect naturally, it must engage in Bayesian like learning to deal with environmental uncertainty.
How much time do I have left roughly?
Still more than enough.
I'm definitely more than half through I'd say I'm two thirds of the way through.
So, John Campbell has this great paper called Universal Darwinism as a process of Bayesian inference that I kept coming across as I was trying to understand non equilibrium thermodynamics and information theory.
I should say actually, I should have done the books, showed you each book, but there's a great book called The Origin and Nature of Life on Earth by Santa Fe Institute's Eric Smith and Harold Morowitz.
Morowitz was a professor of mine.
Eric is a friend that we would have these foundations of the mind guild.
It was like a consciousness club that would meet at the Krasnow Institute where I got my PhD.
And so their book, The Origin of Life on the Origin of Life in Chapter 8 actually gets into this information theory and this Bayesian inference and describes the origin of life and the evolution of life as a process of Bayesian model selection.
And so that was kind of what connected non equilibrium statistical mechanics to these to this Bayesian brain hypothesis.
And I realized that, you know, these theories were kind of converging on the same ideas.
So John Campbell wrote this paper in 2016.
He says Bayesian inference is an algorithm for the accumulation of evidence based knowledge.
This algorithm is now seem to operate over a wide range of evolutionary processes, including natural selection, the evolution of mental models and cultural evolutionary processes, notably including science itself.
So when we say that evolution is a process of Bayesian model selection in the book I mentioned with Eric and Morowitz actually characterized evolution as an inference engine.
So we're basically saying that when organisms that aren't fit get weeded out.
That's basically models that aren't predictive getting eliminated.
So the organisms that persist are the models that were able to predict the environment best.
So inference and prediction are kind of the same thing since the word inference is a little obscure, I guess.
So just to make this point a little more clear, since nature is complex and intrinsically unpredictable, the model of an organism is at some point guaranteed to fail when reality surprises it with the unexpected.
So that's what the free energy principle is about.
Minimizing surprise is the same thing as minimizing prediction error.
So an organism gets eaten by a predator, baby fails to reach his bottle, scientific theory fails to explain new data.
Basically, when any of these things happens, it means that the model used to predict reality is not completely accurate, it contains a certain amount of prediction error and needs to be corrected.
So what's the solution? Try something new, the old model worked well enough up to that point so don't ditch it, just vary it a bit and see if it performs better.
better. If it does not reduce surprise, eliminate that variant and try again. If prediction error
is reduced, replace the old model with the new one so that it becomes the reigning theory and
the design template for new variants to be based upon. When a model has been updated in this way
due to natural selection, adaptive learning, or experimental testing, we can say that knowledge
has been acquired and environmental uncertainty reduced. So here we have an image. I should say
that Infinity Maps, a German software mapping company, helped me create these images. Oliver
Wan, I have to give a big thanks to him. This image has a little bit more going on than I would want
right now, but you could see that basically this represents two different mechanisms for learning
and adaptation. So this one on the top that we're going to talk about first is the normal
competitive evolution, the sort of Darwinian survival of the fittest,
while this mechanism over here is the mechanism of self-organization. So let's first talk about the
normal type of evolution we're familiar with and show that how this process of evolution that works
through variation and selection actually generates predictive information and creates a model which is
which encodes knowledge of the biologically relevant regularities in the environment. So first we have
this, this is a bacterium over here and so this is the simplest model. You have an organism that's an embodied
theory or a best guess about how to stay far from equilibrium. So evolutionary epistemology sees organisms
themselves as embodied theories. So evolution is basically testing these different models. So it basically
reproduces and we know that because there are going to be errors in that process, the genome will get
changed slightly and you will get a generation of progeny that all are slightly different. They have
slightly different configurations. Some of these configurations will be better at extracting energy
and predicting the environment than others and the ones that aren't good at predicting the environment,
they get filtered out by natural selection. So here we see design four is the winning design because
it's the best predictor and it's the best predictor because it's the best extractor of energy. And so that
design that that organism gets to reproduce and then you have another generation of designs that are
slightly different and this process is an iterative process just like science and hypothesis testing. So
over generations you will start to get designs that are better adapted to the environment which we've
explained means that they will be more correlated with the environment and being more correlated means being a better predictor.
So the knowledge that's left over after this process is the adaptive information stored in genetic material that reduces
environmental uncertainty and you see that this process will ultimately lead to the evolution towards the the best possible design.
So it's it's an optimization. A lot of people don't think that evolution is optimizing anything. There's been this, you know, kind of philosophy that evolution does
just good enough. But we actually see that in terms of the computation that it does to stay far from equilibrium,
that it's actually optimized for being almost maximally efficient with its use of energy. It approaches something close to what's called the land hour limit, which David Wolpert at SFI is written about. But life is much more efficient with computation in terms of energy supply needed compared to
all of our technology. So the human brain can do solve problems that even our best AI systems can't solve and it does so running on the equivalent of one household light bulb.
So we'll come back to this self organization process. Oh, well, actually, we'll get into that right now. So this is the normal process that we think about when we think about evolution generating knowledge predictive knowledge.
And so that's called phylogenetic learning. Phylogenetic refers to these like generations. So learning is generational, the organisms don't really learn, because they don't have brains, they're not able to update their model in real time. So learning is at the level of the population.
And for learning to occur organisms have to die before brains. Basically, you have to have this competition for there to be a learning process. However, there's also self organization when these organisms don't compete, but actually find a configuration find it discover collective configuration through their somewhat random interactions with each other.
And when they find this collective configuration through trial and error.
Basically, the configurations that are better at attracting energy will be the ones that are retained. So Donald Campbell, father of evolutionary epistemology, explained this process, this evolutionary process, by which self organization works as blind
variation and selective retention, or we can think of it as selection for persistence or stability. So fitness kind of
there's a Dawkins quote, I think I come out where Richard Dawkins said Darwin's survival of the fittest is really
just a more specific instance of a more general law of survival of the stable. So when we think about being fit, at the beginning, we're talking about
just being stable, being able to find energy, if you can't do that, it doesn't matter whether you have agents that you're competing with or not. Because if you can't get energy, it doesn't matter if there are other people competing for it, that you won't survive. So you don't need replication with variation to evolve. That's what this is this model is saying.
And Stuart Kaufman from the Santa Fe Institute has been talking about the importance of this marriage between Darwinian evolution and self organization. But basically, because there's not this replication process.
And this is how evolution occurs. So you have a system that's a collection of components, parts, these parts can be molecules, or they could be agents. And when these molecules are pushed far from equilibrium by flow of energy, of course, humans are eating food and metabolizing energy. So they're being powered by energy flows as well.
The system blindly explores various configurations in the space of possible designs via trial and error. So the system will move through a series of configurations. And those configurations that allow the system to extract sufficient energy to stay out of equilibrium will get retained, while the configurations that don't allow for energy extraction will get filtered out either the system will collapse and have to try to
new configuration. Or it will just revert to the previous stable configuration. And it will continue trying to explore that configuration space. I should have said, like, here's a good example, like, here's a depiction of this configuration space, we're talking about life exploring the design space. So basically, you have a designer configuration, and then
you get these different, you get these different, this exploration of different configurations that are very close to the configuration you started out with.
So you know, I was thinking about giving a talk on the origin of life, but I couldn't get into all this cool Bayesian stuff. That's what the first part of the book is about. What's really interesting is that refining that self organization, as mentioned, is a Darwinian process. So there's actually a name for this dissipative adaptation, and it shows that this evolution towards these more stable configurations dissipate more energy. When this happens at the level of organisms that we're talking about, it
shouldn't be surprising that it shouldn't be surprising that it dissipates more energy, because basically, as the organism evolves to be better at extracting energy, all that energy it's extracting to maintain far from equilibrium is being converted into thermal entropy. So all self organizing processes are really dissipative adaptation processes at different levels. So this process, philosophers would say is multiply
multiply realizable. So this process can happen at different scales. And that's exactly what we see like, right here, the same process. So you would have like society, like exploring different governance systems. And it doesn't know which government system is going to work the best beforehand, it tries it, if it doesn't work well, like the fall of Rome, it will collapse, and then it will reassemble.
Reassemble. So just to wrap up the origin of life. So we have this process of dissipative adaptation. And if it's being pushed by the flow of energy, and it's doing this process here, where it's finding increasingly stable configurations, collective configurations, then
basically, basically, basically, what will emerge is an auto catalytic set, we'll define that later. But basically, it's an, I'm losing a lot of terms from philosophy, I was going to say, like, it's the beginning of an auto poetic agent. So like a self maintaining agent,
and its simplest form is a chemical system, and its simplest form is a chemical system that produces outputs, which are then fed back into the system, so that the system can self amplify, it's basically creating all of the molecules that it needs to grow. And it's thought that this process, you know, occurred,
the auto catalytic set is kind of the precursor for the first cell. So it's kind of like a proto cell. And it was thought to occur around hydrothermal vents, which are underwater volcanoes, there's all this energy flowing up from the the hot core, running through geochemical energy.
And there's these rocky pores in the rocks around hydrothermal vents, which provides something like a membrane, like a lipid membrane to hold the components in a Markov blanket. So the pores in the rocks were the Markov blanket for the auto catalytic set. And Eric Smith and Marwitz showed that basically,
basically, feeding off inorganic inputs, like carbon molecules, like not not anything, not organic chemistry, where it's like life, but just like, simple, like carbon, hydrogen and oxygen feeding off those inputs. Basically, the metabolic process, it's called the reverse Krebs cycle. So that process allowed the first
auto catalytic set to continuously self amplify through this through this process. So if this process is allowed to continue, further self organization may eventually lead to the emergence of an organic computer that can process integrate and store information about the world. So what dissipative adaptation is doing is, as it's doing this blind variation and selective retention process, and it's finding more stable
configurations, those more stable configurations, those more stable configurations are also predictive of the environment. So this dissipative adaptation process is this auto catalytic set, modeling the surrounding energy landscape. So I'm arguing that this is where modeling begins, it even begins before what we call life like rep self replicating life, and it's dissipative adaptation, which is a process of modeling the the energy in the environment.
Dr. David P. So this isn't just one continuous process. There are these leaps that are phase transitions. Basically, we've heard of phase transitions and physics and chemistry courses where you have like,
Dr. David P. Water being heated up and then transitioning into a gas, or the reverse when a gas becomes frozen. And then you have a gas
Dr. David P. Water being heated up and then you have a gas, or the reverse when a gas becomes frozen. You get a state of order that emerges. These transitions towards these configurations that are good at extracting energy. Those have also been characterized as phase transitions. So Eric Smith, who I mentioned before, and Harold Morowitz, they have this phase transition theory of life, which basically explains how information
Dr. David P. gains control in these systems. And Sarah Walker and Paul Davies work on this basically showed that through this process, the blind variation and selective retention, information gets built up in this auto catalytic set. And at some point, there's what they call algorithmic takeover, or informational control, and the system becomes an agent that can start to steer and control itself.
Dr. David P. In ways that wouldn't be predicted by physics. So living system is very much like we didn't talk about dissipative structures, but like tornadoes, whirlpools, those things emerge to dissipate an energy gradient.
Dr. David P. Living things because of the process of metabolism, we are this cycling system, this thermodynamic energetic loop.
Dr. David P. But what was I going to say about that? So yeah, we are like the storm, but we do have control over the storm. We're a storm with control. So it doesn't really make sense going back to Sam Harris's quote that you are the storm, you do not control it. It's literally the information that gets built up through evolution that allows us being this dissipative
Dr. David P. So the last part of the storm to start controlling its own behavior.
Dr. David P. So the last part is just an argument for that second question, why should complexity increase?
Dr. David P. We know that this evolutionary process where you build up this model.
Dr. David P. So we would think that this after these generations of evolution, this organism is going to be well adapted to the
Dr. David P. environment, but we know that adaptation doesn't mean becoming more complex always. So sharks and crocodiles are
Dr. David P. are cited as species that haven't evolved much at all in many millions of years cavefish actually evolved to become more simple.
So basically fish with eyes got isolated in like an underground environment where there was no
need for sunlight. And so basically fish like processing light like eyes didn't have any
survival advantage. So basically fish lost their eyes over many generations of evolution
becoming simpler. So if that's true why should evolution increase complexity?
The answer to that it comes from this understanding that evolutionary epistemology says that a species
adapting to a niche is like a scientific theory being tested for viability. Species will evolve
not to become increasingly complex but to match the complexity of the environment. A sort of simplest
solution to the thermodynamic problem of staying far from equilibrium. So Einstein famously said a
theory should be as simple as possible but no simpler. The same could be said about an organism.
You want it to be as simple as possible while it accomplishes its task of extracting energy. It has
to be complex enough to be able to extract energy in a competitive environment. But a bacterium doesn't
have to do it doesn't need intelligence. Any extra information processing higher level cognition
would be energy wasted that could be energy that allows it to stay far from equilibrium for longer
and replicate more. So it's not the case that everything will evolve towards higher complexity.
But the reason that we do get increasingly complex species over evolutionary time in a way that I'm
saying is inevitable. So there is a progressive evolutionary process that leads to higher forms. It has to do with
a niche emergence. So basically a species will evolve to become as complex as its niche, as its environmental niche.
But there will be increasingly complex niches that emerge for reasons that will be explained. But I will pause there
before I get to that which will be what we end on.
There are no other questions right now. So if anyone does have questions, how about they can feel free to ask it during this last section, give you a second to catch your breath.
I know it's been a ton of information. Like, my goal is that, you know, since this is being recorded, it'll be something that's up. Hopefully, I've cited enough literature that people can explore this stuff themselves and see that like, okay, it's not this guy that's like,
I'm not going to have like, I'm not going to have like a theory of everything. This isn't my theory. It's a synthesis that's emerging. And really, the story has been there for quite some time. And the cybernetics pioneers, actually, a lot of them were you could call them like cosmic teleologists, a lot of them did see this continual increase in complexity.
Of course, there's nothing mystical about it or supernatural about it. It's a mechanistic process. That doesn't change the fact that nature seems to have these built in goals that emerge from the fundamental laws and constants, the parameters, the fine tuning. But it's a completely natural, progressive teleological evolutionary process.
And so I'll just end up, you know, this is just finishing up, it's along the same line. So that's good. Questions can come after this. I know, it's been quite a lot. So I will just try to sum this up simply. So two important principles from cybernetics. These came from Ross Ashby, who also created the principle of self organization, which was really the first time people took self organization, which was really the first time people took self organization.
So we think of complexity science, seriously. So we think of complexity science as being the science of self organization, but it really goes back to cybernetics. I think the term I think Kant might have talked about it, but it was Ross Ashby, who tried to, you know, give it a, make it a principle and a formalized concept.
So there are these two concepts that really, I think anybody interested in like Carl Fursten's Bayesian brain hypothesis free energy principle should be aware of, because all of the way he talks about like evolution comes from this Ashby's work, the good regulator theorem.
It was also updated. It was also updated. There was the internal model principle, which came like a decade later, good regulator theorem came.
He's both these laws, I think came in the fifties and the forties or fifties. And then I think in the seventies, the internal model principle was created, but it basically says that any system that regulates or controls another system must have a model of that system.
Otherwise it can't regulate it. So it seems pretty obvious, but this talk of models kind of starts here.
That, that is very familiar to like anyone interested in like the free energy principle.
So this, this can be applied to inanimate systems. I mean, controllers are like house, like thermostats and stuff, but Ashby was really interested in adaptive systems.
So he was thinking about evolution. So applied to evolution, an organism must model its environment.
Uh, if it's going to extract free energy, uh, and an organism is a model of its niche, like a key is a model of the lock it opens.
So when we talk about these models can be kind of extract kind of abstract, but I think this model, a key is a model of the lock it opens really explains how an organism fits into a niche.
Uh, you could also say like a hand fits into a glove, but it really, uh, the organism is a model of its environment.
So natural selection is essentially an information channel that through evolution is pumping in information from the external world, from the environment into the organism, such that the organism is encoding the structure of reality and encoding the structure of the world.
And its design, uh, include, uh, uh, encodes information about the outside world.
So it's kind of a new way to think about evolution as this process of basically the universe is modeling itself and waking up through this process.
It's pretty interesting.
Um, kind of psychedelic.
So, um, the law of requisite variety is just telling you about the sophistication of that model.
So how complex does the model have to be for the organism to stay far from equilibrium?
Um, Ross Ashby's law says, so John non researcher at Cambridge, uh, kind of summed it up this way in colloquial terms.
Ashby's law has come to be understood as a simple proposition.
If a system is to be able to deal successfully with the diversity of challenges that its environment produces, then it needs to have a repertoire of responses, which is at least as nuanced as the problems thrown up by the environment.
So a viable system is one that can handle the variability of its environment, or as Ashby put it, only variety can absorb variety.
So it's what we said before with evolutionary epistemology, an organism evolves to become as complex as its environmental niche requires.
It has to specifically have enough behavioral responses, which map onto internal states.
So it has to have enough cognitive states to, uh, respond to the number of challenges that the environment presents challenges, um, uh, in its ability to extract energy.
And when, when, when you get organisms and you get other, uh, you get other agents, other organisms, then of course, what the organism has to model is much more complicated because it doesn't have to just model the energy source and its environment.
Like to get food, it also has to model other modelers, other cognitive agents.
Um, so yeah, basically any adaptive system has, uh, uh, uh, uh, a behavioral repertoire and a repertoire of accessible mental states or for things without brains, computational states.
And the number of states that the organism can access, uh, uh, uh, should match the number of challenges, the number of states that could surprise the organism by the environment.
Um, so a cat must have at least as many states as the ways the mouse can evade it and the mouse has to have enough behavioral states to get away.
So they model each other, a swordsman, like a fencer must have many blocks as his opponent has attacks.
And as we said, because behavioral responses map onto unique internal states, the loss of an organism must have as many accessible states as required by the complexity of the niche.
So we already said this, uh, organism is some simplest solution to the thermodynamic problem of staying far from equilibrium.
So a well-adapted species represents biological solution to an existential thermodynamic dilemma.
It's a sort of living, evolving scientific theory about how to most efficiently extract the free energy, the lifeblood of existence out of a particular niche.
Some niches present a changing variety of challenges that must be adapted to while others present hardly any at all.
So almost done here.
I know it's a lot.
Hopefully this can kind of wrap up the ideas and kind of show how they're all connected.
Um, but this is still on this question of how complex is the universe?
Uh, how complex can it get?
So, uh, Olivia Judson wrote this, uh, uh, published this paper called the Energy Expansions of Evolution.
It's really nice.
People should check it out.
Uh, so she says the history of the life earth system can be divided into five energetic epochs, each featuring the evolution of life forms that can exploit a new source of energy.
These sources are geochemical energy, sunlight, oxygen, flesh, and fire.
The first two were present at the start, but oxygen, flesh, and fire are all consequences of evolutionary events.
And then she makes this statement, by the way, red is quotes if people haven't, uh, figured that out.
So these are her words.
I forgot to put quote marks.
Um, so no category of energy sources disappeared.
This has over time resulted in an expanding realm of the sources of energy available to living organisms and a concomitment, uh, increase in the diversity and complexity of ecosystems.
So here's the way to think about it.
Um, so taking the thermodynamic perspective and looking at organisms as energy flow channels, uh, we can think of each niche on earth as a sort of energy slot for a given species.
And an evolving population of organisms efficiently searching the solution space will eventually just by chance discover a solution to a thermodynamic problem that it didn't know existed.
The discovery of a novel energy source or energy extraction technique is both how a new niche and a new species come into existence.
So phylogenetic learning, which we saw in that chart will naturally lead to speciation because organisms will stumble upon new ways to exploit thermodynamic niches that were previously inaccessible to life purely for design reasons.
We're going to give examples on the next slide.
Um, so as the biosphere accumulates knowledge through phylogenetic learning, not only is the solution space corresponding to one kind of thermodynamic problem being explored, there's a growing problem space, each with its own unique solution space.
Um, so in an evolution, so there's an evolutionary trajectory that's not determined in the strict sense, uh, envisioned by Laplace where like there's no freedom in the future is like set in stone, but there is a sort of, uh, statistical determinism, what I've been calling a non-equilibrium statistical determinism that guarantees that basically the inevitability of this emergence of a distribution of far from equal
equilibrium attractors.
sunlight was a little bit of a more difficult challenge to extract sunlight.
It took some time for evolution to be able to do that.
Um, so, uh, extracting energy from the hydrothermal vents, uh, source of energy is really simple because the energy is already like flowing through the system.
It doesn't have to do much work to extract sunlight.
So if you have, you know, a moving sun, uh, it's a little bit more complicated, but not nearly as complicated as organisms that eat other organisms.
So heterotrophic organisms, um, because they will have to model not just like a sun moving predictably through the air, but have to model all of these other agents.
agents, many of which are trying to eat them to kill you. So
basically, so answering this question, why increasingly
intelligent species emerge, we started off with reductive
autotrophs, those organisms around hydrothermal vents, they
were a solution to the problem of how to extract free energy
from geochemical gradients, photosynthetic bacteria, the
ancestors of plants for the solution to extract of how to
extract all the solar energy that was flowing through the
planetary system. So that was a big discovery made by life is
that they can get energy directly from sunlight.
Heterotrophic organisms, organisms that eat other organisms were
the solution to the problem of how to extract energy from life
itself. Once life starts having to model life, other agents with
causal power and adaptive behavior, the computational task of
extracting free energy gets increasingly difficult as
increasingly complex species arise. So by virtue of having to
model each other, the complexity of some species gets ratcheted up
by what's known as an evolutionary arms race. So the lion is
evolving, you know, lions are producing offspring, some of those
lions will be better at predicting the gazelle's movements, the
gazelle will also be creating offspring, and some of those will
be better at predicting the lion's attack. The ones that are better
predicting are the ones that get to stick around. So you see how you
have this ratcheting mechanism that ratchets up ratchets up complexity.
There's actually a principle called the Red Queen principle that says
that for an organism to simply stay in the game of existence, certain
organisms, a certain species, they will have to become increasingly complex. And
that comes from Alice in Wonderland. Basically, there's a scene with the Red Queen and
Alice is there, they're all running as fast as they can. And Alice is like, you
know, I'm running fast as I keep running, but I'm going nowhere. Like, so they're, they're all
running, but they're not making any distance, they're staying in place. And
the Queen says something like, Oh, you see here for that, to go somewhere, you'll have
to run much faster than that. So the idea is that for a species that has to deal with this
complex environment, just to stay where it is just to stay in the game of existence, it
has to become increasingly complex, it has to keep adapting. So one thing that I wanted
to get into more, but I'm not going to, is this idea of empowerment, it's comes from the
computational neuroscience literature. It's similar, it comes from Daniel Polanyi, but it's
very similar to Harvard's Alex Wisner, Visner Gross. He has an idea called causal and tropic
forcing, but basically, these people are arguing that, well, Visner Gross is arguing that a causal
and tropic force means that, like, basically, with like evolution, you'll get a system systems
that are trying to maximize the number of states they can respond to. So the maximize and the number
of states they can respond to is mirrored by their internal diversity. So systems naturally try to
increase the number of states. And it's this ability that allows for intelligence, because if you have
more states, going back to this law of requisite variety, you can respond to more challenges. So not
every species is increasing empowerment, but you will get the emergence of increasing, increasingly complex
species because each species serves as food for a potential new species. You will get increasingly
complex species that emerge over time. And they will be increasingly empowered, meaning that they can respond
to more environmental states, and that they have more accessible mental or cognitive states.
I explained some of this in the last slide, but I'll just explain a little more. So open-ended niche
emergence, why has the evolutionary records shown a trend of the emergence of increasingly complex forms?
Because when all conceivable niches on earth were filled, that wasn't the end. New species created new
niches because the free energy slot they provide is themselves, their food. So cybernetics guy, he's
kind of like the last living cyberneticist, kind of. I'm sure there are other people that call themselves
that, but he's kind of kept that title even when it like wasn't trendy. He says, it is well documented by
evolutionary biologists that ecosystems tend to become more complex. The number of different species increases
and the number of dependencies and other linkages between species increases. He cites E. O. Wilson,
who recently passed away, who did a lot of work that kind of inspired a lot of the concepts in the book.
Not just this niche emergence, but also talking about super organisms, so collectives like ant colonies,
self-organizing systems at all scales. But he said, not only do ecosystems contain typically lots of niches
that will eventually be filled by new species, but there is a self-reinforcing tendency to create new niches.
What does that mean? It means the biosphere, certainly ecosystems, are themselves autocatalytic sets.
So Seth Lloyd, he's talking about these chemical autocatalytic sets, but it's, I should have had this on the
earlier slide, but it'll be a good way to kind of show the equivalence between ecosystems.
Seth Lloyd says, autocatalytic sets of reactions are powerful systems. In addition to computing,
they can produce a wide variety of chemical outputs. In effect, an autocatalytic set of reactions is like a
tiny computer-controlled factory for producing chemicals. Some of these chemicals are the constituents
of life. Now, Stuart Kaufman, big, you know, one of the main names who's kind of this whole talk,
he's kind of put these ideas out there since like the early 90s. Well, actually going back farther than
that, but he started writing books in the 90s and really gaining exposure for the Santa Fe Institute.
He's written a recent paper, well, semi-recent, about Nietzsche emergence as an autocatalytic process.
So ecosystems are autocatalytic, autocatalytically closed, self-sustaining reaction networks. So they're
autopoietic agents that reliably drive up biological diversity and complexity as they self-amplify and
evolve. So when you think about it, really all integrated networks of adaptive systems function as
autocatalytic sets. There's been a lot of papers showing this. Economies, in a sense, are autocatalytic
sets, including the social organisms we call societies or civilizations. So these networks are common
because they emerge spontaneously when many organisms repeatedly interact with one another and discover
synergistic collective configurations as nature often pressures them to do. So we're at the end, almost.
We've explained why complexity increases. Evolution will not increase the complexity of every species.
They will become adapted to their niche. They will match the complexity of the niche. However, because
new niches are always emerging, because species act as food for a potential new species, because of that
process, you will get species that emerge that have a higher number of a larger repertoire of mental and
behavioral states. So the law of requisite variety really explains why more complex environments create
more complex niches. And this is open ended. There's really no limit to how far this process can go,
and so especially since humans who are the pinnacle of this process, we're not, you know, a lot of people
have been against these kinds of views because it seems like it's saying that humans are superior.
We're superior maybe computationally, but not superior in any other sense. We're actually part of the
biosphere, which is this integrated interconnected system. So it's really, you know, it doesn't make sense to
think of us as like superior to nature because the whole biosphere is an organism that we're just sort
of an organ for. We're basically the nervous system of the planet, the cybernetic global system that
people have called Gaia. Some people don't like that name. I think it's a perfectly good name.
But that's why complexity gets ratcheted up. But the final,
I guess, part of this complexity increase story is that not only do you get increasingly complex species,
those species will interact naturally to form higher level adaptive systems which are collectives. So
I call this the principle of recursive self-organization based on Ashby's principle of self-organization.
What I'm arguing is that when you have a biosphere with these agents and you have some are simple and
some are complex, naturally those agents will interact. When they interact, they will in many cases discover
synergistic collective configurations. So configurations that make it easier for each agent to extract the
energy they need to stay far from equilibrium. So why do interacting agents link up to form stable holes?
For the exact same reason that molecules with the right chemical diversity will form stable autocatalytic
reaction sets when pushed by a flow of energy. Working collectively allows the whole system to extract more
free energy with less work. We can, that's the whole point of synergy is that working together makes your workload
easier because there's a distribution of labor. And it's, it's really nice that, you know, this
distribution of species with some simple and some complex, that's really what you need to create this like
cybernetic adaptive system at the level of a planet because a system needs diversity among its components
in structure and function for there to be this distribution of labor, labor, which makes it this
uh, collective whole, this, this synergistic, uh, holistic unit. Um, so it's actually good that evolution
and adaptation isn't increasing this, the complexity of each species. Like each species isn't becoming
intelligent, like roaches aren't becoming like more and more intelligent over time with no limit. Um,
the biosphere wouldn't be stable if that were the case. Uh, it's really, uh, ecosystems need this
diversity among components just as a car with made of all engines isn't going to be functional or
or organism made of all brains. You need a variety of parts, some simple, some complex because they all do
different functions. Um, so nature promotes cooperation, collaboration, and synergy because
it is thermodynamically beneficial for all parties. Um, synergistic collective configurations will
eventually be discovered by many component systems that are exploring various states or configurations
through the blind variation and selective retention mechanism mentioned. Organisms only compete until they
finally figure out what that working together makes everyone's task easier. And that goes for humans too.
So it's kind of a moral lesson for everybody. The nations have to work together. We shouldn't, um,
get rid of the nations. There shouldn't just be this evolution into this like global government because
the nations are actually, uh, provide this diversity that we're saying is important, uh, because you need
this, uh, diversity of component parts to create a division of labor. So there's strength in diversity. This is
different than the evolutionary picture of survival of the fittest. Whereas there's just like this idea
that the stronger, the most intelligent survive. This is saying that that's not true. It's the most
adaptive that survive has nothing to do with strength or intelligence. Sloths have been around for many
millions of years, despite being sloths being slow, uh, because they exploit a source of free energy. That's not
being exploited by another, uh, species. So, um, going back to this kind of global message, you want nations
to retain their identities, but you also want them at the same time to come together and to, uh, work
synergistically. So you basically want something like a global system, but this, there has to be the optimal
balance between centralization and decentralization. Um, neither approach will be good on its own. There
needs to be this balance. So, um, as long as the biosphere is creating a growing variety of complex
adaptive systems, some of those will interact to produce higher level complex adaptive systems, which
will come together to form even larger ones. This process continues, uh, at higher scales. So I didn't go into
this, uh, left out a kind of a neat picture that shows a brain and then the planet and it's like
information networks. But, uh, I do, I hope that, you know, talk about Gaia and global brain will become,
uh, will be taken as seriously as it should be. Uh, they really only weren't taken seriously because
there were mystical notions associated with this word Gaia, which wasn't even James, uh,
uh, Lovelock's, uh, fault. He act, the name Gaia came from his neighbor who is actually the author of
Lord of the Flies, William Golding. So blame him for the, for the flowery metaphor with Gaia. Um,
but yeah, the, the, the biosphere is a cybernetic organism and we are forming something like the global
brain and a self replicating biosphere, uh, is essentially the next step. And when we are trying
to care form planets like Mars, that can be seen as the biosphere replicating, uh, for humans to
at this point in our stage of development, we would have to kind of convert Mars to like a something like
a biosphere to have like oxygen. And so you can see how it's replication with variation. You get the
same sort of thing, but because it's a different planet, there's going to be a variation. It's not
going to be exactly the same, but that's how the evolutionary process continues. I should have showed
this earlier. This is just showing how like eukaryotic single celled organisms like amoebas will come
together to form communities like a slime mold. Uh, these, uh, multi-cellular organisms come together to
form colonies. You see this ant colony and actually really do form a super organism. You can see here,
they actually build a bridge out of their bodies so that some ants can like climb across that bridge.
So it really makes sense to call it a super organism or, uh, at least like a, a super adaptive system or
like a meta, meta system. Um, because without it, we can't make sense of this collective behavior that's
functional, um, of course, human civilization. We again, see this hierarchy. Now it makes more sense.
Uh, we see that these evolutionary transitions. Oh yeah. These are called evolutionary transitions.
Sometimes I use the name meta system transition because, um, if we were talking about the brain, I would
also talk about like, uh, the emergence of a prefrontal cortex, which is like a high level controller. Um, that's
also like a meta system transition. So meta system transitions are a little extend this where it's not
talking necessarily about evolutionary transitions, but these other transitions where systems
start to model themselves. Um, so here we see, uh, how evolution has created these different memory, uh,
systems, these knowledge repositories. So it's that process of recursive self-organization
that creates new memory systems. When you get go from single cell life to multicellular life to life
with brains, uh, it's, uh, these are in, uh, revolutions in information storage machinery. So you can see how
the information in the biosphere gets accumulated through an evolutionary process. Um, these are the
final points. Yeah. So knowledge is powers, not just the hollow buzz phrase of the digital age. It's
true in the most fundamental way. Uncertainty reducing information is life's first and last weapon in
ongoing war with disorder. Without knowledge, life cannot exist for more than a moment, much less
colonized the galaxy and beyond. This suggests that setting out on the path toward cosmic superiority
is not a choice that intelligent agents like homo sapiens make upon careful reflection, nor is it just
some quirky ambition we stumbled onto by chance. This is the main point humanity's collective desire to
transcend mortality and expand outward into space. So apparent from our current scientific and
technological endeavors, SpaceX, uh, this doesn't emerge as an accident. This is an inevitable consequence of
the fact that continual knowledge acquisition is a fundamental biological imperative. If life wants to
persist and stay far from equilibrium, at some point it has to get off the planet because the sun is, uh,
going to die. And, uh, it's these sorts of problems, these existential problems, which, uh, create progress
because it's our awareness of this problem, which, uh, forces us to, uh, search the configuration
space for the solutions that solve the problem. So as natural selection pumps information from the inanimate world
into life, nature begins modeling itself, encoding its own structure, and the universe begins to wake up. We are the cosmos
come alive, not metaphorically, but literally. This is Ray Kurzweil's, uh, image from his book, The Singularity is Near.
You can see that he sees this, he calls this the, the, the destiny of, of life in the universe. And he's not shy about
using that word. Um, again, it's not determined in a strict sense of replace. This, uh, kind of a statistical determinism
that creates these, uh, series of attractors. And, um, you've seen famous people, uh, so, you know, some people see that idea and they'll have been reading Brian
Green and listening to all these reductionists and think that's not a scientific view. Well, uh, that's not true.
And, um, I hope to see more of these people speaking out about it. So Christophe Koch in
Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist says, the rise of sentient life within time's wide circuit was inevitable.
Teilhard Deschardins, who really came up with this, don't have time to talk about him, French philosopher and
Jesuit you should look into, is correct in his view that the islands within the universe, if not the whole cosmos,
are evolving toward ever greater complexity and self knowledge. To be clear, he's not saying that
earth had to bear life that, you know, primates had to walk the African glass lands. But he says,
I do believe that the laws of physics overwhelmingly favored the emergence of consciousness. The universe
is a work in progress. Such a belief evokes Jer, Jeremiah, I don't know how to say a word from many
biologists and philosophers, but the evidence from cosmology, biology, and history is compelling.
So there's some, uh, advanced blurbs for this book. Uh, if you want to pre-order it, um, it comes out in June. Uh, but every, uh, order that I get from now until then
I'll count towards my first week sales total. So that will help me get on bestsellers list.
If you want to pre-order it now and you email me, um, I will send you a copy soon of this novel.
I also wrote called Road to Omega. I was pretty busy in the last five years. Yeah. I went into a cave for like four or five years, but this, uh, it's a vehicle for the science and philosophy in the book. Kind of like an anti-Ain Rand
I shrugged maybe the opposite philosophy. Um, and the road to Omega substack kind of turns this philosophy into kind of an effort to, um, save the world with, uh, science epistemology and blockchain technology.
Uh, blockchains are part of this self-organization process. And that's the longest talk I've ever given.
That's the longest I ever talked at one time. Probably my wife will probably say that's not true, but, uh, I'm tired. So let's, uh, open it up to questions and thank you for your immense patience.
It's awesome to hear and think about it. So there are two questions in the chat. First is from Dean. Dean asks, how would we explain caring through a lens of free will or no free will? Would free will deniers say there's no caring when it appears that agents can or do fully care?
Dean asks, how would you explain the, you know, free will be the best of free will?
Dean asks, how would you explain the best of free will? Yeah. So great question. Um, unfortunately, I don't have much to say without saying the things that I was going to bring up in the next talk, really explaining what free will is. I guess I should just say right now, uh, kind of a brief explanation of what I mean by free will. So I've, I hope I've made the argument that agency emerges, uh, in adaptive systems that start off as biological organisms.
And, um, to the person that are self driving car thing, I, uh, uh, just to mention that real quick, I don't think they are agents, but I do think, uh, it's possible to create systems with agency, um, for reasons that I haven't gone into, um, uh, it seems important that the systems have a certain type of architecture.
So not like a standard computer as a von Neumann architecture, and it's not distributed or integrated in the way the brain is.
So it's not integrating much information. So these systems won't have causal power. They won't be agents.
So neuromorphic hardware has been a lot of people think that's going to allow machines that can think and perhaps even be conscious.
I think maybe that's the way to go. It's probably a lot more complicated than that. It's a step in the right direction.
So agency is real. It's due to information, gaining causal power in a system, and it starts steering the system.
So you'll see a bacterium performing chemotaxis. But does it make sense to say that the bacterium has free will when it's going this way and that,
just because it's not predictable in the way an inanimate system is?
So I would say that they have agency, but they don't have free will.
What free will is, and this is not my idea, other people have kind of been talking in this way.
Kevin Mitchell has a book, Neurogeneticist.
He's coming out with a book called Agents, which is all about agency and free will.
But the idea is that we are agents with causal power, but we're sort of,
where our responses like are basically programmed responses that are responses that occur
automatically that are informed by this information that's been built up through evolution and adaptive
learning. So a lot of the time we go through the day and we're not really thinking about things like
driving or like waking up and like, you know, going to the fridge. We're not putting conscious
thought into that. So that wouldn't seem to be free will. To me, you're kind of acting on autopilot.
So what free will is, is a higher level of control that emerges with something like a prefrontal cortex
in a global workspace. Basically free will allow a prefrontal cortex allows an agent to override
its instinctive and automatic behaviors. And so free will is something that we have, but only if we're
exercising this higher level of control, it's associated with cognitive control or executive
control, effortful control. And basically, if you have a healthy functioning prefrontal cortex,
you're going to basically the conscious mind is monitoring consciousness is a monitor. So it's,
it's monitoring your behaviors. And if it detects that there's suboptimal behavior, for whatever reason, like
it's just automatic kind of instinctual, let's say someone says something that makes us angry, and we respond
immediately with like pushing them or something. That's not a wise move. And that may be may happen when we're fearful,
because of the amygdala response, and we just have this automatic behavior. But free will would be when the conscious mind
overrides that process. And the bet actually the free will studies that everybody cites, as saying that we don't have
free will. He actually never said that he said free will is in this veto power, like maybe some of our voluntary movements occur
without conscious thought. But it's our ability to override those movements. That is the source of free will. But there was more
problems with that actually, the studies have coped to the study showing that basically, that free will,
readiness potential, which is like a spike in electrical activity that occurs before you do this voluntary
movement, this movement, you think is voluntary. And everyone thought that this meant that you're not
really making a conscious decision that you could see this spike in brain activity earlier than the person
thought they made the voluntary voluntary decision. But a new study has shown that that's only the case when
we're making like arbitrary decisions. And when they had people making a decision about when when to donate
like a large amount of money to a charity, you actually saw this readiness potential disappear. And so
it seems like deliberate thinking, which is still this like prefrontal cortex. And there's this
distinction between access, access consciousness and phenomenal consciousness that I didn't go into that
I would in the next talk that Adam Saffron and integrated world model theory really gets at. But the idea is
that the prefrontal cortex does allow us to override automatic behaviors. And that is a sort of freedom
that we have, and we also lose it. In cases of schizophrenia, you see impaired prefrontal cortex
activity and drug addicts, you see impaired activity. And drug addicts, you see, they do repetitive
behavior, even when they know that it's not beneficial to them, they will still engage in that. So they're kind
of stuck in this loop or this unhealthy attractor. With schizophrenia, there's patients that report being
pushed around by forces that are beyond their control. I think that's because when the prefrontal cortex is
basically deactivated, people lose this sense, this ability to override their automatic behaviors.
And I think that's what those people are experiencing is sort of loss of this higher level agency that
we've called free will. Another interesting, just a final interesting thing to mention about that
is Cotard's syndrome, Cotard's delusion is this delusion where people think they're dead. They think
they're like ghosts or just not alive. It's really weird. A lot of people die from starvation, because they
think they don't have to eat because they think they're already dead. You actually see from neuroimaging
studies, they've showed like impaired activity in the prefrontal cortex. So maybe these people who
think they're dead have lost this high level agency, and they feel like they're ghosts or something. As far as
caring, caring is a part of like emerge through evolution, because you do have this benefit to
cooperating with each other. This self-organization process that we talked about that happens naturally,
because basically you find that when you work together, you minimize conflict and align it, you align
with the same interests. And so caring, altruism, empathy, all of those things are as natural
and as Darwinian as anything else. But you have to add on to evolutionary theory, all of this stuff
about self-organization and cooperative evolution. As far as you say, he said something about why people
who don't believe in free will. I forget the exact point about the caring. What was that?
When it appears that agents can or do fully care.
I'm sorry, what was the first part of it?
How would you explain caring through a lens of free will or no free will? Would free will deniers
say there is no caring when it appears that agents can or do fully care?
Yeah, no, it flies in the face of our everyday experience. The amount of contradictions and logic
that doesn't make sense when you go down that path of there being no free will or agency,
you just get into absurd territory. I think when we look back, it's going to look quaint that for so
long that we thought that everything was determined in a strict sense. And it's really a big issue because
these people who believe that if they believe it, if they take it to heart, they're experiencing
cognitive dissonance at every moment. And the people who argue against agency, they talk about
religious people having to compartmentalize to deal with the real world. But anybody who believes that
we don't have agency has to compartmentalize in the same way. Funny little conversation between Sam
Harris and his wife, Annika Harris, who wrote a book called Conscious that is a great accessible book, but
it leaves out everything that I've discussed and that I would discuss about the Bayesian brain hypothesis,
global workspace theory doesn't really go into integrated information theory in any depth.
So like all of the things that they're missing that do explain a lot of this stuff can be found in
like modern neuroscience. So we are making a lot of progress towards understanding the hard problem
of consciousness, so subjective experience, but also a free will and agency. But it's funny because
they're having this conversation in the podcast. And they're discussing whether since a belief in no
free will, as mentioned that New York Times article, I think 2011 showed that they have less moral
behavior, and it can, you know, cause depression, they're discussing whether they should tell their
daughter about free will or not, that she doesn't have any free will. The discussion is like, should we
tell our daughter that she doesn't have free will? But the actual discussion implies that they believe
that they have some choice whether to tell her or not, they're having a discussion about whether they
should do this or not. So there's a contradiction in their conversation that contradicts what they
believe. What's interesting is that if they do tell her that she has no free will, and she believes it,
she's actually gonna have negative mental effects, like it will, you know, be harmful, assuming that she really
believes it. I don't know if it has that in everyone. But you do see studies that show that. So if we do have
free will, it's a very bad thing to be telling people. And the last thing I'll say about that is, well, it's, it's
interesting, because if she's familiar with epistemology, and they tell her that she doesn't
have free will, but she goes, Okay, that's based on a model that has uncertainty, and that model may be
disproved, then she might not have the negative effects of free will. So I think everyone should
practice being a good Bayesian, and understand that our models, our theories, even the one that I just
talked about, will have errors, and will be shown to be wrong. And if reductionists do that, they won't
call free will, belief in free will, like, comparing them to horoscopes, which is just, I think, a
horrible statement. And kind of funny that physicists don't like it when like neuroscientists start,
and biologists start like talking about physics. It's kind of strange that physicists are so sure that
we don't have free will, when they're not familiar at all with the neuroscience behind agency and free will.
So would you like me to just read a comment in the chat? Otherwise, I think we can kind of come to a
close.
If there's anything, yeah, I can do one more question.
Yeah, well, Marco and Dave and others, thanks a lot for the great comments and commentary in the chat. I
hope that Bobby, I hope you check the live chat replay. And Sean O'Connor wrote, thanks for the good and
informative talk. Dr. Azarian mentioned the idea of evolutionary arms race. I was hoping to recommend
that he consider if he hasn't, how an intraspecific evolutionary arms race may relate.
Oh, I'm not familiar with the intraspecific. So,
Dr. Azarian mentioned the idea of a
game theory, red queen, not between two species, but within one species.
Dr. Azarian mentioned the idea of a
evolutionary arms race there too. Yeah, certainly, because you're competing with other organisms. And
John Maynard Smith, who I mentioned earlier, talking about like this causal power of information,
biology, he was the person to bring von Neumann's game theory to biological evolution. So he did all,
he basically showed that there is this, you know, game theory sort of process being played out. I think
he, his examples use different species. But I think within species, you would see the sorts,
same sort of thing. Of course, if it's not humans, you know, if you have other species, people are
competing, organisms are competing, you will get increased complexity, but there are limits. So just
because there's these evolutionary arm races, within and between species, there will still be a limit,
because they have to model the environment and just modeling all these unnecessary variables
Dr. Azarian mentioned the same thing. So it will ratchet up complexity in species. But
I think at least with the planet Earth and our biosphere, that, that humans are this sort of leading
envelope of complexity. And so it really just is open ended with the most complex species. So the most
complex species is the one that will evolve toward higher complexity. And really, there might be a
limit there, there are reasons to think there are limits to how far human biological intelligence can
emerge. There's, I mean, can evolve towards there's something called a cephalization limit, which is like,
how big our brain can get, because of reasons like having to do with like the skull. And so, but what's
interesting is part of this process, this evolutionary processes, as Popper and newer people like Dennett have
mentioned, continues with science and culture and technology. So humans really have open ended complexity, because
we're, we're augmenting ourselves with technology. So while biology, biological complexity may have limits, there's no limits.
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
of our minds and all of our devices are.
And for that reason, we need to be worried about privacy,
but we also need to not be scared of technology.
We just need to use technology to become more human.
So we're not transcending like humanity and biology.
Technology will allow us to become hyper-biological.
Very interesting note, perhaps to close it on.
Anytime you want the dot to, we can make it happen.
It can be any format.
We can invite anyone else on.
Really awesome and interesting to think about.
Do you want any last words?
If I come back to talk about free-run agency,
it'd be great to have like Kevin Mitchell
or maybe Eric Coel who's done a lot of work
on top-down causation and causal emergence
that was really influential on the book.
If you know people, you can Twitter, tag them
or email us and email them and CC us,
or just contact us and we'll do that on our side.
Thanks, it's been super fun.
Thanks, Daniel.
I really appreciate it.
I appreciate you reading a draft of the manuscript,
just like in a few days to give me some feedback
that actually helps clear up little mistakes in the book.
I heard you mention Marco.
Thanks to Marco and anybody else who's been watching
and chiming in with questions.
Really appreciate it.
Sorry for the information overload.
If we could make this recording,
we could make this recording,
we could make this recording,

we could make this recording,
we could make this recording,
we could make this recording,
we could make this recording,
we could make this recording,



















Maybe some legal stuff, Delta eight or, or.
Water.
For people.
Micro dose water.
Stay hydrated.
For people where it's legal.
Keep stay hydrated.

## WEfc9X437yY

Hello everyone, this is the Active Inference Institute.
It is guest stream number 15.2 on July 26, 2022.
We're here with Bobby Azarian and this is going to be the second part of a discussion
that we opened some months ago.
Looking forward to it, really appreciate your visit and please just set it up and continue
however you see fit.
I'll be documenting questions in the live chat and looking forward a lot to this discussion.
Okay, thanks for having me.
So the talk isn't quite what I promised.
It's not part two.
I'd like to come back in the future and talk about that stuff.
It's kind of what I talked about last time but a little bit more focused, more specific.
There was a recent Guardian article that came out that was talking about whether there's
this need for a new evolutionary synthesis.
We have the modern synthesis and then the modern synthesis has been challenged by the extended
evolutionary synthesis, which includes more mechanisms, things that weren't recognized
by the modern synthesis.
So things like epigenetics and Lamarckian mechanisms like the Baldwin effect, multi-level selection
or group selection.
So this is actually saying that that's not radical enough.
The integrated evolutionary synthesis has that name because it integrates evolutionary theory
with thermodynamics and information theory.
And it gives us, I think, a much clearer picture of how evolution works and why it's generating
complexity in the biosphere.
So originally this talk was also titled something different.
It said, a unifying theory of reality.
And yeah, it's been kind of downgraded to something a little less ambitious because I did not have
time to include slides that talk about, there's an interpretation of quantum mechanics called quantum
Darwinism.
And a solution to the fine tuning problem called cosmological natural selection.
So what I'm trying to paint today is a picture of a Darwinian reality.
And those paradigms are consistent with this Darwinian framework, kind of a universal Darwinism
type thing.
Dan Dinnit, you know, comes to mind.
So this is just going to focus on the evolution of the biosphere, the evolution of
life towards higher complexity.
And in the future, we can talk about all that other stuff.
Awesome.
Sounds good.
Yeah.
Who would you say this is for?
And how would you like to update their cognitive model?
Yeah.
So that's, I love that you put it that way.
Yeah.
I hope I'm updating people's model of reality today.
So it's for the active inference lab.
So it's a bit more technical than, you know, it might be if I was giving it to a general
audience.
But I tried to not get too technical at the same time.
In my last talk, I really just talked about everything and used a lot of terminology that
I assume that your audience would know.
Today, if anything's unclear or you want me to go into a little bit more detail, please feel
free to ask, jump in.
And I'll try to pause a few times throughout the presentation and see if anybody has any
questions.
Because it's really this story of evolution.
That's something that, you know, you can tell as a story.
And, you know, I want people to understand the mechanisms better than giving like the perfect
presentation.
I just want people to see how all of these things work together.
I just want people to see how all of these things work together.
So it's from my book that just came out a month ago.
And that's available.
So if you like what you hear, this is basically a kind of superficial version of the content in
part two of the book.
There's three parts.
So there's this kind of famous quote from Dobzhansky, who did a lot of work creating the modern synthesis.
And the modern synthesis is basically taking Darwin's theory of natural selection and updating
it with a modern understanding of genetics.
So it's not really modern anymore.
I mean, this was like, you know, the gene was DNA was discovered in the 50s and then in the
60s and 70s, this was formulated.
So he said nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.
And I think it's a great statement.
I think it's true.
But the integrated evolutionary synthesis says that doesn't go far enough that nothing in
biology or evolution makes sense except in light of thermodynamics and information.
And Shannon's information theory is really the same theory as statistical thermodynamics.
There's a lot of the same formalisms.
And we're going to see today that biological information, really the role of information
is that it allows life to sustain itself against this tendency toward decay described by the
second law of thermodynamics.
And basically, there's just one evolutionary algorithm, one mechanism that is behind all
of this complexity creation.
And that has been called variation and selection.
That's a term from evolutionary epistemology, which is based on the ideas of Karl Popper.
But it actually wasn't founded by Karl Popper.
It was founded by a cognitive psychologist named Donald Campbell, who was inspired by Popper's
view and then Popper contributed to it later.
But the idea is that variation and selection, the mechanism of evolution, is a form of trial
and error learning.
So evolution adaptation is the same as learning.
It's a learning mechanism, and it creates biological knowledge.
It creates knowledge in the biosphere.
And David Deutsch is one person who has written a lot about evolution as a knowledge creation
process, and I think that's how we need to understand it from now on.
And this is arguing that evolution does have an arrow or a direction.
It is progressive, in other words.
In the 20th century, Stephen Jay Gould was very adamant about killing this idea that evolution
is progressive.
He saw it as being teleological, kind of implying that there's some mystical force driving evolution
towards higher levels of complexity.
And I think that is wrong.
Evolution is progressive, but there's no mystical force driving it.
It is just mechanisms that are completely intelligible and formalizable.
So, and Richard Dawkins was one person who challenged Gould on that.
He wrote a book review about Gould's book and basically said that this idea that evolution
towards higher complexity was this statistical illusion was wrong.
And he cited evolutionary transitions as being a mechanism of complexity generation.
And we're going to talk about evolutionary transitions today, which is left out of the
modern synthesis.
They don't talk about these transitions.
This quote from Stuart Kaufman, he says, there are things Darwin couldn't have known.
One of them was self-organization and complex dynamical systems.
If the new science of complexity succeeds, it will broker a marriage between self-organization
and selection.
It'll be a physics of biology.
So that's part of what we're going to talk about today.
How self-organization fits into the evolutionary picture.
Because it wasn't recognized by most evolutionary biologists for a long time.
And Santa Fe Institute was one place really, you know, doing the complexity research that
has made, you know, this mechanism of self-organization kind of famous.
It started off with the cyberneticists.
So Ross Ashby had a principle of self-organization in, I think, the 40s or 50s.
So it's an old idea.
And it's, you know, time that, I guess, mainstream evolutionary theory incorporates self-organization
into the picture.
And we'll see that self-organization is really the process that creates the evolutionary transitions
that I mentioned.
So we're going to start off with some quotes just to give some context before getting into
the details.
Thomas Huxley, 19th century English biologist known as Darwin's bulldog for his advocacy
of evolutionary theory, said that the question of all questions for mankind, the problem
which underlies all others is more deeply interesting than any other, is the ascertainment
and of the place which man occupies in nature and of his relations to the universe of things.
So what's our relationship to the cosmos?
Do we have one?
Is life completely insignificant?
Or could it have deep cosmic significance?
Could it influence the future evolution and developmental trajectory of the universe?
So here's one answer to that question, the kind of pessimistic answer.
Man at last knows that he is alone in the unfeeling immensity of the universe, out of which
he emerged only by chance.
So this quote comes from Jacques Manot, a Nobel Prize winning French biochemist, really smart
guy.
This book was really influential and kind of painted this nihilistic picture of reality
that was consistent with the reductionist model of the world, which was the reigning view in
the 20th century.
And today we're going to challenge that idea.
Christian Dedeuve, another Nobel Prize winning biologist, said that the natural constraints
within which chance operates are such that evolution in the direction of increasing complexity was
virtually bound to take place if given the opportunity.
Chance does not exclude inevitability.
So there's certainly chance and contingency and randomness operating in evolutionary processes.
You have genetic mutation, which is at least partially a random blind process.
And that's okay.
That doesn't mean the whole thing is random.
So there's a lot of evidence from convergent evolution, the work of Simon Conway Morris, that
shows that the certain, you know, designs, organism designs are regularities.
So we see them emerge kind of expectedly.
So David Deutsch, founder of quantum computation and author of some great books, Fabric of Reality
and his newer, The Beginning of Infinity, said,
Narrowly conceived, evolutionary theory considers us mere vehicles for the replication of our genes or memes,
and it refuses to address the question of why evolution has tended to create ever greater adaptive
complexity or the role that such complexity plays in the wider scheme of things.
So you see right here, he was hinting at life, which he calls adaptive complexity,
as having this larger cosmic role.
And I think adaptive complexity is a great term for life, kind of for replacing the word life.
That would be a good idea because life has these mystical connotations.
So as soon as you say something like life is in some sense, some statistical sense,
destined to spread through the universe, it sounds mystical.
But when you say adaptive complexity will spread, you get a lot less groans because it makes it clear that what life is,
is this phenomenon that learns.
Living systems are complex adaptive systems.
So adaptive complexity is just a way to talk about the network of complex adaptive systems that make up the biosphere.
And once you learn that life is really this phenomenon that is continuously learning and self-correcting,
then you see why it's so robust and why it seems like there is this inevitability to evolution and life getting off of its planet of origin.
So we're going to kind of demystify that process.
But in demystifying it, we see a natural process that is pretty mystical as far as like, you know, just,
I think it doesn't make sense to use the term, like, to not say that there's not this like kind of magical or mystical quality of the process,
just because we can understand it mechanistically.
To me, this paints a picture of nature that's, you know, more wondrous than any sort of conception of nature that involves like supernatural things.
I think the natural self-organizing process is as interesting as, you know, any supernatural concept.
And then you see this really bold quote by the great physicist Freeman Dyson, who just passed away like a year or two ago.
It is conceivable that life may have a larger role to play.
Sorry, I can't see the quote.
Then we have yet imagined life may succeed against all odds in molding the universe to its own purpose.
So we're going to see if we can make an argument for that.
Last quote, Paul Davies says,
We now see how it is possible for the universe to increase both organization and entropy at the same time.
The optimistic and pessimistic arrows of time can coexist.
The universe can display creative, unidirectional progress, even in the face of the second law.
So nothing in this story in any way violates the second law of thermodynamics.
And it's important that, you know, that's emphasized because a lot of people had this just superficial interpretation of the second law that the universe is growing increasingly disordered on average over time.
And this presentation will say that that, you know, popular understanding of the second law is wrong and that the universe is becoming more organized at the largest scales.
OK, let's get into it.
If anyone has any questions about that introduction.
Nope.
OK, so.
The paradigm of emergence and cosmic evolution says each emergence in the cosmic self-organization process is brought together by a metasystem transition or an evolutionary transition that moves life further away from a state of thermodynamic equilibrium and total disorder through a nested series of such phase transitions where functional things come together to make larger functional things.
And so on.
So how these new levels emerge.
And on the right here you see that there's this hierarchy of science that has tried to, you know, model this natural phenomenon phenomena and you get these levels that represent these different emergencies.
So with biology, we have life and we have the emergence of mind and we get psychology and then we have the emergence of civilization and we get culture.
So this framework says that.
So this framework says that.
And it's really the framework of evolutionary epistemology and universal Darwinism.
It says that the emergence and evolution of life, mind, society and technology are all part of one thermodynamic process, one evolutionary process, one computational process unified by the concept of knowledge.
And it says that humans are all part of the universe.
And it says that humans are neither a cosmic accident nor the end goal of evolution.
Humans are a step on the evolutionary ladder of becoming and an essential driver of increasing complexity.
And it says the universe is undergoing a grand and majestic self organizing process.
And at this moment in time, in this corner of the universe, we are the stars of the show.
So this is what this process of cosmic evolution looks like.
This comes from a book called Cosmic Evolution by the Harvard astrophysicist Eric Chayason.
And these are some unifying paradigms of the past and present.
So the integrated evolutionary synthesis is not really a novel thing.
It's sort of an update to all of these unifying paradigms that have come before it.
So general systems theory came out of cybernetics.
It was founded by Ludwig von Bertalanffy and basically says that all complex systems have similar organizing principles that can be described conceptually and modeled mathematically.
The problem with this theory was that it was a little too broad and not specific enough.
Evolutionary epistemology came after that.
And it emphasizes that the evolutionary process is a problem solving procedure that creates knowledge.
So the growth of complexity and emergence of intelligence in the biosphere arises out of a knowledge accumulation process.
In this view, when I say knowledge accumulation, this knowledge is encoded in the different forms of memory that life allows for.
So genetic memory, neural memory, cultural memory, and we'll talk about that more later.
Universal Darwinism came after evolutionary epistemology.
It was basically the same theory, though.
So Richard Dawkins and Dan Denit are people that are associated with universal Darwinism.
And it emphasizes that the universe is evolving at all these different scales and levels of complexity.
So universal Bayesianism is a term that some people are using.
And it's just basically an update of the previous paradigms.
So it basically says the same things that, you know, now evolution is knowledge creation process.
But it specifically says that this knowledge is encoded in biological systems.
That knowledge is stored in the form of a world model.
And that the model is an internal representation and statistical mapping of the environment, which gets updated through adaptation and learning.
And we're going to see that adaptation is a form of learning and that learning is a form of adaptation.
So to kind of frame this story, earlier I said it's you can tell the story in a kind of like mythological way.
So David Deutsch says, if one can speak of a cosmic war, it's a war between monotony and novelty, between stasis and creativity.
And in this war, our side is not destined to lose.
If we choose to apply our unique capacity to create explanatory knowledge, we could win.
So it's a pretty optimistic quote.
And a story that I think, you know, is probably a lot more comforting, satisfying than the old view that the universe is becoming increasingly disordered and that life is just a transient phenomenon.
We'll see that adaptive complexity isn't transient.
So you could frame this as this battle between order and disorder or life versus entropy or knowledge versus ignorance.
And so the story starts with the second law of thermodynamics, which is kind of a nice way to frame the evolutionary story.
Since the second law of thermodynamics is this kind of ironclad law that everybody accepts.
So it's kind of built on a really firm theoretical foundation.
So to understand life and its role in cosmic evolution, we have to understand the second law, which says that the entropy of a system naturally increases over time, at least on average.
You could sum this up by the quote, things fall apart.
So it's describing this tendency toward decay and disorder.
And we see that in this little simple cartoon.
Below.
Below.
So in our everyday experience, things don't typically organize themselves.
Rooms get messier and buildings erode.
Not the opposite.
But OK, so yeah, this is just a depiction of that same process, which was the model that the founder of the statistical interpretation of the second law used.
So Ludwig Boltzmann imagined a simple system.
So an ideal gas in a box.
And you see that if this system is just left to evolve over time, these molecules spread out.
Simply because if they're just all moving at random, then there are many more configurations that the system can be in that are disordered compared to patterned arrangements.
So just due to this statistical tendency, you will get a system evolving toward a more disordered state if it's a closed system.
And there's no way for the system to access any energy from the outside.
So this is, you know, this model is looking at a gas in a box.
It's not looking at the universe.
But people were quick to jump to apply this to the universe as a whole under the assumption that the universe is a closed system.
But it ignores a lot of things.
So this model ignored the effect of gravity because gravity doesn't really have a noticeable effect on things that small.
So it was just seen as negligible.
And it also assumes that these particles stay uncorrelated after they interact.
And we know that with certain chemical systems in life, the molecules are held together by chemical bonds and forces.
So this model ignores a lot of things which make it probably not very useful to apply to the universe as a whole.
And it leaves out this phenomenon of life that we've called adaptive complexity.
So if systems naturally become more disordered, then what's going on with life?
We see life maintaining its structure and, you know, has the capability of regenerating itself and making copies of itself and producing all of this order that we see around us in the biosphere.
And so adaptive complexity is this local reversal of the second law.
And Schrodinger was one of the first people to really talk about this mystery and give us one piece of the puzzle.
So life is able to evade this tendency towards disorder because it is an open system.
The planet is receiving all of this free energy from the sun.
And that energy allows us an adaptive system to stay far from thermodynamic equilibrium.
So the trick to life evading the tendency toward decay is that it has the ability to extract energy that allows it to do work.
And that work is maintaining its stable, non-equilibrium steady state.
And so you can think of life as playing a game.
So the game of life is this battle between order and disorder.
So the challenge that life has that any system, any adaptive system, any conceivable sentient system in any universe abiding by the second law has this intrinsic problem.
And that's it has to be able to resist the natural tendency toward disorder, which requires work.
So this intrinsic challenge gives life an intrinsic goal.
So life does have a goal.
And the goal is simply to continue to persist, to stay far from thermodynamic equilibrium or to survive.
Now, what must life do in order to achieve that goal?
It has to be able to extract energy from the environment.
And that's not a trivial task.
In order to be able to navigate its environment and actually extract or absorb this energy, it has to acquire information about the environment that it's in.
It has to model the world.
And life strategy is to search the space of possible configurations for structural and functional solutions.
We call those adaptations to the problem of survival.
And so evolution is this process of life exploring the design space.
And Dinit made this way of looking at it popular in his book, Darwin's Dangerous Idea.
So on an abstract level, we can imagine a certain practical problem or challenge.
We can imagine a challenge as having a solution that exists somewhere out there in the space of possibilities, just waiting to be found by adaptive complexity.
So it may take some time, but if the possibility space, the space of possible solutions, is continuously explored in an efficient way, eventually a solution will be discovered.
So Darwinian evolution is a problem-solving algorithm.
And that algorithm is called variation and selection.
Yeah, this slide was old.
I meant to update that.
So this is supposed to show that variation and selection is the method of adaptation and that this is a trial and error learning process.
So trial and error is the mechanism for learning.
Those are the same thing.
So adaptation is equivalent to problem-solving, is equivalent to learning, is equivalent to knowledge creation.
And we're going to see an illustration of that to make it a lot clearer.
So this is an evolutionary epistemology-inspired picture that David Deutsch supports.
So he says that the whole scientific process resembles biological evolution.
A problem is like an ecological niche and a theory is like a gene or a species which is being tested for viability in that niche.
So the way we should think about organisms now is that they are embodied theories about how to survive in a particular niche.
So a genome is basically a strategy for survival.
Okay, so this picture looks complicated at first, but it's pretty simple once you break it down.
So here on the left, we see one of the most simple organisms.
We have a single-celled organism.
And this says that an adaptive system is an embodied theory about how to stay far from equilibrium.
And that basically it's searching for a winning design.
So a winning design is specifically one that allows for energy extraction from the environment.
So now we're just really understanding life as having to solve a thermodynamic problem.
It has to find free energy to maintain its non-equilibrium steady state.
And it does this without any consciousness or conscious intent at first.
So let's imagine that this is the origin of life, that we start with this one organism.
It's a replicator.
So it makes copies of itself.
And because genetic mutation is unavoidable, the copying process will always make errors.
Then you get a generation of new designs that are variations on the original design.
So here you see design one, two, three, and four.
And you can have many designs as copies that this organism can make.
So just through replication with mutation, you get this variation and selection mechanism that will create learning.
So natural selection is a filter.
And natural selection filters out the dysfunctional designs.
So we see that, and you could imagine that, so bacterium, some bacteria perform a process known as chemotaxis.
So they will swim towards molecular food and away from toxins.
So they have some sort of very basic abstract world model of the environment, some statistical mapping that allows the system to basically swim towards food and away from threats.
And you could imagine that this first one, maybe it swims in random directions.
It doesn't swim towards food yet.
It just moves around randomly.
So it makes a copy of itself.
Let's say that copy still has that same behavior.
And then you have another copy.
Let's say this one, because of random mutation, swims toward poisons and away from food.
And this one, third one, just by chance, has a better design, a more optimal design where it swims towards food and away from toxins.
And you can imagine, you know, however, you know, many types of different designs with different functions.
And so some of these designs will die out because they can't fulfill this task of extracting energy.
So they can't stay far from equilibrium.
They get filtered out.
And this winning design gets to make copies of itself.
And so this winning design is the one that can best predict its environment.
So it's the one that's best at extracting energy because it has the ability to predict its environment.
And so this process continues with a second iteration.
And it creates this new generation of designs.
And again, some of these designs will be dysfunctional or at least not optimal.
And especially if they're competing, the dysfunctional ones will die out.
So natural selection acts as a filter again.
And again, we have another generation.
So this iterative process is how basically the species design gets optimized.
And it is also a knowledge creation process because this organism has a genetic code that codes for these functional designs or dysfunctional designs.
And random mutation is creating random bits of code.
It's creating like random changes.
And some of that code will produce functional designs.
So while it's producing all this information, some of it is information that's not predictive of the environment.
It's useless information.
The information that survives the filter of natural selection has proved itself to be knowledge.
And the reason I call the information in these systems that survive knowledge is because they contain information that reduces the organism's uncertainty regarding the environment.
So you can look at this whole process as basically a world model.
And there's variations being created to this embodied internal model.
And that with these iterations, the model is getting updated to be more accurate.
So I'm not going to go into active inference and the free energy principle and the Bayesian brain hypothesis here.
But I will mention some things for people who already are familiar with it, since this is the active inference channel, that this whole process would be minimizing free energy or prediction error.
So as adaptation occurs and you have these different generations, the model is getting updated in a Bayesian fashion.
And John Campbell has done work showing that the evolutionary process is a process of learning and specifically Bayesian inference.
And Carl Friston has worked with him on that.
So I'm calling this knowledge, the information that encodes these structures, knowledge.
And that comes from evolutionary epistemology.
So what do I mean by that?
So a dolphin's streamlined design, which is a product of the information stored in its genome, contains a knowledge of hydrodynamics.
And similarly, an eagle's wing design contains a knowledge of aerodynamics.
So not only can we be certain that engineers see knowledge in these functional structures, there should be little doubt that these designs provided the original inspiration for our aircraft and submarine technology.
So, yeah, you can think of evolution as a knowledge creation process.
And you can think about all of the species that exist as being solutions to different types of environmental challenges.
And so humans, scientists studying these species can learn a lot about how to better manipulate the universe and better solve our challenges by looking at how evolution has solved challenges in the past.
So, this process of adaptation that's creating this knowledge is also creating statistical correlation between the organism and its environment.
And when you understand this, you see that natural selection is something like an information channel.
You could think of as pumping in information from the environment into life.
Life models its environment.
It's isomorphic to its environment.
So, an organism is a model of its environment in the way that a key is a model of the lock it opens.
So, as this process that we see here takes place and you have these different iterations of the adaptation process, it's becoming more correlated with its environment.
So, we talked about these different designs.
And being different types of bacteria.
Some that swim towards poisons and some that swim away and towards food.
And so, we see this is the work of physicist Carlo Rovelli, who is now interested in evolution and how evolution creates information.
His work builds on the work of adaptation.
His work builds on the work of David Wolpert and Artem Kolchinski at the Santa Fe Institute.
So, just to explain this concept of adaptation creating statistical correlation and mutual information.
And this is really what underlies its ability to predict its environment.
We have this simple example.
So, a well adapted organism is one that is statistically correlated with its environment.
So, a bacterium that swims to the left when nutrients are on the left and swims to the right when nutrients are on the right prospers.
A bacterium that swims at random has less chances.
So, increasing statistical correlation represents the creation of mutual information.
And that comes from Shannon's information theory.
So, basically, when you have this correlation, basically the information in these organisms is predictive of the environment.
And this quote from Fred Dretzky, who did a lot of the pioneering work applying information theory to natural selection.
This is from the biologist John Maynard Smith's essay on biological information.
Dretzky argues as follows.
If some variable A is correlated with the second variable B, then we can say that B carries information about A.
For example, if the occurrence of rain is correlated with a particular cloud, then the type of cloud tells us whether it would rain.
So, we see here that adaptation equals statistical correlation equals mutual information equals model optimization equals knowledge creation.
So, let me just skip some of this stuff.
So, we see how knowledge is created in this example.
And species are becoming optimized for extracting energy in their niche.
But they're not becoming more complex, per se.
So, since an organism is an embodied theory about how to extract energy from the environment, it kind of follows Occam's razor.
So, it's really trying to be the simplest solution to a thermodynamic problem.
So, at the beginning of this talk, I said that this was going to explain mechanisms of complexity generation and this tendency towards higher intelligence that we've seen in our biosphere.
But it's not the case that natural selection is making every species more complex or more intelligent.
And Stephen Jay Gould is right about that.
If an organism is extracting energy and avoiding threats just fine in its niche, it doesn't need to become more complex.
So, crocodiles and sharks are common examples of organisms that haven't become more complex over millions of years of evolution.
And there are examples like cave fish that weren't previously existing in caves, got trapped in caves or some sort of underground environment where having eyes was no longer a selective advantage.
You saw those organisms actually become more simple.
So, if evolution isn't making organisms more complex and more intelligent, how do we argue that intelligence is inevitable?
Like, how does that work?
So, it's not that evolution makes every species more complex.
It's that evolution will create new species and there will be this growing ladder of complexity such that the new species that emerge have to solve more complicated energy extraction problems.
And that is basically what ratchets up complexity.
So, we're going to talk about that now, this tendency towards intelligence.
So, we can think of each niche on Earth as a sort of energy slot, a thermodynamic slot for a given species.
And an evolving population of organisms efficiently searching the space will discover a solution to a thermodynamic problem that it didn't know existed.
So, the discovery of a novel energy source or energy extraction technique is both how a new niche and a new species come into existence.
So, this Darwinian evolution process, which is also called phylogenetic learning, this iterative learning process, it's generational learning, will naturally lead to speciation because organisms will stumble upon ways to exploit thermodynamic niches that were previously inaccessible to life purely for design reasons.
So, let's look at that picture one more time.
So, when this organism self-replicates, it's making these different designs.
Some of them will be better at extracting that source of energy for the first organisms.
It was thought to be the geochemical energy that was around these hydrothermal vents, these deep sea volcanoes.
And you can imagine, just by chance, that it creates a copy of itself and that it discovers a configuration that can suddenly absorb sunlight.
So, that's how we get the generation of photosynthetic bacteria.
And when you get this new source of energy unlocked, then that is basically what creates a new species.
And then you don't just have this, you know, one species exploring this solution space.
You have a growing problem space.
So, you will have organisms discovering new sources of energy that weren't available.
So, basically, if life is something like a game and it's trying to, you know, find these configurations that are best at predicting the environment,
it'll kind of just by chance, you know, discover that there's like a different aspect of the game.
So, it will unlock a new source of free energy, which creates a new species and a new niche.
Okay.
So, just to make that idea a little more clear, there's a great paper called The Energy Expansions of Evolution by Olivia Judson.
And she says, the history of the life Earth system can be divided into five energetic epochs,
each featuring the evolution of life forms that can exploit a new source of energy.
These sources are geochemical energy, sunlight, oxygen, flesh, and fire.
The first two are present at the start, but oxygen, flesh, and fire are all consequences of evolutionary events.
Since no category of energy sources disappeared, this has over time resulted in an expanding realm of the sources of energy available to living systems,
and a concomitment increase in the diversity and complexity of ecosystems.
So, why do increasingly intelligent species emerge?
So, first, we have these organisms around the hydrothermal vents I mentioned,
reductive chemoautotrophs, their solutions to the problem of how to extract energy from geochemical gradients.
Photosynthetic bacteria, the single-celled ancestors of plants are a solution to the problem of how to extract work from all the solar energy that was flowing through the planetary system.
And heterotrophic organisms then emerge, which are organisms that eat other organisms,
and their solution to the problem of how to extract energy from life itself.
And this explains how intelligence emerges, because once life starts having to model life, other agents with causal power and adaptive behavior,
the computational task of extracting free energy gets increasingly difficult as increasingly complex species arise.
By virtue of having to model each other, the complexity of some species gets ratcheted up by what's known as an evolutionary arms race.
So, here I'll mention this law from cybernetics created by Ross Ashby called the Law of Requisite Variety.
And applied to evolution, it basically says that an adaptive system must have as many states, like cognitive states, behavioral states, as there are challenges in its environment.
And so, when you have this process of new species emerging that are able, that basically discover configurations that allows them to extract a new source of energy or eat a new source of energy,
you get this pressure towards, or this tendency towards species that have a larger repertoire of cognitive states.
And so they can deal with more challenges.
And so this increases an agent's empowerment.
That's a term from the computational neuroscience literature.
Harvard AI researcher Alex Wisner-Gross has this concept of a causal entropic force.
But basically, we can see that the biosphere as a whole is increasing its repertoire of internal states.
And the most complex species is also possessing a repertoire of larger internal states.
And this is one explanation for this tendency towards higher intelligence.
So, just to reiterate those points once more, why has the evolutionary record shown a trend of the emergence of increasingly complex forms?
When all conceivable niches on the earth were filled, that wasn't the end for complexification.
New species create new niches because the free energy slot they provide is themselves.
So, they become food for any sort of other organism that through blind variation and natural selection,
discovers a configuration that allows them to exploit that new source of food.
So, the cyberneticist Francis Heiligan said,
It is well documented by evolutionary biologists that ecosystems tend to become more complex.
The number of different species increases.
And the number of dependencies and other linkages between species increases.
E.O. Wilson said,
Not only do ecosystems contain typically lots of niches that will eventually be filled by new species.
There is a self-reinforcing tendency to create new niches.
And Stu Kaufman actually has shown this parallel between niche emergence and the autocatalytic process that we see with basically the precursor to life was this chemical autocatalytic set.
So, Stu Kaufman says,
Ecosystems are autocatalytic, autocatalytically closed self-sustaining reaction networks that reliably drive up biological diversity and complexity as they self-amplify and evolve.
Okay.
So, that tells us how we get species of increasing intelligence, but it doesn't answer everything about how that happens because it isn't telling us how you go from the
single-celled organisms to multicellular organisms.
And it's not addressing the complexity that we see with these collectives, with societies.
So, how do we go from multicellular organisms to these larger societies?
And we've seen that because of the internet, that human societies have become integrated into this larger computational network that some have called a global brain, because humans are basically nodes exchanging information in the same way that neuronal populations or neurons are exchanging information in the brain.
So, we need to talk about more than normal Darwinian evolution, competitive evolution, and we need to include self-organization in this model.
So, before I start talking about self-organization, and that will kind of be the second half of this, and it's a bit shorter, any questions about any of the mechanisms that have been presented so far?
Yeah, there's definitely a few questions. Would you like me to ask them now? Or do you think it makes more sense to just present everything you'd like to get out, and then we can have just a full Q&A?
If the questions are like broad questions that aren't specifically asking about the mechanisms that were just described, then we could wait. But if it's about this stuff, maybe it'd be good to talk about now.
Let's go through the whole presentation, and then I'll have compiled questions by then. Thank you.
Okay. Great. All right. So, this is that same question.
Same thing that we were looking at earlier. It was an older version. Looks a bit different, all these arrows. But yeah, this is showing the same process, this phylogenetic learning process that happens through competitive evolution.
So, this is normal Darwinian evolution. But you see here at the bottom, this part at the bottom right, is showing that these organisms down here, these different designs, they don't have to compete.
They can cooperate. They can find synergistic collective configuration and form a larger unit.
And so, this is the process of self-organization right here. And basically, that creates a new level of complexity.
So, if you think of life as a game, and it's this game where life's trying to, you know, life's exploring the design space, looking for configurations that solve its thermodynamic problem of staying far from equilibrium,
this process of self-organization is how life graduates to a new level in the game.
So, you don't always have to compete. You can cooperate.
And we're going to talk about self-organization as a Darwinian process, this marriage of self-organization and selection that Stu Kaufman talked about in that quote at the beginning.
So, Richard Dawkins says, Darwin's survival of the fittest is really a special case of a more general law of survival of the stable.
And this concept of evolution being about survival of the stable will allow us to understand how self-organization is a Darwinian process.
And by a Darwinian process, I mean that it works through the evolutionary algorithm that we've called variation and selection.
So, here you see that the self-organization process up top, there's just a couple examples of collectives of higher level systems that are made of many units.
So, it can be a collection of molecules forming something like an auto-catalytic set, or it can be a collection of agents. It can be people in a society.
So, basically, this is the evolutionary process. It works through variation and selection because to have variation on a design or structure, you don't need replication.
You don't need a system that's making copies of itself. That makes the process more efficient in ways.
But you can have a single system that's exploring a variety of internal configurations.
And so, you see this flowchart here where it says,
System blindly explores various configurations in the space of possible designs via trial and error.
So, it's just being pushed by a flow of energy.
With humans, we're powered by metabolism.
So, it's still a flow of energy pushing us technically.
And it's basically causing the system to randomly explore different states in the configuration space.
Now, those configurations that it discovers that allows the system to extract sufficient energy to stay out of equilibrium are the ones that get retained.
And the system is able to persist for longer.
So, it's the same variation and selection mechanism.
But here, since there's only one system, Donald Campbell, the inventor of evolutionary epistemology, being influenced by the cyberneticists, called this blind variation and selective retention.
So, the stable states are selectively retained.
So, those states that the system moves into that does not allow the system to persist are filtered out.
So, really, you can explain evolution with this simple kind of tautological phrase,
What works persists.
And that Dawkins simplification of Darwin's law as really being
about the survival of the stable shows us why this integrated evolutionary synthesis is important.
We can see the second law's tendency toward disorder as being a selection pressure.
It's the second law that filters out the unstable designs.
And they're not just filtering out the unstable designs.
It's specifically filtering out designs that are less functional.
So, the stable designs, because of this constraint, this thermodynamic constraint that systems must be able to extract energy to maintain their order,
it is really discovering the most functional designs, the designs that are best at predicting the environment, and the designs that are most robust and most functional.
So, this process explains the origin of life.
You have all these interacting components.
These are molecules, the molecules that are involved in organic chemistry.
And Jeremy England, who did this work when he was at MIT, named this process Dissipative Adaptation.
So, he was showing how basically a flow of energy pushing a system of molecules far from thermodynamic equilibrium will lead to this increasingly ordered state,
because the system is exploring configurations and finding those information, getting stuck basically in the configurations that allow the system to extract and dissipate more energy.
So, the book discusses this principle of recursive self-organization.
The name is inspired by Ross Ashby's principle of self-organization.
This is basically explaining why interacting agents will consistently link up to form stable wholes.
And that's because working together allows the individual systems to extract more energy with less work.
So, there's this effect that has been called synergy.
So, nature promotes cooperation because it's thermodynamically beneficial for all parties.
And for that reason, synergistic collective configurations will eventually be discovered by a mini component system that's exploring various states or configurations through the blind variation and selective retention mechanism.
So, agents will compete until they discover that working together makes everyone's task easier.
So, this is a lesson for humanity because the challenges, the sustainability challenges, which is an entropy problem, can only be solved.
These global sustainability challenges can only be solved if we work together.
Working together increases the computational power of the system.
So, self-organization, I guess, I think was kind of ignored by evolutionary biologists for a long time because they didn't want to recognize anything that sounded like a teleological mechanism, like something kind of mystical.
And it was like, how, you know, there's the second law of thermodynamics.
How can there be spontaneous self-organization?
Well, the answer was, it's not exactly spontaneous.
It requires energy flowing through the system, pushing the system far from equilibrium and forcing it to explore the configuration space.
And that's how we see that it's a Darwinian process, that it explores these different configurations and the configurations that are most functional are the ones that survive and pass the filter of natural selection.
So, here's just an illustration showing that self-organization is something that can happen at all of these levels.
So, complex adaptive systems are nested systems.
They're systems made of smaller systems that are interacting.
And they build on one another.
So, you have single-celled organisms coming together to form this multicellular unit, like a slime mold.
So, humans are multicellular organisms that come together and make societies.
You have ant colonies here, which do the same.
And so, these form a collective unit that function very much like the units that they're made of.
So, you see that adaptive systems can exist in all these levels.
And these adaptive systems have similar dynamics and work through these same variation and selection mechanisms.
And that's how they evolve toward increasing robustness and complexity and computational power.
Jeffrey West's book, Scale, is a great book about that.
So, this principle of recursive self-organization says that as long as a biosphere is creating a growing variety of complex adaptive systems,
some of those systems will interact to produce higher-level complex adaptive systems, which will come together to form even larger complexes.
This process continues at higher and more computationally sophisticated levels as time marches on.
Familiar examples of superorganisms include ant colonies, termite mounds, human societies, and the ecosystems that make up the biosphere.
And all of these distributed networks process information and fight to maintain their organization in ways that are surprisingly similar to the organisms they're made of.
So, it tells us that knowledge of the dynamics and mechanisms at one level can be informative of isomorphic phenomena at other levels.
So, it's kind of interesting here because you see that this theory has predictive power that no reductionist model has.
This reductionist model where it's trying to look, trying to understand reality and predict reality by looking at this most base level, such as the interactions of basic particles and forces,
don't give us this predictive power that this paradigm does because it basically says that we can use adaptive systems.
We can look at those patterns at one level and then we can use that to understand things that might not be easy to see at another level.
So, for example, we saw that paper with Stu Kaufman saying that ecosystems were autocatalytic sets.
Studying autocatalytic sets can tell us about ecosystem dynamics and vice versa.
Studying human brains can tell us about the emerging global brain.
So, this is something that I won't go into here, maybe in the next talk.
But there's this question of if there is a global brain, is a global mind emerging?
Could the global mind even be like a conscious mind?
And I think that something that this paradigm, some sort of predictive power that it has would say that for that mind to emerge, the system might have to duplicate the dynamics that you see underlying conscious brain states.
So, not all brain states are conscious states.
When you go to sleep, before you enter a dream, there are periods where consciousness ceases to be, but the brain state is still functioning physiologically.
It's keeping you alive.
So, to understand how a global mind emerges from a global brain, we would probably want to look at human brains and looking at this transition between unconscious to consciousness.
Unconscious to conscious states.
And every level has novelty.
And so, they're not going to be exactly the same.
New properties will emerge.
So, it's not certain that these predictions will tell you everything about the higher level that hasn't emerged, but it will give you a sort of outline of the dynamics that could be really useful.
So, this process of recursive self-organization creates this hierarchical emergence that we saw at the beginning.
Now, we see exactly why it happens.
Now, we see exactly why it happens.
These things come together.
These units come together to make larger units because cooperating makes the thermodynamic task of staying far from equilibrium easier.
And you get the emergence of new properties as these higher levels emerge.
And so, with brains, which is left out of this, but with the emergence of brains, you have a system that can encode the causal consequences of its actions in real time.
And that allows the system to create a variable for itself.
Before brains, an organism that does something, like interacts with the environment, there's no synaptic plasticity.
There's no mechanism for creating a memory of the effects on that environment in real time.
And so, what brains allow is the system to encode the consequences of its actions, which gives it an understanding of itself.
It's really the beginning of self-modeling.
And so, something that's in addition to this concept of intelligence being about the size of the repertoire of mental states, which is increased by this niche emergence process that we discussed,
you also need to think about these levels of awareness that come from self-reference in the form of self-modeling.
So, that would be for another talk where we talk about, like, how does consciousness emerge from this?
But yeah, I just wanted to point out that these levels of awareness are another important factor of the emergence and growth of intelligence that we can't leave out.
And it's an emergent property.
So, this process of multilevel self-organization and recursive emergence is creating more complex structures, these, you know, hierarchical adaptive systems.
And these systems are, these evolutionary transitions are also revolutions in information storage and processing machinery.
So, we start out with genetic material.
And then brains emerge and we have neural memory that sits on top of the genetic memory.
And then we have collective form.
And then we have collective form.
And then we get cultural memory.
So, memory that's shared among all of the brains of the individuals in the system.
And then we get things like books and journals.
And then eventually technological memory, digital memory.
So, you can see that this process is a process of knowledge accumulation.
And that the biosphere and technology, the technosphere, you could call it, this is all one continuous process.
And I didn't talk about it here, but one of the big insights of Karl Popper's evolutionary epistemology was that science and adaptive learning all work through this variation and selection mechanism.
So, it's called trial and error learning in the developmental psychology literature.
And you can understand science as competing theories that works through like this Darwinian process and the mechanism.
He used the name for that was called conjecture and refutation.
But it's all trial and error learning.
It's all variation and selection.
So, you have these different models and then these models get tested and natural selection weeds out the models that aren't predictive of the environment.
So, what does the integrated evolutionary synthesis show us?
This theory of knowledge creation.
It shows us that knowledge is power.
It's not just a hollow buzz phrase from the digital age.
It's true in the most fundamental way.
Uncertainty reducing information is life's first and last weapon in the ongoing war with disorder.
And it infuses organic matter with control and causal power.
Without knowledge, life cannot exist for more than a moment, much less colonize the galaxy and beyond.
This suggests that setting out on the path toward cosmic superiority is not a choice that intelligent agents like Homo sapiens make upon careful reflection.
Nor is it just some quirky ambition we stumbled onto by chance.
Humanity's collective desire to transcend mortality and expand outward into space.
So apparent from our current scientific and technological endeavors emerges not incidentally, but as an inevitable consequence of the fact that continual knowledge acquisition is a fundamental biological imperative.
So, the sun is our source of energy.
It's what allows us to stay far from equilibrium.
Intelligent species that are modeling the world with increasing sophistication will realize that there's this thermodynamic game clock that if life is to persist in the long term, it has to leave the planet.
So, SpaceX isn't Elon Musk's creative idea.
This is an imperative that any sufficiently intelligent species will recognize.
And this has hopefully shown how natural selection is an information channel that pumps information from the inanimate world into life.
And through that process, nature begins modeling itself.
So, matter starts finding a configuration that allows it to model the world around it that it's part of.
So, it's encoding its own structure.
Reality is encoding its own structure and the universe begins to wake up.
So, some of the other wording was, you know, life ascending to this, you know, cosmic superiority and being able to dominate the cosmos.
But you can similarly look at this whole story, not as a battle between life and entropy and order and disorder, but that those things are complimentary.
So, they sort of need each other and they work together.
And so, it's not the case that life is dominating the cosmos.
It's that the universe itself is self-organizing through this process.
And that basically, life is an agent are these kinds of sensory modalities for the universe.
I think it's appropriate to look at it that way.
I don't think there's anything wrong with it.
So, here's a quote from Harold Morwitz, who was a founding member of the Santa Fe Institute.
He was a professor of mine and was a big inspiration on the book.
He says,
We start with observations and if the evolving cosmos has an observed direction, rejecting that view is clearly non-empirical.
There need not necessarily be a knowable endpoint, but there may be an arrow.
And so, Christoph Koch, one of the world's most respected neuroscientists, wrote,
The rise of sentient life within time's wide circuit was inevitable.
Teilhard de Chardin is correct in his view that islands within the universe, if not the whole cosmos, are evolving toward ever greater complexity and self-knowledge.
The universe is a work in progress.
The evidence from cosmology, biology, and history is compelling.
So, we're seeing a kind of change in sentiment, and it's been brewing for a long time, but that this idea, this paradigm of the universe being self-organizing and becoming increasingly complex is completely scientific.
And I think, given what we know, it has predictive power too.
We can understand, we can predict things about future emergencies.
So, I would like to see this paradigm of emergence replace the reductionist paradigm.
And where is this taking us?
So, this is a kind of far out speculation, but I think, you know, given the story told so far, it's okay to go here.
Paul Davies, super respected theoretical physicist, says,
Many scientists have speculated that as the timeline stretches toward infinity,
so an emerging super intelligence will become more and more godlike, so that in the final stage, the mind will emerge with the universe.
Mind and cosmos will be one.
He goes on,
Then the whole character of the universe, including the emergence of its laws and the nature of its state, sorry, of its states become inextricably intertwined with its mentality, with its mindfulness.
And so, what would that look like?
This is from Ray Kurzweil's, The Singularity is Near, where it shows this trajectory where life creates technology and it merges with technology.
And you get the universe waking up.
What about heat death?
Does this process happen and then fade out because the universe is going towards thermodynamic equilibrium?
Well, people like Stu Kaufman and David Deutsch have challenged the heat death scenario.
More and more physicists are with different alternative models, but some of these models basically say that the expanding universe allows for continual free energy supply.
I will get into that in another talk.
But yeah, so where is this heading?
Maybe something like this.
Maybe something like a cosmic mind.
Can't rule that out.
And yeah, this comes from that book.
The almighty Carl Friston was nice enough to give me a blurb for it.
If you email the romance of reality, if you buy it from Amazon or wherever and send me a screenshot of the receipt with your address, I'll send you a signed and numbered book plate.
It's like a sticker that goes inside the book.
And yeah, thank you so much for having me again.
Nice.
Thank you very much, Bobby.
Okay.
Let's take a deep breath and then to the question and answer.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Awesome.
Okay.
Wow.
Lot there.
So I'm just going to ask some questions that were asked in the live chat during the stream and also just some other ones I wrote down.
Okay.
So I'd like to start with one of the first parts of the stream.
You read the Dobzhansky quote, nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.
So famous and memeable quote.
Yeah.
My question was, what else is necessary and or sufficient for sense making in biology?
Like is evolution the only light or what are the lights that help us bring light to those issues?
So first part is about what else is necessary or sufficient.
And the second part is how should we move forward knowing what is necessary to make light of evolution?
Well, I guess it depends on how you define evolution because some people might be defining evolution very narrowly in terms of like the modern synthesis.
And someone might say, we need to understand self-organization.
We need to understand emergence.
But with this framework, all of those things are included under the umbrella of evolution.
So I'd say that you need evolution to understand the generation of complexity and intelligence.
this process.
But you need these, you know, it needs to be expanded to include these ideas about multi-level emergence and this process where you have like self-modeling.
So we need to understand like how self-reference fits into this picture.
Brains allow self-modeling and, you know, first you have the emergence of consciousness, which in this definition, I would be talking about, you know, subjective awareness, not necessarily like self-awareness or self-conscious.
So self-awareness would be a higher level of self-reference.
So those basically the, to explain all of this stuff, the evolutionary model would have to be this model of cosmic evolution, where you talk about, you know, adaptation through Darwinian competitive evolution, but you also have this cooperative evolution with self-organization, creating these new emergencies and these emergencies.
bringing about new properties, bringing about new causal powers and higher levels of awareness.
But, you know, it's, I don't want to be, it's like reductionistic to be like, is it all evolution?
So I think it's important.
There are a lot of trends today.
You're seeing like whiteheads process ontology coming back and this understanding of, you know, systems as processes rather than things.
I think that's enlightening.
I think that we need to talk about philosophy and metaphysics even.
So, for example, and I talked about this in my last talk, but we need to think about, you know, is hard determinism true or is reality a little bit more complex where reality fundamentally has this probabilistic element at the lowest level, but then, you know, these higher level systems emerge with, you know, these deterministic trajectories.
And you get, yeah.
You get, yeah.
So, so because the, the model, the hard determinism model that comes kind of from this Laplaceian model of reality, this idea that there's just particles following these trajectories, it has metaphysical and philosophical implications.
Like we have no agency, like we have no agency, that there's just one future and it's completely determined.
And if we had a powerful enough computer, we could even predict that.
It turns out that that's wrong.
And this new model allows for true agency and it allows for organisms that emerge that have something like free will.
And that term opens up a different bag of worms.
That's like something, you know, I'd like to talk about that in the next presentation.
But when I say free will, I'm talking about biological agency and the fact that organisms making decisions.
We're not just particles following trajectories, we're actually cybernetic control units that have emerged through these evolutionary processes that I explained this time.
Basically, those processes that are pumping information into the system, that information gives agents causal power such that you will see systems behave very differently than inanimate systems.
So an inanimate system like a rock only moves if it's pushed by a force.
But living systems, because they metabolize and store energy, they have self-generated motion and they're not predictable with classical mechanics.
You have to have some sort of higher level theory like Pristen's Bayesian brain hypothesis, the free energy principle.
So it's not that organisms aren't predictable at all.
You can actually predict what they will do based on saying, for example, that they're going to behave in a way that minimizes their models prediction error.
And that's very different than trying to calculate what the system is going to do based on these based on microphysics.
First of all, you can't do it.
Second of all, I'm saying that that idea is misguided to begin with because this process where natural selection pumps information into these adaptive systems creates systems that have what people like Sarah Walker and Paul Davies have called informational control.
So it creates these cybernetic systems, which use feedback mechanisms to stay far from equilibrium.
And we can't understand causality without understanding the role that information plays in biology.
So, yeah, evolution can explain a lot, but it requires us to talk about thermodynamics and information and really what information allows systems to do is to continue to persist in the world against this tendency towards decay.
Okay, I've noted it down.
Okay, I've noted it down.
I have causal powers, free will, agency, the role of information, evolution, energy, thermodynamics for the part three.
So, let's leave a little footnote there.
I wanted to add a few kind of resonances that I saw with active inference, like places where there was a nice plugin or like a saddle point between the way that you framed it just in this nice presentation and in some of the ways that people are modeling in active inference today.
So, you provided a Dawkins quote with survival of the stable and that is kind of like a operational definition for the related claim survival of the fittest.
And people sometimes say, well, that's circular and survival of the stable almost says like it steps into that circularity.
It's like, yes, in fact, it is that way.
And that's what our operational definition is.
Repeated measurements is going to be what a thing is over a given timescale.
So, there might be some spatial or temporal scale where a gradient or a boundary or a blanket does exist, but that's going to be like an observer and a relational specific situation rather than like an all or none question about what kinds of things and processes exist.
So, just wanted to give that one and then I have a few more, but what do you think about that?
Like, where does this survival of the stable come in and how do you think that's different than how sometimes people have framed evolution and ecology in the past?
So, yeah, there is this criticism of the survival of the fittest being this kind of tautological hollow statement because what's, you know, what survives is what's fit, but what's fit and you define it as what survives.
So, you're not really getting to the bottom of it.
But this, that's one thing that's one of the, like, I guess, highlights of this integrated synthesis is we get an answer to that.
And you're right, saying what's stable, you know, it actually kind of embraces that thing.
Like, what works persist or what's stable persists kind of has that same problem, but the thermodynamic perspective gives it a specific answer.
It says what is stable is what's able to extract energy from the environment.
So, it's what's functional.
So, we finally have an answer to, like, what fitness is that isn't tautological.
It's a system's ability to extract energy to stay far from equilibrium, but also avoid threats because if something kills you, it's going to rupture the Markov blanket and you are going to collapse to equilibrium.
You're going to die.
So, yeah, the answer to, like, what fitness is, is this ability to evade thermodynamic decay.
Okay.
Okay.
Thank you.
Let me go to the next one of these resonances because, again, I really like how it was laid out and I guess how many paths we walked around some core points.
You mentioned learning and adaptation and seeing those in a new light, like on part of a new continuum.
And so, that's a lot like an active inference, how there's similarity in how perception is modeled and in how slower and even slower processes of learning and memory happen.
And all of that is framed as a type of parameter finding.
Whether that's what organisms are doing, which is realism, that's one perspective.
Or whether it's just a way that we can model organisms, that's another perspective, instrumentalism.
So, like, when the perception of the ball crossing the visual field is happening, is that perception of the location, especially if we think from this generative approach, like the Bayesian brain, is it perception?
Yes.
Is it learning the parameter, like in a technical sense, like machine learning of a parameter?
Is it learning the parameter representing the location?
Also, yes.
So, there's kind of a connection between learning and adaptation.
And because data and observations coming in through the blanket are sometimes, like, sparse, conflated, related through causal mechanisms that aren't directly observed, all these challenges with them,
evolution shapes systems' ability for their sense-making with the statistical regularities of the niche.
And that's been something that has been approached from people outside of the free energy principle, octave inference, just from different angles.
For example, like collective behavior with the work of Deborah Gordon and thinking about how collective behavior evolves to be fitting statistical regularities of different niches, like four ant colonies, like you mentioned.
And then also, on the other hand, this imperative to be fitting literally the statistical regularities of the niche leads directly to the embedded and the inactive, all the four E's, etc.
And then the kind of piece that ties that all together is you talked about the need to extract free energy, like in a chemical sense, in a dissipative situation.
You need to extract chemical free energy, liberatable work from the environment.
And then in order to navigate the uncertainty at higher and higher levels, more and more planning has to come into play.
And then that is like modeled with variational free energy in active inference, which isn't exactly like that liberatable biochemical energy.
But it seems to be, and people interpret it differently, but they overlap in certain situations because the systems that are planning well are planning well to extract energy.
The systems that are not planning well are not succeeding at extracting effective energy.
So like there is a relationship, even though those variables are not formally the same.
Yes.
Yeah.
Very cool.
So, um, yeah, it's, it's, it's this story of free energy, um, that the active inference paradigm is exploiting, but it becomes literal.
So minimizing information, theoretic free energy or predictive model air is exactly what allows the system to minimize actual thermodynamic free energy.
So if you look at the biosphere as a whole system, you can look at individual agents, individual organisms, or these collectives, Maxwell Remstead and Fristin have done work showing that, you know, at these talking about complex adaptive systems that are societies, these things are minimizing free energy as well.
Um, so yeah, basically, um, you, you have this story, this kind of neat little story where you can explain it all in terms of like different types of entropies.
So life is trying to keep internal entropy low.
And to do that, it needs to extract free energy.
Um, but by extracting free energy, it's dissipating more of the world's free energy supply.
So it's keeping internal entropy low and increasing external entropy.
And it does that by minimizing its prediction error.
And that's minimizing Shannon entropy or uncertainty or ignorance.
So, yes, um, I think what one kind of goal of this, you know, integrated synthesis is to, um,
basically it can incorporate the, the, the free energy principle, um, because, uh, to minimize, um, actual thermodynamic free energy to stay far from equilibrium,
you have to minimize your uncertainty of the environment.
And that's what, you know, Bayesian inference is doing.
And so, um, there's one other point I was going to make about that.
Yeah, well, yeah.
So, um, I mean, the free energy principle, I think on its own, you know, it's just saying that systems will minimize, uh, you know, the models prediction error,
but it doesn't talk about like how you get like more complex species or anything.
It doesn't really tell us this whole story of evolution.
It just talks about minimizing free energy.
So, uh, what this story does is starts to get us think about, uh, thinking about niches and, um, that each niche, uh, represents this set of challenges.
And this set of computational problems and that, um, uh, systems, uh, basically when, when you want to think about like why complexity increases, um, well, so minimizing free energy, like trying to reduce surprise, uh, will keep you, um, far from equilibrium only for so long.
So if the environment changes, then that species will die, that species will get filtered out by natural selection.
So, um, there is a benefit to being curious.
There's a benefit to seeking out surprise.
And that's because, um, basically, um, if you can find a new niche to exploit, then you don't have to compete with, uh, everyone else in the species or whatever.
Group that is.
So it's not just about minimizing surprise.
Uh, in, in, in many cases, um, you know, uh, more complex species, the most complex species, especially like humans.
Um, it's beneficial, um, um, um, be curious and do epistemic foraging and try to, you know, imagine the space of possible configurations where society is headed.
So there's this, um, um, real benefit, uh, to, to seeking out new knowledge that I think the free energy principle may kind of leave out or hint at.
Awesome.
Thanks for sharing that.
Just to add a few more points.
Um, so you mentioned Daniel Dennett's 1995 book, Darwin's dangerous idea.
Um, and one of the really memorable parts in that book is this distinction between the cranes and the sky hooks.
And the image is like a building is constructed.
And then we're going to see the artifact, but not the process of how it was made.
And then ask like, was this likely constructed by a crane that put the last windows on the top or put the last piece of, um, you know, building on top.
Or was there a sky hook that built kind of a castles in the sky and then built down.
And, um, the constructivist answer just to your construction site, but like a biological constructivist answer, which is to say like a developmental perspective.
It's like, well, it was cranes all the way down and smaller cranes are basically constructing larger cranes if needed.
And then at some level, there's like some, um, way for the seething of tiny, tiny cranes somehow to facilitate larger cranes arising.
Um, so I was reminded of the cranes and sky hooks.
And, and then as you just brought up in that light answer, last answer, and in some of the figures, the design approach connects us with that kind of Darwinian constructivism that Dennett laid out, but also you connected that to, um, process ontology.
And that in a sense, this constructivism, this niche constructivism and the way that the bottom of forces are leading to increasingly powerful, large scale organizations of systems, like whether we call it life or adaptive complexity, like you laid it out.
Um, I'm seeing a sort of, um, I'm seeing a sort of omega point direction towards, instead of like finite competition, curiosity driven niche creation for certain systems or maybe something involving other scales where like there's a rebalancing of the relevance of different mechanisms.
Because we're seeing the adaptive complexity process playing out in a different way.
But that was what I was thinking and wondering how this framing influences how we act.
Yeah.
So I think, um, uh, it basically demystifies what looks like a teleological process.
And I still think it's okay to call it teleological because it is goal directed, but it's not teleological the way some, you know, theologians have used it to mean that there's this mystical force or something like, well, it's really interesting.
It gets into like language issues because like, uh, uh, Henry Bergson, who, uh, coined that term, Ilan Vital and T.R. Desjardins, who had a similar concept of radial energy.
And even going back to Aristotle and his intellect, um, and Tilos, um, these people claim to be talking about something natural, even T.R.
And, uh, uh, so what we're seeing is that you can have this directional evolutionary process, uh, without there being any mystical force.
So it's, you know, it's not the case where, where demystifying everything and then getting, you know, because we got rid of this teleological force, we've showed that it doesn't exist.
It's this mystical, you know, um, immaterial force, like pushing things toward progress, uh, by showing that doesn't exist, we're not killing the argument that evolution is progressive.
We're actually showing that this idea can exist in a completely naturalistic framework.
And to me, it makes it more interesting, but you do clearly see this statistical tendency towards higher intelligence.
And not only that evolution advances at a rate that allows life to leave the planet before it's star dies.
And that's specifically because the process creates consciousness and higher levels of awareness that, um, basically create this imperative in the, uh, most intelligent species of a biosphere, such that they understand that long-term persistence requires getting off the planet.
So, um, yeah, it is the case that, that a lot of species just evolved to be, um, as complex as their niche.
And if they're getting their energy, uh, just fine, like bacteria, there's no reason for there to be any pressure towards higher complexity.
But with humans, for example, we start to construct our environment.
We construct niches, we build all of this order around us, and we create these new selection pressures and we create all of these new biologically relevant variables.
So there's a tendency where the most complex species, uh, basically how many variables they have to model is open-ended.
And anyone who is willing to kind of go beyond, um, you know, the amount of things that most people model, um, is going to have some sort of advantage.
Let me make that a little bit more clear.
So someone in some very simple, let's say small, rural, rural conservative town, and I'm not saying that in a bad way, but, um, you could imagine, uh, you know, a culture with a simple lifestyle.
It might not be, um, adaptive to be someone like Roger Penrose, like some freak genius.
I think I read that like Penrose gets like lost, like walking around like his office and stuff.
Like he's just really absent-minded because his head's probably in the clouds thinking about mathematics.
He might not do well.
He might even be considered like the town's like crazy person in a small conservative town.
So if your niche is simple, you don't have to have a complex, uh, world model and something simple, like a worldview, like a religion can serve you just fine.
It might actually be better because it's this sense-making lens that simplifies reality.
But if you're motivated, uh, and you're someone who wants to, uh, take on, you know, this, I guess, you know, modeling more variables in the world, there will always be, uh, niches for you to exploit at places like academic universities and corporations where there are these niches that, um, create this environment.
And that means there will be this evolutionary tendency towards, um, there's actually this pressure towards, um, more complex models.
And that means these, there will be this evolutionary tendency towards organisms with a larger mental repertoire.
Um, so this niche emergence process where you get these increasingly complex species, you can actually measure that increase using something like integrated information theories, phi,
which measures basically the size of the mental repertoire.
And, uh, so that's what, uh, this niche emergence process is doing.
It's creating increasingly complex species that are more intelligent because they have a larger repertoire of accessible mental states.
But on top of that, you have this other, uh, component of intelligence, which relates to, um, how the system is reflecting on itself.
So you get these emergence of higher levels of, um, awareness.
And I didn't talk about this, but that's really what the prefrontal cortex in the brain does.
It's a module that unites these other computational modules, which often do processing, uh, individually.
Um, there's this global workspace that emerges and basically, um, that's a meta system transition as well.
So as far as like, uh, kind of lessons for society, um, I think, uh, you know, part of intelligence is these levels of awareness where you have consciousness and then you have self-consciousness or self-awareness that leads to different types of behavior.
Um, but then there's another level that you might call meta awareness and it's realizing that you're a conscious agent in a network of conscious agents that form this higher level meta system that we call society.
Um, and, um, um, um, so, uh, basically to, uh, and I hinted at this during the talk to overcome our existential challenges, our sustainability challenges, um, ensuring that artificial intelligence, um, isn't used in this way that destroys civilization.
Um, all of these big problems, um, all of these big problems require us coming together and the nations working cooperatively, um, because it solving those problems requires the computational power of the full system.
So we need to cooperate to basically exploit this synergistic effect that occurs when you work with others rather than working alone.
The other, the other thing I guess I'd say right now about, um, kind of lessons for society is that complexity is really a function of two things.
You need a lot of parts, um, and the parts need to be highly connected.
The more connections between the parts and the more diversity there is among the components, then the more complex that system is and the more computational power.
Uh, it can have.
So, um, that's basically why you can't have life emerge.
If you only have like all hydrogen elements are all oxygen elements.
Like you can't just have like one or two types of atoms.
You need, um, this distribution of molecules because they play, they function as something like a division of labor.
So at the society level, uh, a society full of the exclusively made of engineers or made of doctors or made of artists, like none of those societies would be functional if they had one type of person.
So you need a diversity among the component parts and you want a lot of connections between those parts.
So technology that, um, uh, connects us, um, not just the internet, but social media and blockchain technology, anything that bypasses middlemen.
And as starting to make all of these connections between the units, those things are good.
They can also be bad as well.
Um, we don't want to connect in a way where we become some sort of homogenous hive mind.
I know when I say the global brain, a lot of people express problems with that fears over becoming this kind of hive mind, which I think China's government is like, like basically trying to create.
And they have this philosophy of that, the, the, the, the citizens, um, recognizes that they're part of an interdependent whole.
And they kind of use this to, you know, tell people like, uh, convince people that like surveillance and all of these other things, like, you know, that takeaway freedoms is good because you're doing it for the greater good.
Um, so what this paradigm says is that we want to become increasingly connected, but we don't want to be homogenous because we want diversity among the component parts and a system like that, especially a system that doesn't allow criticism.
Um, doesn't allow for a diversity of ideas.
Um, a system that's homogenous doesn't allow for cultural diversity.
So diversity and interconnection is good.
We want to come together.
We want to bring the nations together, but we also want to, um, keep the, uh, identities of the nations at the same time.
We want to preserve the cultures.
Um, a brain is super integrated, uh, with, you know, 80 billion neurons and 10,000 connections between each of those, those neurons, but it's also structured hierarchically.
Um, and you have these different levels of modules and you have, you know, you have like the fusiform face area, processing phases.
You have like the visual cortex doing visual stuff, all this, all these things are specialized, but they're working together.
And I think that provides a model for optimizing society and that, um, evolutionary principles can inform, um, how we structure our governance systems, our economic systems.
Okay.
A few more questions if you'd like, is that cool?
Sure.
Yeah.
All right.
So you've mentioned a few things about the trajectory towards integration.
What do you say to, you see that where you see it up until you don't and where you don't see it.
So how do we really assess what is like, what must happen or what probably happens given our really limited knowledge and how do we sort of balance this optimization across multiple points in a design space with this N equals one trajectory that our one body, one spaceship earth, all this sort of stuff is, um, limited by in the scenario that we're in.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, I mean, we can't see, you know, what we don't know.
Uh, so I'm definitely not arguing that this process is inevitable, uh, in the way that would make our civilization incapable of failing.
Um, evolution towards higher progress occurs, um, because life is always learning from its mistakes.
So it's failing, it's failing constantly.
And, um, I didn't mention this principle in the book.
I call it Popper's principle, but it says problems create progress.
So it's a story of this, you know, this eternal thermodynamic challenge of staying far from equilibrium, which requires extracting energy, um, which requires also avoiding threats and just maintaining the stable state in the face of, uh, you know, a chaotic and noisy world.
And, um, um, that, uh, yeah, it's, it's basically the challenges that we face that, uh, force us to find solutions.
Um, so it's not this straight march of progress.
It's not teleological in that way where there's like nothing stopping our failure.
We're actually going to fail over and over, but because there's memory, uh, we, we learn from our mistakes.
Um, as long as you know that those failures are encoded in memory in some way, you get this progressive process.
And, um, um, as far as like, how do we handle like what we don't know, um, we have to actually engage in this process that, uh, I would say is very Bayesian.
Um, we have to, um, try to imagine all of the possible futures.
We have to map out all of the counterfactuals because that sort of allows us to see the possibility space.
And if we don't do this, we're like sitting ducks, like there's, there's no way for us to be able to handle the challenges that are coming.
And, uh, it was interesting, like writing the book, um, and thinking about these ideas and, you know, going from non-equilibrium thermodynamics to finding out about like the free energy principle.
And that it's basically part of this non-equilibrium story, like how systems persist in a universe, abiding by the second law of thermodynamics.
Uh, I was talking, I was telling a friend about it.
Um, who was in design school, I think it was Parsons design school.
And they had this class they were teaching on future forecasting.
And it was literally, I guess it was for people like architects, all types of jobs, but their job was to map out like the different possibilities of reality.
And like the different trajectories of ways we could go.
And they had to map out what was like likely and like less likely.
And, you know, at all these different levels of likelihood, but if one thing, if, if current events have showed us anything, it's that things don't always happen that we predict are likely.
I don't think Trump becoming president would have seemed likely 10 years ago.
I don't think, um, the pandemic, I don't think the storming of the Capitol would have seemed likely.
Um, so we actually have to do the work of mapping out the space of all possible futures.
And this is part of planning.
I mean, this is what good planning does.
This is made possible by the prefrontal cortex.
We can uniquely do this, you know, process because, uh, we're, you know, at the leading edge of intelligence.
Um, but it's, it's a practice that we have to engage in.
Um, now, if we want to be prepared for the future.
Awesome.
Awesome.
I just wanted to post this out on a little bit more of a general or personal note, perhaps.
Wanted to hear your view on how the writing and the reception of your book, as opposed to say other live stream appearances or articles you've written.
How did that process of writing the book update your sense of science's direction, especially in terms of global participation and education and research?
Like, where are we at with science inclusion, participation, and just where is science going with all these topics that you thread together in the work?
Like, where does that bundle of science go?
And how to change?
How did writing the book update the way that you were seeing that?
Yeah.
So I guess the first thing I would say was that it became very apparent, especially reading about evolutionary epistemology and Karl Popper, because, uh, his work was the philosophy of science.
And epistemology and epistemology and it became really clear that academia kind of, um, you know, you, you can't think of an idea like too radical.
Everything you do has to be based on past research.
You can't just invent a question and, you know, write a paper about like some, like if you tried to submit a paper to a journal that didn't reference past work, it would not have any chance of getting accepted.
Um, and this is good in a way because it forces people to read the literature and understand what's out there.
Um, but it's really constraining and you have this publisher parish game that makes it such that people are just going where there's, you know, easy publication.
So, uh, you're in, you're, you're being conservative.
You want to just build very small, uh, incrementally on the work that has come before.
But the problem is that if you have this big integrated view, because you've looked at all of these things, you know,
all of these different fields, like if you look at, you know, from biology to neuroscience, to thermodynamics, to information theory, uh, cybernetics, um, you're going to be seeing connections.
That people that are just like biologists working in the field, like in paying attention to those mainstream biology journals that they just don't see.
And, um, there's so, so there's not enough interdisciplinary, like connection collaboration.
Um, there's not enough emphasis.
There's not enough appreciation for generalists.
Like everybody's like, um, uh, basically pressured to be a specialist in science.
And, um, we really need generalists right now to step back and look at all the different fields and not just fields of science, but philosophy.
Because anytime you do science, you're making philosophical and metaphysical assumptions.
Um, and, uh, yeah, the, and the, the, the hardest problems that you haven't understood, like say the hard problem of consciousness, it's always philosophy at first.
That's going to kind of define like the territory, like make you understand, like what, what the problem is and like how to approach it.
So we need generalists, we need scientists working with philosophers.
We need scientists becoming philosophers.
We need philosophers caring more about science and all of these mechanisms rather than just like picking panpsychism as a stance because it seems cool to you.
And then you just defend it for the rest of your career.
I also see a lot of philosophers just picking like illusionism or something and sticking to it.
Like, I think that's bad too.
We should all be, you know, excited about updating our model when new evidence comes in that.
Um, so yeah, we, we shouldn't get tied to any one idea too much and, um, not, you know, there's a role for specialists.
I mean, people solve these really hard problems in their fields because they're just kind of have this one track mind and tunnel vision.
But at the time we're at right now, so like make progress and truly like apply this stuff like to society because societies are complex adaptive systems.
Like it's a big mistake to think like these things can't like these scientific understanding of like evolutionary mechanisms and emergence can't inform like our institutions and our sense of morals.
That's a big mistake.
So, um, yeah, writing it, uh, that just became very apparent that, um, and I was lucky enough to have, I mentioned him before, Harold Morwitz as a professor.
And he was just someone, you know, it was a neuroscience department, but he was the origin of life researcher.
So, you know, he got us like understanding that like, we, we had to start thinking about like, you know, energy, like free energy and, uh, staying far from equilibrium.
Um, that information theory is important and epistemology, um, that, uh, and Santa Fe Institute is, you know, a good place to mention because their work is interdisciplinary by nature.
And, um, um, so yeah, uh, we need to be that way and we need to push back on the culture that like, actually some scientists are threatened by this and like the extended evolutionary synthesis.
Like if you read that guardian article, I mentioned that, you know, a lot of these scientists are saying that we need to extend the modern synthesis.
A lot of scientists were really mad and insulted by that.
And they feel like it's attacking this sacred thing.
And some of them might even, you know, um, claim that some concepts are pseudoscience.
I still see people thinking like emergence, like some people thinking, you know, some of these different concepts from complexity science are like not real science.
And a lot of times those are people that are just have been like indoctrinated by like, uh, militant reductionism.
I won't like go like, you know, talk too bad about reductionism.
It's a great method, but it's a terrible philosophy and worldview.
Um, so yeah, I think there needs to be a big.
Okay.
I think there's a huge push to have an awareness that we need generalist.
We need people looking at everything.
And I think people who aren't in academia, who are interested in this kind of stuff, people who follow the channel, but they're not like at a university, they have a big role to play here and they can.
You know, see these connections and blog about it, whatever they do to like create content that kind of shapes the narrative.
Because that's one thing I've seen, like the narrative does get shaped by culture and by these people who are really good at articulating things.
Um, Daniel Schmachtenberger is kind of like a complexity theorist philosopher.
But you know, I, as far as I'm aware, he doesn't have like, you know, he's, he's not in academia, but, um, people like this are kind of like showing us these connections and trying to create a sense making lens.
Out of our scientific paradigms.
And, um, I think we're going in the direction.
I think we're going in the direction.
I'm, I'm excited to see, like, I've been finding all these new communities.
So I'm looking for them like meta modern communities and a game B.
And, uh, these people are looking for this kind of like integrated, uh, paradigms and it's pretty exciting.
Thanks for the answer.
Just to share a few more ideas and you can feel free to respond or we can go as long as you want.
So when you were mentioning those regimes of attention, which is an active inference term, meaning the regimes of action and cognitive states, like what entities are doing in the niche and what their cognitive models are.
And in the social context that relates to the concept of scripts, like strong and weak scripts.
And when it comes to science broadly, that niche and the scripts and the norms and the archetypes and all the different players include like the journals, the publishers, what people are paying attention to the public science, meme pages, like everything.
And then I heard the call for the normalization of transdisciplinary collaboration, which implies at least like an island of shared generalism.
Like not everyone in the transdisciplinary collaboration is going to be pan generalist, but there has to be some overlap in their Venn diagram or some way that they can align in their perspectives, which is related to generalism or being able to take different vistas on the differences between the perspectives.
And then like that transdisciplinary collaboration, whether in the mind of one person or teams, it happens and hopefully will happen at the informal, like everyday level, just bringing that kind of curiosity and synthesis to like, well, it's really cool that the algae are growing here next to the waterfall and not here.
What does that mean about uncertainty or how are they minimizing free energy by living here, not there?
So that kind of like everyday embodied science conversation.
And then also hopefully the rigorous, like decentralized science, D-Sci research that teams and communities could be carrying out.
So I just thought it was kind of cool how this is a idea that applies to like the whole continuum of what today is occupied by like research institutions doing research.
And then like the, the citizenry and the population receiving a very certain kind of science communication and not necessarily like a including or an engaging one.
And then just the last point was I heard you talk about pluralism and this sort of like Bayesian pluralism.
Like you have a portfolio of models and maybe on some features or over some timescales, some fit better than another, but just one model in a portfolio of models, like one investing strategy or one chess move transiently doing better in a situation is hardly like something objective about that strategy or that chess move.
It's something that should be a chess move.
It's something that should be seen in context and across this distribution of all the chess moves and so on.
So I think that's a really rich angle and that avenue of scientific pluralism, which Helen Longano and others have explored is really rewarding because it just speaks to some of those questions about like modernism and game B and so on and resolving the sometimes apparent tension.
Tension between like multiple truths and scientific pursuit of what is epistemically good.
Tension between like three states is kind of the devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil's devil
I think we're seeing, you know, all of these things are popping up partially because the pandemic, it was great that like, you know, people had to embrace like Zoom because we were going crazy being by ourselves.
But yeah, I'm seeing so much excitement regarding like these kind of questions like the hard problem of consciousness, like, you know, origin of life, all of this stuff people are super excited about to where like all of, you know, these people working in these fields from science to AI, they've become like celebrities.
And it's amazing that I saw the kind of progression in the last few years, where the kind of the amount of knowledge of people who weren't in academia just was like so much higher than it was before.
Like I would say like 10 years ago, being on Facebook, like regular people were learning about like Schrodinger scat and like making jokes about it and making memes about it.
And, you know, there were these specific ideas, things that, you know, Stephen Hawking wrote about in a brief history of time, like black holes, singularities, whatever.
There were all these topics that people were like getting into and like understanding enough to where they were becoming memes.
But like in the last few years, I've seen this like crazy explosion where like people in these communities, like these like Facebook groups or on Twitter.
I mean, they know a lot.
They know sometimes like it seems like they have a lot more knowledge as far as like the philosophical context of one like problem than the actual like experts in the field.
And so I think this is great.
Life was inevitable.
The emergence of life.
It wasn't saying anything about the emergence of intelligence or anything.
But so it was a pretty.
It was a pop article, but it got into like thermodynamics, non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
And but it had this like catchy title is the universe pro-life.
And Sean Carroll was nice enough to give a quote for it and then retweet it with like an endorsement.
And I think that helped get the book deal.
But so I was pitching it to different publishers and Harvard, the Harvard editor saw that article and was interested.
And we had lunch and I told him about it.
But like when he heard like the whole story and then saw the proposal, he was like, this is just like too big.
I'm not sure like which reviewers to get for this because it's just, you know, so many different fields.
It seemed like very philosophical to him.
It was great because then I got my publisher, Ben Bella, which publishes like pop science books.
And that gave me the freedom to write something like this big in scope.
So it's great that popular science books exist.
I hope more scientists, you know, start writing like stuff like outside of their field and journals.
But it was funny because once I wrote it, the, you know, my agent was like, this is really technical.
I'm not sure how it's going to do because it's written at a college level and like, you know, usually pop books are written at like a high school level.
And so it turned out being a book that probably would have worked for like an academic press.
But so, yeah, I wasn't sure how it was going to be received because it had this larger kind of teleological narrative that was purely mechanistic.
And so far, it's been great.
It was really surprising that I got people who people like Michael Shermer, who are, you know, known for being like skeptics and atheists because, you know, they felt that it was, you know, the mechanisms were articulated well enough to show that, you know, something like this teleological narrative.
It was, you know, was, you know, was legitimate science and something really exciting.
But it was funny because like, I won't say this person's name, but they were a famous cosmologist that I thought would be really into the ideas of the book because it were these ideas of like emergence and kind of this teleological stuff.
And that person was like really influential in that kind of niche area.
But they said that they thought that the book was written, you know, super well and that they thought it would be successful, but that he couldn't endorse it because it was it talked to it mentioned too many reductionists.
It was like too much reliant on Richard Dawkins and Dan Dennett.
So where I thought it was really going to appeal to like the spiritual scientists, it was like too reductionistic for them.
And then for some maybe reductionist scientists, it was too much like on the emergent side.
So it was, it became very clear there was a culture war and that we've been held back from progress, just talking about like a science of agency, like it, an emergence.
These ideas for some reductionists, like we're too abstract and not well-defined and we're considered pseudoscience or like new age stuff or, you know, whatever, theology.
So both sides have to kind of see where the other side's coming from and what they have to contribute.
And I hope the book, you know, I wish I would have had a year, two more years to like really make the book what it was.
It feels like something that's like not complete or something that needs to be like continually updated because they're definitely open questions.
Like I forgot to like put, I didn't have time to like address like the Fermi paradox stuff that was like really relevant and hopefully I've talked about in these talks.
But I was really happy with the way, you know, people who are looking for a science book have embraced and got excited about this larger story of purpose and progress because it totally changes the narrative.
It really just goes from the reductionist worldview, which said, you know, life and mind are epiphenomena and we don't have true agency and that life is transient.
It's a really nihilistic, depressing worldview to a scientific worldview that does have spiritual implications.
We're not, we're not, we're not, we're not, we're not destined for transience.
And one person wrote me and said something like understanding this worldview made reality like, or like just the general experience of being alive, feel different, feel like more infused with like meaning and purpose.
And that, you know, that would be like one of the major goals of that is that, you know, people don't feel like life is some sort of fluke or cosmic accident that we're actually a natural manifestation of physical laws.
and that this actually,
it's not just this optimistic picture
that's fun to believe.
It actually gives us a picture
of where we might be going
and how to deal with that.
So doing this thing that I mentioned
about like mapping out all the counterfactuals
so we can ensure that we move along the trajectory
that's consistent with the continual existence
and progression of life.
So yeah, let's open our arms to philosophy
and metaphysics and anything that can inform
the scientific picture
because science needs philosophy.
Amazing.
Bobby, thank you again for this
and really appreciate the time.
And we'll plan point three when the time is right.
So good luck with everything and see you around.
Thank you so much, Daniel.
Love the questions.
Thanks to everybody else who is in the chat or whatever.
Appreciate it.
All right.
Thank you.
Have a good one.
Bye.





























































Thank you.

## S-tFHIqtbSI

Hello and welcome everyone. This is ACTIMPF Guest Stream 15.3. Lucky number three with Bobby.
We're here with Bobby Azarian as well as some guests. We're going to have a discussion,
talk about a range of different topics. It's June 1st, 2023. First, Adam and Michael can
introduce themselves. Then Bobby will pass it off to you for sharing your screen and facilitating
this however you see fit. So Adam, go for it. Hello, I'm Adam. I am a research fellow at the
Johns Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research. Long standing interest
in the free energy principle, consciousness, free will, psychedelics, artificial intelligence.
And along the way, I met and befriended Bobby and I guess proud to be part of the movement.
So thanks for coming, Adam. Yeah, Adam, I wish we would have time to get into this today,
but Adam has presented a pretty clear mechanistic model of free will, cybernetic free will. And
there's just this huge problem where, and I'll keep this short, we're going to introduce Michael,
but basically the main kind of straw man against free will is that there's this argument that you
have this non-physical mind doing like stuff outside of causality. And that's why everyone's
rejecting it as not a scientific idea. But of course, something can't work if it's not,
doesn't have mechanism. If it's not real, it's not real. So it's kind of a ridiculous debate to have.
If you want to talk about what people are talking about when they discuss free will. In the past,
we didn't have mechanisms to understand what that was, but now we understand things like top-down
causation. We understand control. And when you have that language, you can actually talk about what
free will is in a mechanistic way. And that just changes the debate completely. That's not enough to
convince people that there's something called free will because there's a lot of issues that we get
into. But Adam's one of the people that have been taking this nebulous concept and have been trying
to show that there's actually a very specific set of mechanisms and it's nothing outside of science,
but it is science that is outside of our current paradigm. It's just dynamics that we don't normally,
that weren't included in the previous model. So it looks like magic, but it's actually,
there's stuff going on there. So yeah, we're going to have a longer discussion with Adam.
In the future, either on my channel, or maybe we'll come back and make it all about free will
because it's such a big topic. But yeah, thanks for coming.
And invite Michael as well. So, yeah, you want to,
Am I supposed to take the wheel now? Yeah. Obviously I'm a fan of Bobby's. I very much like,
well, I think it's important. I think the work that Bobby is trying to articulate and Adam,
I'm a fan. So this is the first time we've met, but I've watched some of your stuff as well. And
Daniel, obviously we've talked. And yeah, let's just yield to Bobby and let's see where we go here.
Yeah. Michael has a background in kind of system science and those kinds of things. That's how we
kind of resonate is kind of like the system science approach, but thinking about how system science can
be applied to like psychology and organizational issues. So how to make this stuff that's very
theoretical, practical. And so we're kind of working on that on the side. And then Brendan
Grand MC will be coming and joining the conversation since he's not here right now. I'll just give a
little introduction for him. He's the author of a book called Emergentism, and he has a Facebook
group called Metamodern Spirituality. And basically he's in that book, he's turned this emergence paradigm,
which is basically kind of the opposite of the reductionist paradigm, into something like a sort
of secular religion. And so he's talking about a lot of these same things. So he'll join us shortly,
probably. I think he's watching the stream and is trying to get into the Zoom link.
So yeah, we can start. It'd be great for this to be sort of a discussion. So if anything
I say triggers any sort of thoughts or criticisms, please speak up because I don't have an organized
set of slides. And there's a lot to talk about. And the problem really when I was trying to make
these slides was like everything I say kind of gets into something else. And so I had like a
hundred slides and I was just trying to organize them in the last minute. So I think, you know,
I have some slides that were made in the past for other presentations that are just going to be
kind of like a roadmap. But we can veer off of that. And I'm going to be saying a lot of stuff
that's not in the slides. Yeah, so I guess we can start. So I'll share my screen because I just shared
my screen for my computer and I couldn't see you. But I think the trick to that is to share my screen
through Zoom and then share do like slideshow and then I should be able to see your faces on the side.
Yep. Okay, so you can see my screen now. Yep. And then if I do slideshow, it doesn't cover you up.
Perfect. Yeah. Perfect.
Okay. Um, so
Bobby, just before you get started, I believe Brendan's joined us as well.
Hey, Brendan.
We warmed up the crowd.
His audio is probably not connected yet. But um, yeah, so we can just begin.
Uh, hey, Brendan, I introduced you and uh,
Yeah, I was just saying YouTube version and I got the link. So great. It's a pleasure to be here.
Thanks for the introduction. Appreciate it.
Yeah, no problem. Please feel free to like chime in at any time because I really need help here.
I'm not like prepared to do this by myself. So, um, and maybe you can play the role of the critic too,
because I should have invited some like anti free will people because, um, or just some skeptics of
these ideas because what I realized is like, I'm saying these things, a lot of them were the things
in my book, the romance reality. And I make that argument as clear as I can, but then people have
criticisms that for whatever reason, you know, how I worded it, don't address those. And then they're
not convinced. And then I do nothing to convince anyone who doesn't already believe this. So it's
actually a lot more, um, fruitful if there's a sort of this dialectical debate, like this dynamic,
because then you hear both sides and then I can actually address the things that people think are the
issues that might, um, you know, cast out on some of the things that I'm arguing. So, um, the teleological
stance. So this is the name of the self-help system for a lack of a better, uh, term. I know people
hear self-help and they think, uh, you know, that's something like cheesy and new age or, you know, BS.
And there are a lot of like, you know, snake oil salesmen in this place. And I think that's why
it's so important that we try if possible to create something like a self-help system and, you know,
something almost like a religion, like something that has practices and a sort of instruction manual
for living, um, based on scientific principles. Now it doesn't have to be based on, you know,
science won't explain everything, um, or address everything. Um, but this provides a foundation
where we can actually start to build a logic where we can go. Some of these things are right. And some
of these things aren't, and we can start to see things that have been said in folk psychology or new
age practices that people just considered to be non-scientific or pseudoscience. We can see how
that maps on to some of these newer mechanisms that we're understanding because now we're starting to
look at biology and neuroscience and psychology from the perspective of information theory and
thermodynamics. And these are like revealing new mechanisms that I believe can create a bridge
between reductionist science and the higher sciences, but also a lot of these statements you'll hear,
you know, things that you hear in like spiritual circles, or people are doing practices or, uh, and,
you know, just different little things that they find to be very effective. In most cases,
there's a scientific explanation for why those things are effective. And most science-minded people
are ignoring all that stuff. So they're like throwing out all of these things that emerged because they
were adaptations like practices, um, you know, community building, things like that are just
completely being ignored. Um, and that's really bad. It's just throwing the baby out with the bathwater.
And as long as we have that mentality, um, you know, scientists, they may say, you know, I don't want to
promote religion, organized religion, let's say, or, you know, like kind of new age spirituality. I don't
want to promote that, but they're actually helping keep those things in existence because the, a lot of
regular people are hearing this scientific worldview. That's the mainstream worldview. And it's very nihilistic.
And some of its beliefs, and that'd be okay if that's how reality was, but we're going to see that
a lot of these are based on mistaken assumptions and people are rejecting that worldview because it's
doesn't offer anything of value to them as a normal person. And they will opt for other less evidence
based, uh, worldviews or philosophies because they're not getting that from that. So science is actually
helping like pseudoscience and things like that. Um, if they want to keep science isolated from all of
these practical things and sort of addressing bigger existential and even spiritual questions.
And so if we can do that, if we can build that bridge, it would be good for unifying everyone, but it would
also cut down on a lot of the, the pseudoscience and stuff that people are trying to, um, kind of
prevent from, you know, not going there. But actually I think that's, um, part of the problem, if that makes
any sense. Um, so this is stuff from my Substack Road to Omega. Go there and check it out. There's, uh,
posts on the teleological stance that break this down in, um, more detail than I'll be able to give here
today. Um, I have this word in this slide, poetic metanaturalism. If you're familiar with my book, um, you
might've seen that it's not really important, um, to really talk about why I call it that, but let's
just say there are these two distinctive worldviews. So there's the old mainstream scientific worldview,
which is the reductionist worldview, which I think is basically a nihilistic worldview. Um, and, uh,
there are a lot of assumptions built into this worldview based on just, we had limited knowledge
at the time of how the world works. So there were things like, for example, when we thought the world
was Newtonian, you just couldn't get away from determinism. Uh, this kind of strict Laplacian
determinism Laplace basically took Newton's, um, kind of framework and tried to apply it to everything.
It's really interesting that Newton himself didn't do that. He didn't think that his laws
applied to life and Newton was actually very religious and thought there were all these crazy
hidden messages in the Bible, which is neat and kind of like covered up because people, you know,
don't want people to know that, that Newton was so religious. But, um, so Laplace kind of,
you know, created this deterministic philosophy. And when we thought that was the truth, then there was
no room for human agency. There was just one future trajectory and we couldn't do anything to change
that. And we couldn't, we weren't really doing anything to begin with. It was all, everything we
do is sort of illusory and we can talk about determinism in greater detail. Um, but that's one
nihilistic aspect is that we don't have any agency and we don't have free will free will. It's a bit more of a loaded term.
There's just assumptions with that word, like with the word free that, uh, make it a little bit more
of a contentious subject, but, um, yeah, without, with determinism in the strict sense, no one could have
any agency. So it kind of, if you accept that scientific, um, proposition, then you're like basically accepting
that you have no control over the future or your life. And that can be very depressing and demotivating.
And there are studies that we can talk about that have shown that, um, that belief actually causes
people to, for example, um, behave less morally. They will be more likely to cheat, uh, because they
don't have culpability because no one's responsible for anything. That's them basically choosing
to not have this agency that I'll explain exactly what I mean by that. But basically, I mean, the fact
that you can tell them that, and then they lose it and then they start behaving more immorally, it's
obvious that there's something causal there that's changing their behavior. So that's kind of a clue that
that that picture, something doesn't make sense there. Um, and it also causes people to be like
really depressed and have kind of existential meltdowns. Um, I personally had, you know, when I
thought determinism was the only explanation that made sense, I sort of had, you know, times where I
would have these experiences where I was very disturbed by the fact that I had no control over
anything and that this was sort of a tape that was determined from the initial event and that I was
just playing that out. It can be very disturbing if you take this stuff seriously. And what I'm
arguing is that a lot of the scientists preaching this stuff, they're not taking it seriously because
they can't, it would be, your life would just be over if you really believe that you had no agency
because you would stop doing stuff. Um, I tried to take it seriously and, uh, it took me out for a
good two years. Um, how do you even take it seriously? Like, what does that do? What do you do then?
Um, so, so the, it happened, um, it was a combination of reading the, this book, um, the meme machine,
um, by Susan Blackmore and, um, Darwin's dangerous idea. There's this one sentence that just like took me
out. It was like, um, uh, everything up to this moment, including your genes, environment, uh, and
all your experiences, including the first half of the sentence will determine how you, uh, interpret
the second half. It was sort of like just this web of causation being described on a different level
of analysis, sort of like bringing that to the foreground. And I was like, and not seeing me in that
foreground. And then I was like, oh, wait, there isn't like a neuron in my brain that knows or cares
that I exist as whole or, or, and then it was wait, not even a wait. So sodium ions are gonna sodium
ion. They're just gonna follow those gradients like, oh God. And I, so, um, and it just sort of had me.
And, uh, and so for, I just was, I mean, so I was actually, so for a while, I was, um, uh,
uh, is it kind of paralyze you or did you just go, I'm going to do what I was going to do anyway,
but I'm going to do it. I'm going to have this weird sort of, you know, experience at the same
time because it's all meaningless. I'm just going to go through life. I'm probably going to
look really sad, but I'm going to do everything that I plan to do otherwise, or does it just shut
you down where you're like, I'm not going to get out of bed. There was kind of like a double
consciousness about it too. Cause it was like, I'd be moving between like, um, like,
having that as a, as a frame and, but then like to take action, you're like, you can't, you can't,
you just gotta throw it out the window. And so like, yeah. So, and some, on occasion,
there would be kind of like, uh, um, maybe this is a, I don't think it took me in an unethical
direction, but, um, kind of like a, like a fracket mindset, like, uh, well, you know, nothing matters
anyway, so woo, but yeah. And it really stick for me. Can, can I offer a devil's advocate take here?
And I don't know if we're, I don't know if we're derailing or no, this is perfect.
Think of it. So, uh, this is great. But, um, so, and it is very much a devil's advocate position.
Cause I think Bobby, you and I are very much aligned on trying to emphasize the importance of, uh,
free will, the, the causal power of information, potentially, et cetera. I'm sure you might get into
some of that. Uh, but I will say this in its favor or in, in addition to what's being said.
Um, so I also had an experience like that of suffering from the, uh, you know,
seeming implications of the deterministic universe. But I do think that there's a way of also allowing
all of that to be the case and responding differently. And there are a number of different
ways that that can look. Um, I mean, there's the Nietzschean approach to this, which is actually
kind of taking this deterministic cycle and kind of the eternal recurrence of the same as sort of a
wild yes saying to existence. Um, and I'll just, I'll just throw that out there and bracket it. We
could come back to that one. Uh, the other thing by that, that's sorry. I don't know.
So Nietzsche was, he would philosophize while walking, or he would think his philosophy while
going on these long walks and everything. Right. And one day he was walking in the Swiss Alps and
he sees this gigantic rock. Um, and, uh, he comes to this sudden realization. Um, and I guess I won't
get into the whole story cause it would probably be a little bit too much, but basically the, the,
the realization that springs there, which he, uh, which he has when at this sort of like monolithic
scene is somehow he's sort of transported and appreciates that, um, what, what he would need
to do was affirm his existence, uh, under the assumption that everything that has happened
and will happen, uh, will happen over and over and over again, uh, for eternity. Uh, all the mistakes,
all the ecstasies, et cetera. It was all there, uh, almost, you could kind of think of it kind of in
the, uh, you know, there's the big bang, big crunch model, and then it repeats. And so
let's say something like that is happening where it just repeats over.
Yeah. He called it eternal recurrence. Right. I mean, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
A eternal recurrence. And he basically said that, um, we need to be able to positively affirm that
in an exuberant sense. Uh, and, and actually, and here's, I think the point,
what it means is that if you take the idea seriously, um, that this is your life and you
are therefore radically responsible in some ways for what you experience, um, uh, and I'll come back
to this in the sense of what responsibility could mean in this context as well. Um, then,
then it actually imbues everything with an incredible significance because this is what you'll be
experiencing over and over again. Uh, the second thing I wanted to say, which I think might kind of
preempt some of your kind of like, well, how does that work? Right. How can you be responsible?
Uh, is, um, I do think that there's a phenomenal logical way that you can, uh, come to terms with
determinism, uh, that basically concludes something like, okay, even if mechanistically,
this can be describable in terms of deterministic cause and effect all the way back. Um,
my experience of it is rather different. I have the experience of free will.
I feel as though, as if I can choose as, as I want to. Uh, and so there's no necessary reason
why some descriptive, uh, you know, framework needs to, uh, needs to impinge upon my own
phenomenological sense of reality. Uh, so for a long time, I made peace with this question that way
by basically saying, yeah, it's all determined, but I feel as though I have free will. Um, and that's
really, I think the, the, the core there because, um, let me, yeah, let me say something about that.
And I don't want it to be seem dismissive. Um, but I mean, this is not your idea anyway,
so I don't really have to apologize to you. It's Nietzsche. And it's one of the possible things that
I think you're considering, but I mean, I, I, you know, we've talked about this. I think you kind of,
we have similar ideas about agency. What I want to say about that is basically that is similar to
compatibilism and what's going on is that these people are, there's language games. First of all,
like if you want to talk about that, if you believe that causal story in the strict sense,
um, and it's more complicated that because I'm saying that the, the, there is causality,
there's always cause and effect to everything. And that doesn't not permit agency. But what I'm
going to say is the, the, the kind of magic ingredient to understanding how this can be,
uh, you know, uh, mechanistic idea, um, or, or mess in a mechanistic process, how free will can be
explained as part of the causal chain. Uh, we need to talk about top-down causation and that's really the
game changer. And, but without top-down causation, I don't think there is any responsibility. And what
I think that Nietzsche and others are doing is they're, first of all, they're compartmentalizing.
They're like, they're, they're, they're not fully taking the determinism they're talking about
seriously. And if you do that, like you, you have to compartmentalize if you believe that,
because like Adam said, like, you have to throw that out when you actually want to take action.
So first of all, everybody who believes in determinism is kind of living a split personality
life. And that, that leads to all kinds of cognitive dissonance, but it's worse than that.
All of all, I mean, you still are.
I mean, in a way it depends. So like, um, I'm agnostic about determinism in terms of like,
it was, that was part of, but it wasn't agnosticism about determinism, but going more deflationary on
causation or more instrumentalists on causation. And I do think that, but I'm open to there being
like a best causal handling, or like, there could be like a new, like, um, for me, where like
causation kind of like enters into physics and like full majesty. And like,
Adam Werner, that's what this is. That's what I want to describe.
Adam Werner, But the move for me was, um, compatibilism via
instrumental causation that kind of stays within as, as like, Carol's like, it stays in its lane.
Adam Werner, Yes. And I, so I will put out a thing out there where you could have determinism
and have true agency to at these higher levels, you would still need top down causation, but you might
not need any indeterminism at the most fundamental level, uh, like quantum indeterminism.
Adam Werner, Um, and you could still have, uh, potentially agency and that's sort of Adam's
perspective, or like he says, he's agnostic on it. But, um, in the future, I hope to convince Adam
that there's a better solution. And so, so what I was saying to Brendan is that these are language
games when he's like, uh, it's truly this way, you know, it's this way, but that should make you
feel like you're responsible because this is, you know, the life you have and the one you're going to
repeat or whatever, you know, I'm it's good reasoning. Brian Greene says similar stuff.
And that's why I say this Brian Greene's like, the decision is real, but it's not really you making
it, but it's a real, like a lot of strange, weird language games that if you actually make language,
the focus, which I wanted to do, but it's way too abstract. Like I didn't have time to nail that down
for today, but that's what I want to do in the future. And you can show that people who are
talking about this stuff, especially people who are, you know, trying to find some sort of silver
lining to determinism, they're, they're using words inconsistently. They will use a word one way
and then contradict it. They might even use the same word in two different ways, um, in the same sentence,
but basically you can't have, well, I'm going to let you respond, Brendan, but I don't think there can be
in his, that, that model, any true responsibility. And then this solution of like, but I feel like I
have it to me, it doesn't give you anything additional. Like you're just an epic phenomenon.
And to me that can be almost worse. Like he's given a nice spin on the positive way you can see it,
but there's other people like illusionists that say, yeah, we have this phenomenal experience.
It feels like I have free will, but there's absolutely no responsibility. Like Sam Harris was like,
I don't have pride. Uh, a friend was just talking to me about this cause he's a Sam Harris fan,
but he's turned off by this whole no free will thing. And then he hears Sam Harris contradict
himself all the time because Sam Harris will say, you don't have free will. And the whole
thing is on free will. And then there's a little commercial for his podcast where he goes,
you have the freedom to choose to listen to this podcast. And it's like, you're, you're using double
talk like constantly. So I think it's very notable. Sam Harris does not tell that to his daughter.
Sam Harris and Annika, they do not, they say it to each other, but he says, I'm not,
I'm not going to tell my kids because it's going to make them, you know, behave differently. And
like all of these bad things that I said, but when they grow up, I'll tell them that they don't have
any agency when they're ready for it. But what I'm saying is all of that is absolutely ridiculous talk.
It's absolutely nonsense to be like, she doesn't have a, I'm not going to like everything he's
doing is like the whole arguments completely self-defeating in every way. And there's a lot
of people that have tried to make nice stories out of it, but ultimately they're contradicting
themselves and compatible, compatibilism in its current form is a contradiction. And people call
it out for that all the time. Um, but that doesn't stop the compatibilist because it seems like the best
answer. It goes, yeah, but I experienced this agency, so it has to be real on some level,
but then how can we go against this determinism? It seems to go against causality in general. So it's
like a lot of people like Dan didn't, their solution is like, you know, I'm not going to go against,
um, the, these sorts of like, you know, I'm not going to go against, uh, determinism or causality,
which I'm saying it doesn't go against causality, but they think the best solution is to try to do
some magic and make both these things work together. Um, yeah, so we can talk more about
that, but yeah, maybe you have a response that please. Yeah. Yeah. I was just going to throw in,
um, you know, something that we had grounded this in before was the idea that, uh, you know,
we choose not to act on, on the back of that. Right. So there's that balance of, you know what I'm
talking about, right? Yeah. Yeah. If you, if you believe that it's going to affect your behavior too.
And what I'm going to argue is that you won't exercise your agency as much as you would,
uh, if you don't believe it. Um, along those lines, part of what really concerns me about the, um,
anti-free will rhetoric is cause like an agency, like, so like active inference that like Carl
sometimes say, like, you know, there's a certain optimism that's required, like that's just built
into it for the way you pursue goals by, um, predicting them into being. And so like, if you
don't, if you're not, if you stop believing in yourself as a cause, being able to predict certain
goals that actually could be a real problem. I believe it is a real problem. And that actually
these people living this are already not behaving optimally, not making decisions optimally. Here's
the thing that you may say, Sam Harris is a really successful guy. How do you explain that? It's
because he's living too, he, he, he has a split personality at the part of him that believe like,
like pumped about doing all this stuff. It's disconnected from the part of him that really believes that
he has no agency. Um, and you've seen that in those studies where they will like, you see people lose
that belief and it changes their behavior. So my point is if, if that's the way reality is, then we
have to tell the truth. And that's what Sam Harris says. Like, I'm not going to sugarcoat it for you,
but what I'm saying is that idea is built on a mountain of language ambiguities that are creating this
problem. Um, just a misunderstanding of, of causation, because if you think all causation is bottom up,
which means that the system is not, there's no higher level control. Um, and this is kind of
getting into details that I need to give some more background for, but if it's all bottom up causation,
then there is no room for agency. But if you have top down causation and the whole system
is this control center, um, it's a cybernetic control system that's basically, um, um, we can explain
this later, but what I will argue is that the evolutionary process, um, accumulates knowledge,
uh, so adaptive information in, um, biological systems. So predictive information about the
environment, the knowledge, the adaptations that are being acquired through evolution correspond to,
um, genes and, um, you know, neural connections that, um, uh, basically encode information about
the external world. And that's what starts to give a system agency. Um, and that's why living systems
behave differently than inanimate systems. And, um, um, that is because the system has gained
causal power. So the system as a coherent unit, um, is starting to control the components that it's
made of and the trajectory that the system follows. Um, and so for example, Philip Ball is a journalist
who's been writing about this a lot, like one of the most respected science journalists. But
if you drop a pigeon and a rock off the tower, the rock, you can predict with Newtonian, uh, mechanics,
you can with, with, with classical physics equations, you can predict the trajectory of the rock.
You can't predict the trajectory of the bird. So there's something fundamentally different about
those two things. And I'm saying that behavioral distinction is what we have to call agency. Now that
doesn't give us, get us to free will, but it shows us that there's some sort of causal difference between
biological systems and inanimate systems. And this used to be attributed to vitalism. What I'm saying
is that vitalism wasn't necessarily wrong. We just didn't know what that vital force was. And now we
have a name for it and we call it information. Um, so I kind of veered from the point maybe, but, um,
yeah, what, what was, uh, I can't remember what I was answering with that. Um, Brendan,
do you have anything else to say? Sorry, Brendan. Yeah, go ahead. Yeah. So maybe we should finish up the
Nietzsche thing and then I should get into some slides and then we should, uh, come back to this.
Yeah. I was just going to say real quick again, I think, Bobby, I think what you're articulating,
I mean, having read your book and, you know, talked with you a lot about your work, I think
we're very much on the same page. Uh, I was very much also at the same time doing a devil's advocate
thing though, for a couple of reasons. And it would, it would derail us too much from the present topic,
which is more important than trying to make a devil's advocate, uh, case for living with
determinism. So yeah, well, I, I told Daniel that I'm a recovering determinist. That's kind of,
that's kind of what I want to do here, because I said, if you don't, if we don't hear the criticism,
then the people who don't agree with this, I'm not going to answer. So I, I'm glad you said that,
but I would just like to push you a little bit more to explain. Yeah. If, if it's purely deterministic,
what's, where's the responsibility that Nietzsche's talking about?
Yeah. Well, let me say maybe a couple of things too, um, uh, that, that add further context here.
Um, there's sort of a, a tradition, uh, of let's say using historical, uh, philosophical, or even
theological categories, um, and the kind of, uh, frameworks that those used to provide for making
sense of really important, um, concepts and ways of being in the world. And then presuming that
if someone deviated from those, that there'd be these natural, natural, uh, necessary sort of
implications that would flow from thinking differently about something. Uh, the classic
case in my experience has been, oh, we need morality and moral facts to make us good people.
As soon as you don't believe in moral facts, you'll become, uh, you know, uh, a terrible human being.
And that's not true. Uh, you know, people who don't believe in moral facts in the kind of traditional
way, uh, can find all sorts of groundings, uh, for their morality.
Yeah. But sorry to interrupt, but I do, I can see like these language things going on,
like everywhere in these discussions. So for example, um, yeah, so you're saying that people
don't need morality and that these people, but then you said traditional morality. So that was
the point I was going to make is that the people who let's say you don't believe that there's any
purposefulness in nature, there's no teleology. So it's like, everything's random and accidental.
Then they go, well, you know what? That doesn't make me depressed. I'm actually, this is the only time
I'm, you know, this is all we've got. So I better make it count. There's no afterlife.
Um, so what I'm saying is they're still deriving morals from this, uh, paradigm and they're actually
deriving meaning and purposeful principles out of this. So they're really, um, um, in a way there,
they still see some, they're, they're still finding what they need to find to, um, behave in an optimal
way. But what I'm saying is that that's kind of a teleological view and they're not fully sticking
to their paradigm with no assumptions. They're building on lots of assumptions and you get this
morality that ends up looking exactly like religion. Once you map it out and you go, oh yeah. Like the
golden rule, for example, the golden rule, you don't need a religion or the golden rule. You just need to
know that you're an agent. There are other agents like you, they're like you. They also experience
happiness and suffering. Therefore I'm going to treat them like I would want to be treated. And also
there's an incentive to do that because then they can treat me that way. Um, then they'll treat me as
I've treated them, but the golden rule could be a basis for a religion and a moral postulate. So are
they really moral morally free, free of moral facts or are they creating a set of morals from
a paradigm that's supposed to be completely moral free, but maybe it's not because what I'm saying
basically is they're kind of converging on this kind of purposeful narrative without even realizing it.
Well, yeah, I mean, there's a, there's a lot there. I mean, I would say what you're getting at,
which is important, which is there is often a performative contradiction that we're engaged in.
We're asserting something logically and then our, our actions are sort of, you know, suggesting
otherwise. I mean, if I, if I'm a solipsist and I say, you know, I believe in solipsism and I think this
is right. It's sort of like, well, wait, why are you telling me that? You know, like, uh, so there's,
there's that element to it. Uh, there are actually though, some rather detailed arguments you could
make that get into things like, um, well, yes, I'm a solipsist, but I'm talking to you about it
because your projection of me, and it's still worthwhile for me to have projections with my,
you know, conversational projections with myself, et cetera. And there are versions of that for the
free will sort of a thing, right? That's you could, but I think there's fallacies with all of that.
So for example, let's say, and there's a, uh, uh, old joke about the teacher gives a, uh, lecture on
solipsism and why solipsism can't be refuted. And the student comes up to him after the lecture and
says, Oh, you're a solipsist too. Like he's happy to meet another solipsist, but the whole point is that
the other person doesn't exist. So you're happy to meet you. But so what I would say is let's follow that
anytime. Okay. So then we would do a little game where we break that down. And what I'm saying,
when you start to break all those things down, they lead you back to the same road.
So let's say you're not real, Brendan, you're a projection of my mind, but what does that mean?
Brendan is a projection of my mind, but you're an agent and you have different beliefs than me,
as I know myself here. And you're going to do things. You're going to behave in ways that are
different than I would, then I would behave because you have a different set of beliefs
ultimately compared to actually the me. I know, even if you're really me, what I'm saying is that
really me doesn't really have any meaning because when you start to define you as this agent, even if
you make this metaphysical claim that you're a projection of me for all practical purposes,
you are an agent within this system that has a different set of beliefs than what I know that
behaves differently. So what I'm saying is even the thought experiment has this language fall because
you come back to the equivalence of it's not really a meaningful statement to say whether it's me or not.
If it has all these properties that counts as an individual agent in the reality that we can be
aware of, if that makes sense. Yeah. And I think we, I agree. If we really followed this through,
I think we would converge to the same point, which for me tends to be, well, I'll frame this a little
bit by saying something like, you know, you know, Hume, you're just mentioning earlier about how,
like, you know, Sam Harris said, I wouldn't tell it to my daughter, you know, Hume skeptic would
question, well, will the sun actually rise, et cetera. But he made the point that basically once
he puts his philosopher pen down and he goes and leaves his study, he's now living like a regular
person. Now you could say, so there's a, there's a potentially meaningful distinction between
the pragmatism and the sort of intellectual logical, you know, coherence, let's say. But I do
think that there's a meaningful way that we can actually collapse those in a way that should be
collapsed because, because it would lead to something like what information about reality
has a, has causal power for sustaining my viability and flourishing in the face of entropy,
right? Kind of tie back in some of this free energy principle, you know, Bayesian updating sort
of thing here, right? So, you know, and this is the point that, that you introduced me about the
work of like Kolchinsky and Walpert, which I've made great use of, of thinking about meaningful
information as being that meaning that a system produces by processing information about its
environment that ultimately aids its viability, right? Now, if what we're talking about in a pragmatic
sense has a deleterious effect on our viability because of our concepts, then we might say that
that actually is decreasing our viability. And therefore we might be inclined to say,
if that's our sort of criterion for asserting information as being an accurate model of reality,
which I'm not sure of a better one, then we could say that things like skepticism and solipsism
are, are untrue on that ground. If that, if that line makes any sense, you could really start to
unpack that. But I think that that might be where we'd ultimately converge in agreement on some of
this points on some of these points. Yeah. So five minutes. I'm after running five minutes,
unfortunately. So I'll just like throw in a quick, a couple of quick thoughts.
David Gardner Oh, let me just say one sentence. Before I forget,
maybe I already forgot. Let's see. Okay, go ahead, Adam. I'll try to remember it.
Adam Leffler Sorry.
David Gardner Oh, sorry. Yeah. When you were talking about viability,
like all these explanations like, oh, well, maybe I don't have free will, but being optimistic has some
positive effect. What I'm trying to say is if the micro scale determinism is true,
and we're going to break. That's one point I want to make. There's determinism. When people are saying
that word, it's conflating two different things. There's physical determinism that I'm talking about,
like micro determinism, where everything is just this model, like where you have these atoms are
basically pool balls and they're following these trajectories. Well, I'll get to that in a slide,
but that's a different kind of determinism than saying that your genes and experiences
David Gardner Give rise to what you do. My point is, if you're saying all these,
if the micro scale determinism is true, there's no need to even talk about, oh, optimism helps me.
David Gardner There's no like, oh, even being optimistic. All of that biological level talk
is causally redundant. So basically, if there's micro scale determinism, genes even aren't determining
anything, that's causal over determinism. You're saying, okay, the genes cause my behavior,
but then you said the atoms cause my behavior. David Gardner So my point is, if micro scale
determinism is true, you don't even have genes determining your behavior. It's an incoherent
argument. Sam Harris is conflating these two types of determinism and flipping back and forth.
So what I'm saying is, we got to break this down. What top down causation does is it overcomes this
physical determinism. And then there's biological determinism that determines what agents will do.
And I'm saying that consciousness and self-awareness, reflective thought is what overrides
biological determinism. And that's when basically your higher mind, like this monitoring kind of
prefrontal cortex, executive control, like the mind that's responsible for that. There's access
consciousness versus phenomenal consciousness distinction. So that mind can override your biological
programming, your impulsive actions. So when we have this hierarchical model, we see that there's
multiple, there's two types of determinism at least. And then there's multiple types of top-down
causation, which overcome those things. So not to say that that argument doesn't hold up, like we have
to talk about determinism as far as like your genes determining your behavior. But my point is,
if someone believes in micro scale determinism, then these higher level things, when people
say, oh, you know, your genes are deciding what you're doing, that would, those things would also
be epiphenomenal. Those would be shorthands, because you could actually look at the genes, and you could
see a bunch of particles, and then you could use Newtonian trajectories just applied to the particles.
The genes are epiphenomenal. Now, the neurons are epiphenomenal. So it's a level of new, I don't know,
Adam, have you thought about that at all? Adam Lundberg Yeah, the, um, and that's kind of my,
not part of my agnosticism is like, is there such a thing as a true atomism? Does causation even make
sense if it's just like an undifferentiated, like, uh, quantum field, for instance? Like,
as soon as we're talking about particles or kinds of any, anything we can even name or pick out,
um, are we basically core screening? And are we in kind of like a, um, and, and then like,
when we say micro, uh, why don't we just keep going? Like, isn't it already somewhat like an
instrumental for a given purpose? But in terms of like, so like, I've been like, and I've kind of
kept these separate, like these issues of like, the philosophy of causation, like the handlings of free
will. So like, I've tended to focus on like, functional cybernetic free will, basically, as a
the planning and, and like the, the, the architecture of choice and like being able to like, um, suss out
different options and evaluate counterfactuals that you then like, uh, have different control energy for
the system. But I think there could be really interesting connections between how we handle
causation though, and where within the control hierarchy and the way you're describing of like,
we're, um, what's responsible for what, so like ways in which like system two can override system one or
like, that's absolutely what I want to develop here, because I think you can bridge this low
level causation discussion that I'm talking about, which for example, Paul Davies and Sarah Walker
have written about informational control and that's with the origin of life. There's a change in the
causal structure of the system and then it gains this agency. And that's what I focused on a lot in part
one of the book. Um, and so what I'm saying is Adam's work focuses on basically this free will topic where
I'm saying that there's this even higher level system beyond just normal biological agents that
comes with not just consciousness, but an ability to create counterfactuals and imagination. So it's
like a prefrontal cortex sort of higher self. Um, and a lot of people say the self's illusory. That's why I
love to fall back on Adam's work because it really breaks down the self from a mechanistic perspective.
Um, but that's exactly what we can do. We can look at the space of counterfactuals. And as we will see
that I think there is some indeterminism at the fundamental level of reality that propagates up.
And that's what, you know, you see with chaos, even though it's called deterministic chaos,
and that's a whole nother issue to get into. But basically, um, I'm saying that there are choices
and that the world's trajectory is not set in stone and there's some variation. And when we as agents,
um, consider the space of counterfactuals and then choose something specifically,
um, it may be something like we're going to make a choice and then our biases, like our impulsive
decision is to make a certain choice, like reflexively based on like how we feel and, you know,
our genetic programming and our experiences, but then we can have another process where we go,
okay, is this decision optimal given my principles? I have this higher self. Now I think about like,
what's good, what I want to do, what are my long-term goals? And that, that is the mechanism
that corresponds to what people mean when they talk about free will. Um, and so I'm excited about that,
you know, and, and, and working with Adam to, to explain that to people who, you know, are just
saying that there's no way free will can work. Cause he's looked at the, talked about these mechanisms
from this, you know, cybernetic and computational neuroscience perspective and formalize them.
People like Sabina Hossenfelder, like physicists are like saying, there's no way for you can,
free will can be compatible with a causal picture of the world. I don't think that's true,
but what I wanted, you know, and Adam's going to leave. So he's unfortunately not going to be part of
this, but he'll see it later. I think we can bridge Adam's work at this higher level to this
low level causation stuff to actually have a causal story where there's actually still cause and effect,
but there's higher level causation. Um, that can basically override the sort of cause the lower
level bottom up causation. And then you even get these higher levels where you can have, um,
um, that sort of causation being overridden by conscious, like mental causation. So you would
have bottom up causation and then top down causation and then mental causation and top down and mental
causation. They would all be like looped under like, you know, categorized in or downward causation,
or you could call them all top down causation, but there are differences when consciousness emerges
that allows for what could be called new causal power. Things are working in a similar way,
but you will see a behavioral change when you get consciousness that will allow for
things like technology, things that require imagination, uh, counterfactual generation that
can't be achieved with the lower level intelligence. And that we can actually construct a causal picture
that is perfectly in line with everything we know about causality. But when you do this, you realize
that the bottom up story, and I haven't really defined that, you know, you guys know what I'm talking
about, but I haven't defined it for the listeners, but that when you have this story of causation, you
have agents emerge and they're actually control centers that can initiate causal chains. And they
do it for reasons. There's always reasons that you want to make a certain decision over another. So
some people think because you have a reason, that's a cause that somehow that's not free will.
But if you didn't have a reason for it, you would be doing it randomly. And that wouldn't be free will
either. So free will just has to be reconceptualized within this framework. And it's not full free will,
but full free will wouldn't be free will in the, in the first place, because again, it would be random
if it was not based on a reason. But what I'm saying is that your reason, even though it's a cause,
the reasons it's not determined, because basically, it's, it's not determined in the same sense that
people are talking about with physical determinism. We'll get to this, there's no way I can do it
without looking at the slides. But if anyone has any comments about what I just said, and Adam,
I know you got to go. So any final concluding thoughts? I am furious that I have to go. But
I'm really, I'm looking forward to tuning in a bit. So talk to you soon.
All right. See, Adam, thanks for coming.
And yeah, if I may, sorry, may I interject for a second?
Yeah, if anybody wants to read Adam's papers on integrated world modeling theory and cybernetic
free will, you can just Google his name in those terms, and you'll see some great papers and some,
you know, really respected journals like entropy, I think is the integrated world modeling theory one.
Yeah. Michael?
Michael Leach
No, I was just, I'm just trying to, again, do my job here. But Daniel, I did want to ask your
thoughts about, you know, active interference or inference at this juncture.
Daniel Schroeder
Yeah, any thoughts about active inference, how that applies to anything we've said already?
And I will link it to that soon, because I know a lot of listeners, that's what you're interested in.
Daniel Schroeder
I'll definitely look forward to how you link it. But although active inference is this incredible,
modern, composable framework for on one hand, cognitive modeling, and on the other hand,
the actual embodied situational modeling. A lot of the reason why people get into it, get curious,
start participating in the Institute is exactly the topic of self-help and self-improvement and
personal decision making amidst multi-scale uncertainty. And so there's among the many gaps
between theory and application or practice. One of them is utilizing these kinds of multi-scale
information geometry, decision making moment of choice type frameworks for what, for what we actually
do. So this is something that really strikes at the heart of what we do as inference. And I'm just
looking forward to how you frame it in this narrative. And then we can come back to some more technical
details too.
Daniel Schroeder
So we're going to cap it at eight, I guess at 7.50. I don't know if you'll have many questions in the chat.
Daniel Schroeder
But I'm going to try to give the presentation in the next 45 minutes.
Daniel Schroeder
But feel free to comment on stuff that will still be helpful.
But I guess we shouldn't get too far into like, make a comment so we can mark it, I might give a
little answer and then we'll come back to it. But I prefer that you speak up because then we'll know
what to come back to.
Daniel Schroeder
So I'll say a few more things about causality because they're important. And then I'll get into
kind of the bigger picture of the theory and then specifically the self-help teleological stance,
which is, you know, the free energy principle comes into play there.
Daniel Schroeder
And, um, yeah, then we can talk about practical applications for the individual and for society,
because the goal is that this system can be used. It's kind of like a theory of everything. So it
explains reality, but that it can be used to improve your life as an individual, but also be used to
figure out how to sort of optimize our social systems, political systems. So it kind of creates
a logic that could be used to base like a new, like a political party on like a third party or
something, which would be great if we had a party kind of based on systems thinking,
are we kind of need are not like a bipartisan ideology right now that's not based on anything
other than, um, evidence based things that we know can be used to to optimize systems? Not that
that that's everything but what i'm saying is it provides a foundation that then the ethical uh
and kind of moral stances emerge from and if you don't see this basic cosmic story then you will
be confused about ethical issues and what i will argue is that folk psychology ethics all of that
stuff it was it's i i believe is consistent with this view because it was kind of intuitive that
this is the story of nature and that it will kind of ease that cognitive dissonance for people who
have accepted the reductionist view like i know a lot of people have accepted this view that there's
no agency that there's just the strict determinism but then they want to use you know this free energy
principle type things to improve their life but that's kind of a contradiction because
are they choosing to improve it or is there just one trajectory that's set in stone and and and so i
think that getting this stuff straight will allow people to embrace stuff like the free energy
principle and apply it to their lives because they go okay this i can actually use this and i can do
that and i can create change in myself and in the society i'm a part of but with this old model
there's no hope for change because there's only one trajectory and so if nietzsche really took that
seriously it would be no reason to really talk about responsibility because it's just purely a block
time frozen thing where the future's already determined from the initial state and the fact
that it would repeat over and over is just even more hell it's like determinism was bad enough now you
have to experience not having you know an illusion uh forever um so what i want to offer is a different
model that we can't fully get into but what i what i have called eternal recursive emergence and so that
it's not a cyclical process it's actually a process of the universe evolving and maybe giving rise um to
something new potentially like a new universe um there's cosmological natural selection we don't have to go
there we have to talk about like what what you know anything outside of this universe but um
my point is that um yeah so what i want to show is that the universe is uh not an arbitrary system
it's not random it is a system that exhibits a design you can say it's the appearance of a design
maybe it's not really designed but there's there's qualities that can't be explained
um if the universe was the only universe in all of reality uh you you couldn't have that theory
either there's a designer that designed it that way or there's a larger reality with a multiverse
that would explain this fine tuning and that's where basically science went they said okay it looks
like there's a creator because the fine tuning problem but we can't accept that so we have to consider this
multiverse option but the multiverse option is just as weird as a creator it leads to all kinds of crazy things
like other universes where there's every possible version of you um so it probably has
this just as much baggage as the creator thing um but then there's cosmological natural selection
which basically is an evolutionary explanation where basically universes give rise to other universes and there's this
and there's this darwinian selection principle that would lead to like a universe optimized for like complexity growth
and life uh essentially like spreading like continuously so we don't really need to get in those metaphysical topics but
uh i just wanted to state up front that um the universe does have something that uh we could call a design
but when i say that don't assume that i am talking about it being created by some sort of conscious intelligent agent
it could be this evolutionary process um but it's not random it's not arbitrary and that's the big mistake is that
we have models of a random system like a gas that's what boltzman used to kind of
try to have a statistical foundation of the second law of thermodynamics and the problem is we base the dynamics of that inanimate system
i mean we we understood the dynamics of that inanimate system and then we assumed that the universe behaved the same way
and that led to all of these um bad assumptions that created this nihilistic world view so let me let me talk about that first
if determinism is true like if there were no indeterminism at the lowest level for example um
everything was just made of these atoms and these atoms were like
classical scale objects like pool balls on a pool table and that you have all these atoms and if
those atoms follow classical trajectories and they're just like basically you can imagine the universe as a
table of pool balls um then there's no room for anything there's one future trajectory
and it's set in stone so if you believe that if you accept that worldview there is no other future
there's no changing it and if you believe that and you want to change your life you have to and
you're really taking this seriously you would have to ask yourself well if i change my life am i really
changing it or was this the way it was always supposed to happen it was determined that i was going to change
my life or are you saying like it's determined in a way where you can't change your life so you shouldn't
even try um it leads to all these weird conclusions but what i'm saying is that's not the way reality is
and that leads to like this worldview where you have no agency you can't get around it because if
it's a purely pool ball universe then there's no agency um not only that so that's the first thing
that's if if the world was newtonian at the micro level there would be no agency there would be one
trajectory and there would be this block time thing it would just everything would follow from the
initial state in a way that was calculable from just specifying the positions of every particle and
applying newton's laws to those and then we have some forces that interact but it doesn't really
change the picture um so there's just one continual trajectory then bolt's been found that you know
an inanimate system because all of in a gas for example so it's a specific type of system that
boltzmann was using to derive the second law of thermodynamics on a statistical foundation um and
it's not the way open systems work so first of all we should know that um he showed with statistical
mechanics that if you have a gas so in a gas every particle is uncorrelated it's just moving around
freely and in his model also people should know that this is before we understood the periodic table
periodic table didn't come to like decades after boltzmann did this work so we didn't understand like
chemical bonding for example we didn't understand a lot of things so in his model as an idealization you use
spirit spherical like what would be marbles like spirit spherical round things that bump off each other
elastically so they just bounce off each other they don't combine and interact with forces and if you
have this picture if you if you have these things just bumping off each other interacting this way moving
around um following these classical trajectories um not bound in any way you will get a transition from order
um to disorder if the system starts out in an ordered state of course
because the disordered state there's more possible ways to do that so if everything's moving around randomly
you see this trajectory here that we see um and then so the idea but there's so much there were so
many weird assumptions in trying to apply this to our universe like when you start to break them down
like none of them really made sense so he's saying okay this is what has to happen you go from order to
disorder um and this must wait be the way the universe is because this is what has to happen by statistical
laws if everything's moving randomly if there's no magical forces doing anything this is what happens
um so um the problem with that uh basically
well so one thing i should say is that's not even true if this was the way the world is um
um and people pointed this out to boltzman given enough time if these are following these mechanical
trajectories even the disordered state will go back to the ordered state given enough time this is
poincare's uh um recurrence theorem um kind of similar to nietzsche's eternal recurrence but so the idea is
that if you have the system behaving this way you it would um basically all trajectories are possible
and given enough time it will go from disorder and then will revert and people challenged bolstman with
this and he couldn't get away from that that possibility um what i i lost my train of thought
earlier um i didn't let you know i just went on to the next thing but what what i forgot to say was that um
bolstman was like faced with the problem of why is our universe looks so complex
if it goes from order to disorder and then that's where like so he had to say oh well it must have
started out really ordered because it can't go from disorder to order so it must have been this highly
ordered state which was the beginning of time it's this low low entropy state but now we know that after
the big bang everything was homogeneous and then things started aggregating so it was literally an
equilibrium state this fully mixed up high disorder state something closer to that
before that and then things started clumping and you get more organization so the story is completely
the opposite of what we've been taught julian barber in his new book explains this that the trajectory of
the universe is towards higher complexity and order and that we made a mistake by applying this model of
an inanimate system to the universe in its entirety when the universe has all of these batteries in the sky we
call stars and they're driving systems away from equilibrium so then we had um
ilia prego gene in 1940 1950 1960 1970 i would say 50s and 60s were probably when he was starting this work
and it was really gaining influence but he basically showed that there's another dynamic where if you have a
system of particles driven by a flow of energy it will start to naturally organize that system um assuming
that the molecules can bind to each other so you need to have the right sort of um molecular variety for
this to happen but this model of boltzmann's didn't take into account bonding it didn't take into account the
force of gravity it didn't take account into account open systems and what i'm arguing is ultimately that the
universe's dynamics are more like an open system being pushed far from equilibrium where it's
self-organizing so in this model the universe isn't going towards disorder because it's not a
a universe made of particles that that stay uncorrelated so this bolson's model is based on this h
theorem where everything stays uncorrelated but when things interact they become correlated so this model
works for gases and it doesn't work for open systems and what i'm saying is it doesn't work for the
universe we applied it to the universe and if this was true there's only one trajectory which means
there's no changing the future what's going to happen is going to happen and if that's the case
that's pretty depressing because it kind of demotivates us to go oh you know what i can change the world i
can have this idea and it can blow up like mark zuckerberg by creating facebook like you could create
something like facebook and you would have that and you would change the world but if you believed in
determinism it would be kind of strange you'd be like wait but this is already determined so i
already did it in a way i'm already going to do it and like there's only one trajectory and then i play
that important role in history no that can't be true i'm not gonna that's just impossible like i'm
gonna change the world and it was determined so that philosophy leads to a lot of weirdness that i'm saying
completely dissipates when we get the causal picture straight and we see that there's not this nihilistic
one trajectory because of quantum indeterminism and that's not everything but what quantum
indeterminism does is it shows that when you shrink when you zoom in and you get to a certain level
that newton's laws of motion do not hold you will see there will be no definite state
of an electron that you can predict given its prior state there's only going to be a wave function
that gives a distribution of probabilities where that can go and then use the born rule to find
it where it's likely to go and then if you repeat that study a bunch of times you'll see these
statistical patterns but so what i'm saying is quantum indeterminism get rid of this picture of
strict determinism at the micro level and if you did have that strict determinism at the micro level
you would not have any agency or any there would be no real counterfactuals they would be sort of
due to our epistemic limitations what we can know about the world we think there are different
possibilities but there actually are none the world can only go one way and what i'm saying is that there
are some different there's a possibility space of things that can happen and that when agents make
decisions you're carving out a path um that in some way is not it's not determined by the micro scale
physics because of quantum indeterminism and then we have chaos too at the classical scale where you
can't predict what a chaotic system is going to do people call it deterministic chaos i have issues with
calling that determinism because it's completely not predictable and i don't even think determinism is
the right word people want to look up norton's dome if you have a ball posed at the top of the dome
there's multiple newton's equations that can satisfy where it's going to go next there's actually even
determinism is not fully deterministic but that's kind of beyond what we'll get into so um let me just
try to go faster through the slides since the 720 so i'm not going to talk about a lot of the details that
uh i planned but maybe our uh earlier uh conversation provides context that can clear all this stuff up
so what i'm arguing is that the universe is self-organizing and so lee smolin uh popular
physicist says the possibility of conceiving the universe as a whole as a self-organized system in
which a variety of improbable structures exist permanently without the need of a pilot or other
external agent um i can't see that word um so we have the possibility of constructing a new scientific
cosmology um it's clear that if the natural state of matter is chaos and external intelligence isn't
needed to explain the order and beauty of the world um so he's basically saying if we had this model of
like randomness then it wouldn't make sense for us to see what we see and we would need a creator would
be a better explain explanation but if life order and structure are the natural state of the cosmos itself
in our existence indeed our spirit might finally be comprehended as created naturally by the world
rather than unnaturally in an opposition to it and you'll see up here that he says a variety of
improbable structures um that exists permanently so what i'm saying is there's some language issues
here that we're seeing um where we're saying why do we see all this improbable stuff if it's there
it's not improbable so it's only improbable if we accept the old model uh based on you know this
simplified model of causation that doesn't include top-down causation which we'll explain
and that actually complexity that you would say that this is highly improbable that complexity just
keeps growing and growing and growing because statistically you would think that there would
be some transient complexity and then basically you would have this trend towards entropy that you
know this complexity would dissolve what i'm saying is it's not when i'm saying that the universe is
becoming more and more complex it's not opposed to naturalism it's that our conception of naturalism
is based on an outdated paradigm that did not include dynamics that really exists that we're
now just finding so that this these structures that are highly complex were never improbable
and i'm actually going to argue that they're statistically inevitable um uh that they arise um
in a way deterministically and it might be kind of confusing that i use that word but what i'm going
to try to argue is that there when we talk about determinism we need to make distinctions between
that as well so what i'm saying is that there's strict determinism is not true but i'm now going to
argue that something like global determinism is true which is a name that's been used by philosophers
that there is that there are attractors that create these dynamics such that it is natural that the
world goes towards increasing complexity and that if we see this trajectory that we're a part of you
know life is spreading we're building technology the biosphere has created all this complexity on earth
if we spread we're spreading complexity throughout the universe in the form of like you know computational
structures life is a computational structure this information processing network that we call the
biosphere is spreading if life spreads that that was never improbable it was just improbable because
it seemed improbable because we didn't have all the laws and that actually it's inevitable um but
that there is some freedom within that but there is an outline that's basically uh deterministic at this
larger scale um and by that i mean things can go a different way like if you were around the tape of
time and you played it again that different events there would be a slightly different chain of events that
would happen you would get different for example genetic mutations because genetic mutation and
schrodinger uh was the first person to speculate about this but that there's a quantum component so
if you rewound the tape of time and you played it again you would get some different genes but what
i'm arguing is because of these emergent attractor dynamics that were really explained by non-equilibrium
physics and in the work of the pre-gagene then what you see is that you would get the same trajectory
towards higher and higher complexity because there were other laws that we weren't aware of and so
in this model there's going to be a sort of cosmic destiny that is this sort of form of global
determinism and then there's going to be free agency uh that the agents can do things that's not set in
stone within that kind of global deterministic picture so it's kind of new it's not i'm saying
that's not binary is the world deterministic or indeterministic there's indeterminism at the
lowest level which basically introduces slack into the causal chain so not everything is fully determined
in the strict sense but because of these attractors you get these emergent dynamics where you're going to
see similar patterns similar regularities um so christoph coke just a couple scientists who
well yeah i'll skip this stuff but so there are a lot of scientists who a lot of philosophers who have
had this kind of teleological narrative that the universe was moving towards some sort of goal that
it seemed to be like an organism that's developing and that seemed like a an idea opposed to naturalism
people like thielhard de chardin and uh bergson were you know um uh in chardin was religious but bergson
was a philosopher that wasn't really so i think a lot of these people got criticized wrongly they're
actually seeing what was right about nature but this view was thought to be opposed to naturalism
that was teleological and that had to be some sort of mystical force and what i'm saying is
we just didn't know about certain things we didn't understand information and that these people were
right and that a lot of people will hear this and say oh well that's against science that might be
again they might think it's against the second law of thermodynamics or something let's know there's a
big misunderstanding about that and all of these people are you know all the scientists on this page
really everyone with the exception of a couple of those philosophers are extremely uh respected and
very accomplished people who support this view i mean ray kerswell you know he's technology guy
it's a little bit more out there but he even uses the word destiny destiny ultimately it is clear
that the physical laws of our universe are precisely what they need to be to allow for the
evolution of increasing levels of order and complexity ultimately the entire universe will
become saturated with intelligence this is the destiny of the universe so what i'm saying is that
this is the trajectory of cosmic evolution this is the the roadmap of the future and this provides
something like an outline for a non-reductionist theory of everything based on emergence so you have
first physics and chemistry emerged in biology then brains and technology and then the merger of biology
with technology and then you get patterns of matter and energy and the universe becomes saturated with
intelligent processes and knowledge so life expands and we do that because we have to we're going to run
out of energy on this planet our star is going to die which necessitates that we move outward and then we
extract the energy from that and we keep moving outward and as we do the informational network that
is life keeps expanding and it keeps taking inanimate matter in the world and incorporating that into
its computational substrate so the the island of agency the island of information keeps spreading and
subsuming the inanimate world and i'm saying that that is an inevitable process and people say well that
seems very unlikely and if that that's happening then it's it's not part of the the designer it's not
part of the the the the code of the universe like it's not necessitated by the the parameters the laws
and the constants they'll say you know it's just something that could have happened uh and it's unlikely
but we're defying the odds now when those people say that they don't even realize their own ontology like
if they believe in determinism then there's only one trajectory there's only one thing that could happen so
there's no likely or not likely if you really believe in determinism there's no statistics
and there's really no causation it's just one thing follows another and people have talked about that
if determinism true then even causality is an illusion it's just one sort of fabric of events that all
follow from the initial event so um what i'm arguing is that the universe shows the dynamics of a far from
equilibrium system a driven system and that it moving towards complexity isn't violating any laws
and it's not improbable we just didn't understand far from equilibrium dynamics and that the universe's
complexity doesn't have to be transient so sean carroll has this thing where he's showing like the increase in
complexity and the increase in entropy and people go okay this is making sense complexity is not
opposed to entropy it's part of that but it goes up and then it goes down you have the coffee and you
have the cream and the the coffee mixing and you get this complexity and then it all becomes homogenous
what i'm saying is no that's not true for the universe at all complexity keeps going because when life
emerges it's not like some complexity like you get some you know random pebbles arranged as a crystal
and then the wind blows and then they disperse life is robust it's modeled the world and it's because
it's modeled the world it can start to it can maintain its own existence so for example if an
asteroid is coming at the earth in 100 years assuming that we advance technologically at the rate we've been
we're going to destroy that asteroid we're going to do what we need to do to preserve life and that's going
to change the deterministic trajectory of the inanimate world so life changes the in the trajectory of the
inanimate world but what i'm saying what it was inevitable that life emerges and does this so there
is a sort of trajectory that's sort of set in stone from the uh initial parameters but that this trajectory
um is the opposite trajectory of what boltzman thought it's actually towards greater and greater organization
and the discussion of where's the limit if this universe wakes up and the whole thing becomes
this integrated computational system when does it have to stop what about the second law of
thermodynamics what about the energy uh needs and i wrote an article for noema called life need not
ever end and it was shared by david deutch and sabine hausenfelder and robin hanson also were commenting
on it and saying yes it's possible that life could potentially not have a limit depends on if there's
an upper bound entropy robin hanson said sabine was like i have a chapter on this in my book so a lot
of the things that we took as gospel like the first law and second law of thermodynamics those apply very
well to certain systems but we shouldn't have applied them to the universe as a whole i mean the first law
of thermodynamics is just like uh there's conservation of energy which which is um holds and we use that to
calculate things but this statement matter can't be created or destroyed absolutely not true cosmic
inflation theory has new matter and energy created during the cosmic inflation period um continuously
and then now with the expansion of the universe there's dark energy constantly being created as
well and astronomers i mean there's this astronomy conference paper where people have speculated have
argued that we can use dark energy and that's getting more speculative um uh to continue to to power life
um we might not even need that if you read my article you'll see this but you can look up on sean carroll's
blog he has an article called energy is not conserved and it talks about basically the first law is not
true in the way some people thought it was um whoops didn't mean to do that let me go back to this slide
so um let's speed it up um so maybe this is where we're at now so it's a series of these um stages
and what i'm saying is we're at this stage and that the biosphere um mirrors a brain it's an information
network of agents exchanging information through the internet and that there's actually you know people
might say that's cosmic mysticism or there's some interesting new theories by people like lee smallen
and drawn linear um arguing that the universe is a learning machine and everything in that paper
is consistent with this view so go read that paper read the universe's neural network by vitali he has
a group on facebook and we've been meeting um we're taking a break for the summer and making some
videos but basically there's a mathematical foundation for this this picture and uh so calling it cosmic
mysticism it's just not true anymore and you can have a fundamentally purposeful universe
headed towards this what tlard de chardin would describe as like an omega point um and it's
completely consistent with naturalism as long as you update naturalism to include these new dynamics
so um i was going to talk about phase transitions so basically this these stages in cosmic evolution occur
from components like nature's fundamental particles combining to make higher level systems so we have
you know atoms uh come together to form molecules which come together to form cells which come together
to form organisms and ecosystems and in the biosphere is this fully integrated network so those are phase
transitions it occurs in stages you have a depiction here we see a single-celled organism
uh and then those organisms you can think of a slime mold so you have a bunch of like paramecium or
something and they need to solve a problem and so they come together and they solve a problem they form
uh multi-cellular organism so here's a slime mold here's a human and these agents also come together
to form larger collectives and every time you have one of these it's called a phase transition and it's
exactly the same as the phase transitions not exactly the same but the same category of phenomena like when you have
um water freezing to ice but we have these non-equilibrium phase transitions where you'll have like the
emergence of a a tornado or a whirlpool in your bathtub um and basically these little units like in the
formation of a whirlpool you have all these atoms that are bouncing around chaotically and due to some
thermodynamic constraints that we won't get into here they start to organize themselves into these uh
collective formations that create these flow patterns and you can see these organized structures and
that life is basically another version of this um and that when um atoms come together to make uh
or subparticles come together to make an atom like these phase transitions they continue in the hierarchy
of life so you have agents coming together single settlements to multi-cellular then to make societies
and these phase transitions um happen at this edge of chaos so there's this sort of dialectical dynamic
between order and chaos that creates complexity and really everything is going through these cycles so
when there's a phase transition you know you don't want a system to be too stable because it's too rigid
to transition to the next stage so there will be periods of chaos like we're experiencing right now in
society and you might think that the world's ending but it's actually an indication that a phase transition
is about to happen and so the system has the potential to either collapse or to transition into
a higher state of organization and so you know this shows this these different stages you have non-living
then you have it with living you go from cells to multi-cellular organisms to tribes and cities nations and
then to gaia and then it can even extend from like when we terraform mars that's the biosphere self-replicating
and so life will basically the spread of life is like this higher level unit that's the biosphere
making copies of itself with variation and selection and then you know life would potentially you know um
um i'm arguing inevitably subsume um galaxy uh solar systems then galaxies uh and so on so
let's skip some stuff and get into the the self-help stuff since we don't have much time
daniel are is it at eight do we have to cut it eight or can we go ten minutes longer
we can go ten minutes over well we'll only go ten um i don't want to keep you too long but that will
help with the questions if i can end at eight then we can do ten minutes of questions sorry maybe i'll
try it in before but um so these phase transitions create these memory systems so these higher organized
systems um like life uh so when we get the first cell we have genetic memory and that's encoding
information that the organism basically that living things have discovered through evolution so evolution
is this process where it's making these different copies of these organisms um so there's a genome
with some information but it makes a copy and that copy has some variation so you get something different
and that difference that organism might be better fit to the environment or worse fit if it's worse
if it's a worse fit it's going to die out so it's going to be weeded out that that template of information
is going to be weeded out of the population and the the the organisms that are well adapted
get to make more copies of themselves so what's going on in this process is that you're building up
information in an organism and that information corresponds to adaptations and so that information
is information that is predictive about the environment so organisms are performing inference from the very
beginning of life's emergence they're trying to solve a problem it's how to stop this order to
disorder transition basically for an organism to stay organized it has to find energy and if it has to
find and that's what schrodinger's book what his life was showing is that you know life resists this
tendency to fall apart that boltzman described because it captures energy and that energy allows the
system to do work that's keeping the organization so with these phase transitions you get different
memory systems building on each other so you have genetic memory of the origin of life then you have
neural memory with the emergence of brains and then you have the emergence of civilization you get cultural
memory and then you get meme propagation so you get a different mode of transferring information and
all of these memory systems build on each other and they all encode predictive information about the
environment that allows the living system to stay out of thermodynamic equilibrium to stay out to
prevent falling apart um so one thing that is worth mentioning is this new picture of hierarchical emergence
this new paradigm where you have this multi-level level nature of reality where reality is organizing itself
into these hierarchical levels it has predictive power that the reductionist theory any reductionist theories of
everything don't have those are micro physics theories and they don't apply to life so those theories of
everything i would argue aren't theories of everything because they don't include life
and civilization and consciousness and what i'm saying is that that stuff has causal power it's not epiphenomena
so those things any theory of everything needs to include those things because they consider them
epiphenomena they go we don't have to worry about it but what i'm saying is those things actually have
causal power they need to be explained so some predictive power that this theory has that the old model doesn't the
micro scale model is that we can actually use the dynamics of a system at one level to understand the
dynamics of the system at another level because they're isomorphic they're they have similar patterns
because they're all complex adaptive systems so what i'm saying is that you can make predictions and you can
use principles to optimize society that are the same principles at work and evolution that optimize organisms
and so we can think about someone's asking okay maybe you accept that there's a global brain you go okay
we are agents we're informationally connected we're exchanging information the way neurons exchange
uh you know signal each other through action potentials we must be forming this collective
intelligence the way that there's an intelligence in the brain and we know we are because that's how we
build rockets and stuff the single person doesn't do it we build on accumulated knowledge we stand on the
shoulder of giants and we share information that's what science is all about it depends on that so
if you want to ask what how intelligent is the global brain is the network of humans then you can fall
back on understanding the way that neuroscientists have understand brains and what leads to greater
computational power and brains or is what's the most robust design for a civilization well what's the most
robust design for an organism well we want it to be hierarchical because you have this division of
labor and all these other advantages that we'll talk about in a minute but so my point is this theory
allows us to predict things that we couldn't predict before because we are using a model of a similar
system of a complex adaptive system at one level to tell us things about what hasn't happened in the
future and what will emerge and so there is a an essence there's a aspect of determinism here it's not
the same kind of determinism but there's a global determinism where you get expected patterns at
these levels so we can get a glimpse into where the future is headed but we can never know the details
and we can never know what will emerge exactly but we can see that these phase transitions happen and
we will get new emergencies um talking about predictive power so paul krugman nobel prize-winning
economist said by 2005 it will become clear that the internet's impact on the economy has been no greater
than the fax machines probably the most wrong statement that you could ever make um and so
um why did he make this mistake here we see it again internet may be just a passing fad as millions
give up on it why did they make this mistake what i'm saying is if they had this framework that i've
just outlined we would have known when we saw the internet this is a tool for interconnection this is a
tool for complexification it's not going away maybe the internet would go away but something else with
a different name would replace it because this is part of this trajectory that ray kerswell called like
the destiny for life so without this theory we will not see obvious things that would be obvious to us
otherwise and we'll make terrible predictions like paul krugman and hopefully everybody reminds him
every day of his life that he made that prediction um he is into he's really into systems thinking and
so i think he would understand this and i'm interested to know whether he got into systems thinking
after he made that prediction or before because if you see this picture like tealhardy chardin's
newest fear he predicted this the internet like you know 100 years ago um based on his theory
becoming more integrated um so what does this mean for society we'll mention some of that stuff before
getting into the bayesian stuff just because it's here isolationism is bad we want to be connected
if you cut people off it's not good um there's no information exchange and it could be good for your
nation in the short term but eventually what's happening elsewhere in the world is going to affect
you because it's one integrated system so we want to connect to people because we want to open up
channels of information exchange but we also want to uh preserve nations we want to have this
hierarchical thing where there's um control centers at all these levels towns cities nations uh etc so
we don't want it to become a homogenized hive mind why because complexity is in computational power it's
a function of variety and integration so something is more complex has more computational power if there's
more diversity among the parts and if there's more um connections between those parts so that definition of
complexity that lets us know if an organism is more complex like a human brain is more complex than an
ant brain because it has more neurons and more connections and more hierarchical levels we can use
that to create a more robust society now what does this mean for you it means life's part of a cosmic
process with a goal there's this cosmic attractor and we're agents that are part of that bringing that
attractor about this process allows the universe to to wake up so life spreading is the inanimate world
finding a form that models itself and slowly the the universe starts to become this integrated network
that's this coherent intelligence so that's pretty interesting um spiritual implications to that however
you want to interpret that but when we're part of this what does it mean for us okay so this is
the framing of the free energy principle it says organisms are so saving it for last so it'd be
climactic so the free energy principles it frames it with this schrodinger framing and carl fristen
that's where you got it from and it's also influenced by cybernetics but if you look at that stuff
you have the free energy principle because it basically says all organisms will fall apart all ordered
systems so free energy principle applies to aliens any any organized system anywhere in this universe
will have to first of all extract energy if they want to stay organized uh the free energy principle
doesn't focus on that but even though it has free energy in the name but i will focus on that because
i think it should be a part of it organisms have to capture real thermodynamic free energy to stay in
the game of existence to capture energy from a chaotic external world you have to start modeling the world
and that evolution is building a model of the world through variation and selection through through
these accumulation of adaptations and then brains do it even better and then you can update the model
in real time with brains because you have synaptic plasticity you don't have it's not slow where things
have to die and you have this phylogenetic learning which is like the population is learning
this individuals can learn in real time and so you have to model the world and the free energy principle
that's what it says it says there's reality and it has all these details that we don't know and we
have to create a model or a map of that world that's a coarse-grained simplified version of that
and then um that uh model is going to have errors and so what the free energy principle and active
inference framework says is that when we're doing actions in the world those are like miniature experiments
and um what we should do if we want to live optimally and stay out of thermodynamic equilibrium if we
want to survive and be robust we want to decrease the difference between our model of the world um
we want to decrease the error of our model and we want to make it more of an accurate representation of
the world so you have reality and then you have a model of reality and you want your model to match
reality as close as you can to be able to extract energy and avoid threats and to stay in existence
so we can be part of this continual process of complexification so we only got 10 more minutes
but i think we can uh actually cover all this so this looks really complex but this is going to allow
me to explain the free energy principle and merge it with evolutionary theory and even the process of
science so this is an organism imagine this is the first organism um that uh emerged with the origin of
life and so this organism makes copies of itself and you get all of these different designs right so
these different designs are variations on this model this organism is an embodied theory about how to survive
about how to stay far from equilibrium so it has a predictive model of the world that makes copies of
itself and you get all of these competing predictive models and then these models compete for survival and
some die out and the winning design is the best predictor it gets to make copies of itself and you
get a similar design so what's going on here is you have models that are competing models the way
scientific models compete and bayes theorem is basically you have a theory and you have competing models
and then you make predictions with those models and then you test those predictions and you update the
probability that each model is true based on the results of those experiments and so you want to
update your model based on new evidence and so what i'm saying is evolution when you create all these
organisms these copies and they compete it's competing models the way that scientific theories compete
and the winning model uh is a product of natural selection the same way that the winning scientific
theory is a product of surviving criticism and testing so that's a natural selection pressure
um so as these generations go on you get um with each generation you get an update to the model it's a
bayesian update and so the model starts to match reality better such that after a bunch of generations
you get an optimized organism that's optimized for that niche
and so this is how evolution itself is a process of bayesian inference as uh organisms adapt they're
updating their model carl fristen has understood this equivalence and and says that all of evolution
is inference of course someone might say all inference is evolution and it would all be equally true but
so this model applies to science it applies to learning so instead of all these different organisms you know
which we said could be theories different competing models you could have this as different
models of um maybe you're trying to figure out how to play your sport a sport like to the best of your
ability and you want to test out these different things and then you test them and and one performs better
and so that's the free energy principle is that you're decreasing the difference between your model and actual reality
so you're doing these little experiments all the time and based on what works you're updating your model or
you should be if you want to optimize your system for survival and growth and so um
it's the same when we're trying to find a um uh uh uh a political philosophy
capitalism socialism these are competing models we test those models out this is variation and selection
and the ones that work they get retained by society and we keep those so capitalism i would argue um it's
terrible right now but it was the best model for the time and um the superior model is always going to
be it's never going to be one thing it's always going to change so we would want to test hybrids between
socialism and capitalism and crypto economics if you want to define like determine a political
party based on this what you would say was that the best solution for a political party is to try out
different models in small areas and uh based on what works then you can see where to apply those models
but i would argue that it's not going to be socialism for every place it's not going to be capitalism
it might not even be a hybrid it might even be something in addition to that like i said crypto
economics and that we have to test these things and if we're not testing them and we're not trying
these different models we're not living optimal we have no way to get uh to the to the to the optimal
worldview political philosophy if we're not doing this testing and bayesian updating so that's one big
thing uh another thing that you know as i said that you know this is a basis for a self-help system
so you have to model the world and your model of the world how accurate is determines how successful you
are in life if you don't have an accurate model of the world you don't understand how things work
for example let's say you take a bunch of physics courses you can become an engineer and if you don't
understand how things work and you're not paying attention to evidence and you just have some sort
of beliefs that you believe for no reason and you try to get through life you will not be able to
achieve goals and progress uh in the way you would if you were doing bayesian updating um so when i say
this is a self-help system basically i'm saying there's lots of inaccuracies about our model of the
world that could be optimized if we took a bayesian approach to reality let me see let me tell you what i
mean by that in these last few minutes so we have five more minutes so there's this principle of
incomplete knowledge that comes from cybernetics and it says our there's this phrase the map is not
the territory so our model of the world is not the same as the actual world it can't hold all those
details the world is too chaotic uh and there's just too many um there's too many variables for any brain
to model so we need to have this low res like coarse grain version of our model of the world
and it's going to be incomplete it's always going to have uncertainty so anyone who's certain about
anything like sam harris is 100 certain that free will can't exist even though there's lots of uh
well-respected people that know a lot more about him than neuroscience and causality that say that free
will can't exist um it's just bad to be that certain because anybody who's been that certain in the past
has been proven wrong everybody thought newtonian mechanics would explain everything then we had
general relativity and now we see general relativity doesn't explain quantum mechanics every model is
going to be proven wrong so one thing to do is never be fully certain always take into account the
uncertainty of your model what should we do from that we should consider all possible theories um we
should consider for example when we're trying to explain something we want to know what was the
call what was the origin of covet we want to know how did we get sick the other day we want to know
how dangerous dangerous it is is it to move into this neighborhood um when we want to try to understand
like the origin specifically like we have to consider all possible explanations because if we don't we're
already setting ourselves self up for bias and self-deception so we want to be aware of the space of
possibilities of of possible explanations for a certain thing when making a decision and then we
want to map out the likelihood of each of those theories being true with all everything we know
and we do we don't we can't do this in everyday life we don't need to we have intuition about you
know what to do in a lot of simple situations but with complex situations like what person we should vote
for what political candidate what political party we should um support uh i think you have to do
uh this sort of bayesian analysis where you map out every possibility for example every possible
theory and explanation for something you write down the evidence for each one and then you use those
theories to make predictions and then you test them and then you um based on the results of those
testing uh that testing update your likelihood of each of those theories being true and we're not
doing this all the time so let me give you some examples um well so
you know flat earthers you could you know flat earthers think the earth is flat they have these
pictures where it's just flat earth uh in space and you know so if you go by this method i'm not gonna
i'm not gonna rule that out immediately uh to be a good bayesian you want to consider the possibility
because there's always going to be surprises in nature who would have thought quantum mechanics who
would have thought superposition and entanglement was really so weird that everyone would have said that
was pseudoscience they would have been like that defies the laws of physics we don't know so we
consider the theory then we write down evidence for it and we try to test it so we can take a flat
earth or we say we'll do a test so let's put you in a rocket we're going to pay for this we're going
to fund this we're going to give you a video camera you and your fighter friends we're going to bring
you up in a rocket we're going to show you we're going to look we're going to see if it's round or not
everybody's trying to really figure it out because most of us haven't been to space let's say we take
them into space we bring them back down they see the earth is round they come back down and they still get on their
flat message boards earth flat they drugged me or something like that some impossible thing um that
person is not being base optimal because they're not updating their uh model of the world um uh to be
more accurate so they're going to make mistakes let me give you an example a final example of um how i
can give you some new knowledge from this from a theory that will immediately change statistical
behavior i want to show you the effects of like agency so let's say you're completely ignorant to
whether squids or octopus are intelligent you just don't know when you're you you eat calamari at a
restaurant every week sometimes you eat popcorn shrimp and then you eat calamari let's say it's randomly
and you're a person that cares about you're a compassionate person so i have lunch with you and i
say you know neuroscience has shown that it seems like you know squids are highly intelligent and they
show all this complex behavior they have these nervous systems that would uh seem to make them
intelligent um i mean lead to this like computational power where they can solve all these problems
and i tell that person if they're convinced of my argument their statistical behavior is likely to
change such that if you were someone and you were looking at their eating pattern all of a sudden you
see them get this new knowledge they update their model and suddenly they don't eat uh the calamari
anymore suddenly their appetizer becomes shrimp because they go oh that's unethical um and then
maybe they're kind of weak maybe they go i love calamari and they eat it like once a month instead of
like every week or something so what i'm saying is that there's a real power of knowledge that when you
show the person that and they update their model there is a statistical change in behavior that's
quantifiable immediately so that's the power of of of knowledge like we can we do have like agency and
we can actually see that people are not behaving in a bayes optimal way and um we can see all sorts of
you know disagreements about for example theories if we did a bayesian analysis we could start to converge
on what is the true answer for this um so it could be a solution to the misinformation problem a solution
to the misinformation problem is a solution to a problem in your own life um basically it tells you
you know how you need to um update your model to be more accurate and you behave in a different way you
don't have these like delusions um so you know i yeah there's uh you set goals for yourself uh in the
teleological stance because basically life to stay out of equilibrium has to have these intrinsic uh
survival goals like finding energy and avoiding threats but when you create a goal you you basically
create an attractor and when you start working towards that goal um that is when you have a goal in
your mind you say i'm going to do this for the world i'm going to build this thing that creates an
attractor that you work towards if you don't create that goal in your mind you're actually not going to
do what you need to do to make sure uh to work towards that happening so goal setting is absolutely
something essential and if we don't do that then we're not living optimally either and actually like
the law of attraction those kind of things that sound you know like woo and you're like you know but
they're these best sellers why do they sell because we can actually start to map this on to the this sort
of like um systems thinking and you can see oh that's why this new age stuff worked um variation
selection is the method of evolution or learning or science so we can use that in our real life like
if you're writing a book or something um don't just be isolated for a year writing it yourself
write a little bit at a time pass it to your friends get some criticism and so that's a natural
selection filter they tell you what's not good about it you go back you change it you vary it and
you give it back to your reading group that's using variation and selection to optimize your writing you
can use this for any project for not doing that we're making life harder um creating a collective mind
so i'm saying that there's this process uh at all these hierarchical levels so when we um start to
collaborate with someone we're forming a collective intelligence um that then exchanges information for
us so we want to try to form collective minds and that's when you're passing your book to your friend
you're doing that you're forming a collective mind and then you're doing an optimization process at
the level of the collective you want to align interests so you find synergy so basically you're not
you don't want to be opposed to others goals so if you all have goals you want to look at what are
your similar goals and not where you're conflicting and then you will try to align those interests so
we could try to do some sort of analysis with china for example where we try to uh align interest and
see where we agree before you know rather than focusing on all of our disagreements and try to make
progress that way and then the law of requisite variety is the final thing i'll mention right now
um is that um to when you want to model the world depending on how complex your niche is
you basically your model matches the complexity of the niche and so you will have a lot you will need
a lot of accessible cognitive states if you're a theoretical physicist living in manhattan in this chaotic
world we're living on a farm or something so you want to try to um find the niche
that max matches your skill set um so you want to find low complexity niche if you're not a highly
cognitive person and if you are a person that thinks a lot and your mind is just always thinking
you might not want to live in a small town simple like rural town you might because you're not matched
with the niche you could be highly intelligent but still you would be seen as crazy because basically
um the niche is so simple that your model's too complex so um yeah there's a lot of things that
come out of this that i would like to expand on but we don't have any time and we haven't really talked
about free will and and and everything that we talked about at the beginning so maybe we'll have to do
this again but um hopefully that was introduction to this theory of everything which creates this cosmic
context that you're an agent in the theological stance is saying i'm an agent that has to survive
in a world that tends towards this other disorder otherwise and to do that i have to extract energy
and to extract energy i have to model the world in more detail and more sophistication as we run out
of energy we're going to have to model more and more of the world so bayesian inference is how agents
basically um uh carry out this process of cosmic uh complexification so life is the mechanism for
complexity increase and we are agents with causal power and we have to basically um take this bayesian
approach to get to the future uh that we want to see and if we don't take this approach um basically uh
the world is on a sort of trajectory towards resource depletion so this is actually like becoming aware of
this and this method is something that society needs to get us to the next phase transition if we don't have it
we're not going to get there so what i'm saying is that this self-help system in a way there's a selection
pressure that's creating it it might not be this version of it but some form of this is sort of destined
to be the next big thing so everybody thinking along these lines there are other people besides me
um keep going in that direction because you're onto something so yeah
you're going to be the next step and then you're going to be the next step and then you're going to
jump in there yet or what i think yeah bernie must have had to go wow
well bobby i'll ask just two short questions from the chat just in our final minutes so first quick
question from ross b what is the line between living and non-living matter how about i answer them in
like a few sentences and we do a little bit more um but we'll still cut it early so the line between
living and non-living matter is agency and agency comes from the causal power of information and it
gets built up through an evolutionary process so you have an auto catalytic set that's a self-maintaining
chemical set and there's some sort of phase transition between that chemical set and the first cell
where there's a causal a change in causal structure and the agent basically gains informational control
and it gains the ability to initiate new causal chains and we call that top-down causation
so check out sarah walker and paul davy's work on informational control next all right very well
second question from ross are these phase transitions representative of weak emergence or strong
emergence in bobby's theory each new laws come into play that exert downward causation yeah i wanted
to address that and that gets in the free will stuff and i would love to just come back and do a talk
on free will so um what i'm saying is strong emergence has been defined wrong it's emergence
that seems to violate the laws of physics the way it's been defined and what i'm saying is strong
emergence is real but of course it doesn't violate the laws of physics anything that's real
is part of physics so um weak emergence would be more like the formation of like a whirlpool
in the bathtub like you have all these uh you have the formation of uh a coherent structure that does
introduce global constraints that constrain the movement of the particles such that they're no longer
chaotic they're in this ordered state but with strong emergence you actually see this change in
causal structure that i just mentioned or information basically gains causal power and you have an agent
that's a control center that's actually deciding to do things and that's actually real causation
that's called top-down causation and so what strong emergence is is for example uh prior to life coming
into existence you have all inanimate matter and when you have a living thing we already said you drop a
rock and a pigeon off a tower one's predictable from newtonian equations one's not one you have to
understand its genes and you have to understand like its relationship to its environment and then
you can say oh it's flying because it has to survive and you can actually predict some things about it
won't splat on the ground it's going to fly away but you can't predict it with the same thing so what
i'm saying is what strong emergence is is a change in causality such that we have living agents with
informational control and it's not something that's against the laws of physics or somehow working
against that what it is is the laws of physics weren't complete now we're understanding that there's
information that can have causal power and you do see this different type of causation
such that the living world behaves distinctly different than the non-living world
Michael the penultimate word oh that's uh put me on the spot young lads uh and again daniel you know uh
what's going on in the background i'm sure people will guess but uh no um i think you know what uh bobby and
i had spoken about earlier was uh this comes down to what is our uh personal agency in terms of you know
again bobby has spent a long time here and i'm gonna have to like re-listen to it myself again and uh
spend some more time with it but um we're elucidating or bobby is elucidating uh what kind of agency we have
in the face of complexity um and obviously there's a what we say before bobby a methodology
there's a methodology to this uh we had some kind of catchphrase whatever but yeah so well the thing
is we do have agency we behave different than inanimate systems and we do have causal power um but
that's not enough that's like the first step it's like okay we're these agents then what do we do
and the the bayesian approach is kind of an instruction manual for how do you do how do you
exercise this agency agency optimally and what we want to do is we want to be um aware of the uncertainty
in our model and we want to try to decrease that uncertainty and we do that by for example not just
having one theory about something we consider all possible theories we consider the outcomes of those
theories and we make sure that we update our model uh in light of new information and if we don't do
that we're not behaving optimally and we're not fully exercising our agency and you're going to see
consequences of that at the societal level and so society is basically creating
pressures that are going to force us to be sort of bayesian agents because if we're not updating our
model and not seeking out new information and being curious uh we're not going to be competitive
but yeah it's all about agency it's all about i will i will add to this too bob you just know to
bridge the gap between the two of you um uh daniel and pin off the word for sure on my part but uh
you said act infer and serve right daniel said that i like that yeah
yeah so all this is really saying new is that active inference is not something specific to humans
that organisms when you have a population of organisms and evolution is making all these copies
the population is doing a sort of inference process you have these different organisms that
are different embodied models and then they're competing and then only the most accurate ones survive
so that's what bayesian inference is um and uh this should also apply at the level of society so when
you have a a social organism a society it has a model and that model is its world view it could be a
religion it could be the political model it could be authoritarianism or whatever and so with that too we
want to optimize those models and if we don't try all of the different models and and test those models
um we will have no way to know if we have the optimal model so we can't just go capitalism seems the best
or capitalism sucks let's throw it out let's do let's do communism we want to test things constantly
and update and that's error correction if we don't do that we're screwed so the bayesian the free energy
principle needs to be extended to all these levels um and when we do that then we have a whole new way to
go about optimizing social systems and political systems right now it's just like oh i think this
you know i believe in uh you know a liberal world or i believe in this conservative view and it's like
okay fine well how do we get to the bottom of it no one's going to agree first i mean let's do do
testing constant testing the proof is in the pudding it's a good idea we're going to see benefits we're
going to take surveys of everyone and get feedback and see what we can improve and um vitalio venturing
the guy who has the idea of the universe being this neural network which has been covered by media
he's explained that this multi-level learning is consistent with this neural network theory and that
you do have true emergence and you have causal power at these higher levels um and he's trying to
design a political party around this like a new approach to politics and that sort of position
that i came up with that you need to test it without me even saying anything to him that was already his
idea that he's has fleshed out you know i'm sure more than i have um so people are working on this stuff
but this is like a new niche being created right here this is the time everybody needs to go like how
can we use these systems bayesian inference and evolutionary science evolutionary theory mechanisms
to optimize society if we don't do that from if it's not entering the political discussion
we're lost we're primitive like like in a hundred years all of these things that we're talking about
i believe will be part of the discussion uh for anyone who's having any sort of ideas about how to design
systems all right bobby well you're always welcome back for 15.4 we can push into decimal places unseen
all right let's do free will let's let's bring adam and everybody back and and and do free will
free will and does voting matter two sides of the same coin yeah it is and no one's really doing that
no one's thinking that that debate has they think it's purely intellectual it's not yeah so yeah we
need to connect it to practical stuff yeah well thank you to all of our panelists and bobby as always so
both of you yeah no strengthen the journey journey well to everyone listening
all right see you later i wish yeah i wish you could hear more from brendan but uh yeah we'll follow up um
uh go to the road to omega sub stack and i'm going to post about this video and then we can have some
discussion in the comments if you see this yeah all right thank you all right thanks a lot everybody
not very well bye
thank you





















































Thank you.

## dTcuDE6nUpg

Hello. Welcome everyone. It is February
25th, 2026. We are in Active Inference
guest stream 15.4 with Bobby Azarian and
guests Kevin Schmidt and Karl Friston.
Looking forward to this presentation and
discussion. Bobby will present some
slides and then we will have a panel
discussion and I'll read some live
chats. So, thank you to Bobby and guests
for joining and please take it away,
Bobby.
Friston Institute. I love talking to you
because this can be
technical and accessible at the same
time, which I think it really needs to
be for this topic.
And thank you to Kevin and Karl for
attending. If you guys have any
questions or comments, just feel free to
jump in.
There are about 60 slides, so I'm going
to try to keep this to under an hour.
So, I'm going to be going through slides
pretty quickly.
And
we will not get to some of the stuff
that I wanted to about how this informs
AI, but we'll touch on that at the end,
but we're going to focus on one of the
greatest mysteries of science,
the mystery of consciousness.
It's It's one of
the the great remaining mysteries of
science.
Um
So, the framework that we're going to
use to try to answer this mystery is
called strange loop theory.
And I named it that after Douglas
Hofstadter's strange loop idea that he
wrote about in his
Pulitzer Prize winning book Gödel,
Escher, Bach and again in the follow-up
I Am a Strange Loop. Bringing that idea
together with
major neuroscience theories and
consciousness theories, specifically
Karl's free energy principle and
Tononi's integrated information theory.
So,
yeah, let's begin.
So, Richard Feynman
had this famous statement, "What I
cannot create, I do not understand."
More commonly spoken as if if you if you
can't build it, you don't understand it.
So, this was written on the blackboard
during the time of his death and will
serve as a kind of theme for this talk.
So, the converse is also true. If we can
build it,
then we understand it, at least to some
degree. So, building a conscious machine
would be the ultimate test
of any theory of consciousness. Maybe
the term machine isn't perfect because,
for example, if we create AI on
self-organized neuromorphic hardware,
for example, there are these silver
nanowire networks that
self-organized
and
do we call that a machine? It's more
like life. Let's Let's say building a
conscious AI system is the ultimate test
of any theory of consciousness.
And let's call that Feynman's challenge.
We claim to understand consciousness.
I I think we
That's That's the the big claim of this
talk is that we understand the
mechanisms enough to say that in theory
we understand what gives rise to
consciousness and
we want to prove that ultimately by
building a a conscious system.
So,
um
what this presentation offers, a
mechanistic explanation of how
consciousness arises from physical
processes. It's also going to briefly
give a cosmic explanation for why
consciousness exists, which is more of a
philosophical and
existential claim.
And we will briefly touch on an
an engineering path to prove our model
by designing
a conscious system.
So, we start with the infinite infamous
hard problem. David Chalmers defined
this problem explicitly in 1995, but
it's a it's a problem that's really
centuries old. It's kind of a
restatement of the mind-body problem.
So, what is consciousness and why does
it exist? Before we can
explain consciousness, we need to define
it. That's always been a tricky issue
because
for example, you can have an AI system
an LLM that responds as if it's
conscious, but we have no good reason to
believe that these systems actually have
phenomenal experience. So, it gets real
tricky when you're trying to give a
scientific description or definition of
consciousness. The philosopher Thomas
Nagel
um posed a solution just to basically
defining consciousness as something it
is like
to be
a conscious entity. So, an organism that
has conscious an organism has conscious
mental states if and only if
there's something it is like to be that
organism. He has a famous essay, "What
Is It Like to Be a understand anything,
it's best to understand its opposite, to
to compare it to something else. Um
So, when David Chalmers outlined the
hard problem, he also outlined
the easy problem. And the easy problem,
which isn't easy at all, it's extremely
hard, but
it seemed tractable because in the '90s,
functional
MRI was getting popular and these new
neuroimaging tools were being used in
conjunction with cognitive psychology
measures and we were basically, you
know, understanding the cognitive
mechanisms associated with
consciousness. So, the easy problem is a
series of problems that include
understanding perception, so how we
discriminate and categorize stimuli,
attention, so what we attend to is what
we're conscious of. So, to understand
consciousness, we really need to
understand how attention works.
Integration,
how we bind sensory processing
streams. There's this famous binding
problem.
How how is our visual and our auditory
streams
of information
bound together into a coherent whole?
And the difference between sleep and
awake states and states under
anesthesia. So, consciousness is
something that emerges when we're awake
and then leaves. So,
there's something There's a phenomenon
there that needs to be explained.
The hard problem
is not about those cognitive mechanisms.
It's about why is physical information
processing why
does it have a feeling? Why is there
subjective experience accompanying this
cognition? So, we know our computers do
complex information processing tasks,
but we don't think that
our computers
that there's anything it's like to be
our computer. So, there seems to be this
explanatory gap. How do we get from
mechanism to experience? And that That's
really the hard problem. It's the
mystery of subjective experience.
So, I think we have things backwards. I
think the hard problem is the easy
problem, not not necessarily easy, but
the easier problem.
You can answer the hard problem with a
theoretical
explanation, where the easy problem is
this set
you know, it's a technical problem where
we have to understand the nuts and bolts
of the cognitive processes that are
associated with consciousness.
So, I think the easy problem um
will still remain a problem
after the hard problem is pretty much
solved. And actually, by the end of this
talk, we can maybe see that this
distinction is kind of meaningless, that
there's just one problem and that when
you understand the hard problem, uh
it becomes an additional problem on top
of the other
easy problem. So, we need to understand
perception, attention, integration, and
also
world and self-modeling. And when we add
self-modeling to that list of easy
problems, then we start to get at the
mechanism underlying the generation of
conscious experience.
So,
um
once we explain how a self emerges
through mechanism and understand what
qualia are in these terms, what remains
is a challenge, not a problem. So, it's
kind of an optimistic spin on this. So,
today the goal is to convert the hard
problem into a hard challenge and that's
um
what we call the super hard problem. So,
how can we create a conscious system
from scratch? This requires solving both
the hard and easy problems sufficient to
reproduce the phenomenon. So, this is
Feynman's challenge applied to
consciousness.
And the claim is that strange loop
theory converts the hard problem into an
engineering specification. Build a
system with an integrated model of the
world and then have that system model
itself modeling the world.
So, uh
if we want to address this problem, we
should talk about the philosophical
landscape, the different existing
positions on consciousness so we can see
what they get right and what they
potentially get wrong.
Um and when we talk about these
different stances on consciousness,
we're going to be talking about
philosophies like materialism, idealism,
dualism, panpsychism.
Um these uh are stances that address
what could be called the hard problem of
reality. So, so what's the nature of
existence? Is it all physical? Is it all
mental?
Is it a combination of the two? If so,
how do those things interact? So, to
solve one, we must solve the other, it
seems.
So, dualism, uh that was the early
stance, uh famous one, uh by Descartes,
uh who had the famous statement, uh I
think, therefore I am.
So, Descartes uh basically said that
reality consists of two distinct
substances. There's this material stuff
and then there's this mental stuff.
Um and somehow minds influence matter,
but he didn't really explain how this uh
influence happens, which leads to a a
ghost in the machine problem where you
have something that is seemingly
immaterial pushing material stuff around
and that seems to violate the
mechanistic worldview of science, the
Newtonian worldview.
Um Descartes was a Christian, so he
equated consciousness with the soul, and
for that reason, dualism has pretty much
um
uh fallen out of popularity with modern
um scientists and philosophers, except
in a weaker form, which is called
property dualism, and this says there's
only one substance, but some systems can
have non-physical properties like
consciousness, which have genuine causal
power over their material components.
And so, uh Chalmers himself and Christof
Koch are sympathetic to this stance,
and uh there may be nothing wrong with
this stance. This may, you know,
basically it's saying that the mental
emerges from the material and it also
has causal power. So, um
like the other ones we're going to see,
when someone asks, is dualism right, you
have to ask what you mean by dualism
exactly.
So, materialism,
um
pretty much replaced uh
dualism in academia in the 19th and 20th
centuries.
Uh this was called eliminative
reductionism,
um because scientists had this physical
and mechanistic worldview,
uh
they weren't sure how to handle
consciousness and subjective experience.
So, the the the sort of
move, the chess move they made was to
completely um
ignore consciousness or say that
consciousness doesn't exist in the sense
that we think it does, and that kind of
magically got rid of the problem. So,
that was called eliminative eliminative
reductionism.
It was popular with um the Churchlands.
Um this led to the illusionist position
that just said it out right that
consciousness isn't real, it's an
illusion,
um made popular by people like Daniel
Dennett and Keith Frankish, and
basically says consciousness emerges
from neural activity, but phenomenal
experience is a cognitive mirage. So,
this kind of just evaporates the hard
problem, but the paradox is they're
saying it's an emergent property, but
that it doesn't exist at the same time.
So, which one is it? Illusionists live
life as if consciousness is real and has
causal power, so it's
you you're kind of like a walking
contradiction. If you're an illusionist,
um and you can't get away from this uh
simple cogito ergo sum statement of
Descartes, I think, therefore I exist,
so denying the subjective means denying
the reality of the map you're navigating
with.
Um
Dan Dennett's book, Consciousness
Explained, is jokingly called
Consciousness Ignored by uh
consciousness researchers because uh
rather than addressing the issue of
experience head-on, it just kind of
dodges it. And John Searle said that
when it comes to consciousness, the
illusion is the reality. So, we know
consciousness, we know the map is not
the territory, it's
uh virtual construction, and Anil Seth
calls it a hallucination, but that's
something. Calling it not real, saying
it doesn't exist, doesn't make sense
because the
virtual simulation, that that model,
that's something itself. So, you can't
really say it's an illusion. An illusion
to who? The the the statement itself um
suggests uh
an agent of experience.
So, there's also idealism, which says
everything emerges from consciousness,
the mind creates reality. The problem
with uh
what you could call naive idealism is
that things exist that no one has
observed. If if an astronaut
goes to another planet and
uh
doesn't see a rock
in his in his path and trips on that, he
he trips on something real that's never
been observed by anyone. So, the idea
that the mind is creating reality has a
fundamental flaw unless
uh you are talking about a form of
idealism like analytic idealism, um
which basically says that the the
material world emerges from this uh
consciousness that's a universal
consciousness. That's a very different
um argument, and so is idealism right or
wrong? Well, it depends on what version
you're talking about. Um this framework
would say that fundamentally
uh the universe is uh an information
processing systems. So, if you see mind
as information processing, then
uh yes, mind is fundamental in that
sense,
um but if you're defining mind as what
it's like to be something, then it seems
that mind emerges with life and
probably, you know, robustly with
with brains, not until brains. Um
panpsychism is a similar idea. It
doesn't try to explain away the
material, it just says that um
the material world has this conscious
aspect to it, and that
everything, whether you're talking
about, you know, atoms or chairs or the
universe as a whole, is conscious.
Again, if you're talking about
information processing, then one could
make the claim that the universe is
conscious in that it's processing
information, but if you're defining
consciousness like Nagel, what it's like
to be something, um then I don't think
panpsychism is right. I don't think
atoms, I don't think there's anything
it's like to be an atom or a chair.
Um
but this framework, so one could call it
a sort of emergent panpsychism, that
that consciousness inevitably emerges in
the universe and spreads as life spreads
outwards. So, um
the last position that I'll mention is
mysterianism,
uh made popular in the '90s by the
philosopher Colin McGinn. Um
neuroscientist Eric Hall um holds this
position now in a kind of new version, a
kind of Gödelian version that's
interesting. Um just as a dog cannot
comprehend quantum mechanics, uh
humans may lack the conceptual apparatus
to solve the hard problem. Um and Eric
says consciousness may be fundamentally
undecidable,
like a Gödel sentence.
Um our response is that Gödelian
slipperiness isn't a roadblock, but the
engine of discovery.
Um understanding consciousness does
change the configuration of the
conscious system comprehending itself,
producing something emergent, something
new to understand.
Um so,
yeah, in some way, the the mystery of
consciousness will go on forever because
of this.
Um understanding consciousness will
create new configurations in reality
that need to be understood. So, it's
kind of this um Gödelian
uh problem that that that you have to
create these meta-frameworks for,
um but this creates an infinite ladder
of understanding that drives scientific
progress and knowledge creation.
So, the mystery of consciousness
um is really uh an engine of progress.
Um and so, uh when we're done with the
framework, we'll see how each position
represents a partial truth,
um and when the mysteries unravel, they
will be seen as complementary rather
than contradictory.
And so, we will talk about a a third
hard problem in addition to the hard
problem of consciousness and the hard
problem of reality.
There's the practical hard problem that
we're all dealing with every day. Uh we
can call this the hard problem of
survival.
Um so, this problem's not philosophical
like the others, but practical, yet it
provides the solution that solves all
our hard problems. The key is
understanding why minds exist in the
first place, and that's to aid survival,
to aid persistence.
So,
uh
minds uh uh exist um
for a basic thermodynamic reason, for a
thermodynamic imperative.
So, this is
become famous uh
to scientists, this uh saying. I don't
think it's known enough,
but the saying is the second law of
thermodynamics is the first law of
psychology.
Um that was made explicit in a paper in
2003.
So, this idea is our mental processes
function to help us resist entropy's
pull. Minds are required for persistence
to acquire energy and avoid threats,
which is what we need to do to persist.
We must model the world. And this is uh
pretty much what the free energy
principle uh and the Bayesian brain
process are are based on. This is how
they frame it. Um to resist entropy, uh
agents have to create uh predictive
models.
So, this is an old idea. Goes back all
the way to Erwin Schrödinger,
uh famous physicist, uh wrote a great
book in 1944, What is Life? Actually
based on a lecture. So, everyone should
check that out if they don't know it. It
says, "Living systems seem to defy the
disordering tendency associated with the
second law. Life creates and maintains
islands of remarkable organization not
by violating physics, but by extracting
energy from the environment." So, to
stay ordered, you have to get energy. To
get energy, you have to build a model of
the world.
And Dennett said in 1995, "What then are
living things? They are things that defy
this crumbling into dust at least for a
while by not being isolated, by taking
in from their environment the
wherewithal to keep life and limb
together." So, you see this recurring
theme
in popular science books. In 2017,
Steven Pinker wrote, "The second law
defines the ultimate purpose of life,
mind and human striving, to deploy
energy and information to fight back the
tide of entropy and carve out refuges of
beneficial order." So, we can really
understand purpose and agency through
this window. Uh agency uh is basically
um
this uh struggle to maintain persistence
in a world that tends toward entropic
decay. So, Anil Seth more recently says,
"I have to actively resist the second
law of thermodynamics so I don't
dissipate into all kinds of states. I
don't just dissolve into mush on the
floor. It's an active process."
And so, this is tied to biological
agency, but also intimately tied to
consciousness itself. Uh in that
article, uh Anil argues that
consciousness may be nature's way of
allowing its intelligent creations to
keep going
to almost always find a way.
So,
uh
to to to this kind of summarizes how we
get from uh
entropy to experience. So, this is
this is the narrative. The second law
creates this pressure um systems
uh have to resist
dissolution. And to do that, uh requires
finding energy and anticipating threats.
So, navigation and anticipation requires
predictive modeling.
You have to build a map of the world to
be able to get around in it.
And prediction requires simulating
counterfactuals.
So, the argument is that consciousness
is this simulation. It's the virtual
world the system runs to select actions.
So, your your brain is a computational
system
running a world model. But where does
the self come from? The I in I think,
therefore I am. It's not just enough to
have
a world model. The simulation becomes
conscious when the simulator appears
inside its own simulation. This is the
strange loop.
So, on to the next part, uh you are a
strange loop, how self-modeling creates
the self.
So, the argument is that there are two
requirements for consciousness. First, a
system that builds a world model to
navigate entropic challenges. Second, a
recursive leap where that system
incorporates itself into its own model.
When a model begins modeling itself
modeling the world, pretty loopy, uh
something remarkable happens. A
self-referential loop generates a
perspective, advantage point, an I. So,
that was the real mystery. Um
and the concept of a simulation doesn't
quite get you there because our computer
simulations, they there's there's
nothing it is like to be those
simulations. So, we need something more,
and that's self-modeling.
Um
So, Douglas Hofstadter, uh
you know, this isn't a new idea. This
goes back to 1979, and he really
described it in detail. Um
and so, he he calls the strange loop. He
describes it as a level crossing
information pathway that folds in on
itself, something like a mental Möbius
strip.
So, the idea is that without
self-modeling, the generative model is a
Cartesian theater with no one in the
audience.
Um so, the world simulation is not
sufficient. It must place the simulator
within the simulated world.
And we get a picture of reality being
relational from this.
Uh so, Hofstadter um has this cool
little demonstration he likes to
mention. Think of what happens when a TV
camera is pointed uh at the screen so as
to display the screen on itself, a
self-engulfing television. When and only
when such a loop arises uh in a brain or
any other substrate is a person, a
unique I brought into being.
And here's a picture of this strange
loop. So, this is a camera pointed at a
monitor, and you see this emergent uh
fractal structure. Uh Hofstadter claims
that the the self, the I, um emerges in
an analogous way.
And
so, um
how does the self model emerge? Um
unlike uh organisms that just have uh
genes, organisms with brains are able to
record the consequences of the
organism's actions in real time. So, so
you need brains to be able to map the
immediate causal consequences of your
actions. And when you're doing that,
then you're building up a model of the
self.
Um so, that builds up uh a model of your
behavioral routines and patterns. And
this generative model transforms into an
experiential subject when that happens.
Um so, the phenomenological world
emerges from uh recursive processing.
And this doesn't just explain emergence
of consciousness, uh it explains the
emergence of levels of consciousness.
So, self-consciousness emerges um from
uh
an even higher level of recursive
processing.
And the strange loop spawns a new level
of control. So, it's not just that
you're getting these higher levels of
awareness with richer recursive
processing, the system is also gaining
more autonomy, more causal power of the
world over the world. It's not this
input-output machine any longer. It can
understand its own coding, and it can
modify itself.
So, you have these different levels. So,
the first level, the system models the
world. You just get agentic behavior. Um
probably uh
a sort of zombie system with no um
subjective experience. When the system
models itself modeling the world with
brains, we get consciousness.
When the system models itself
self-modeling, you get
self-consciousness. And a higher level
emerges when the system models itself
within a larger system of agents.
Um at this higher point of reflection,
um that gives rise to
metacognition and all of the uh great
functions that we uh
have thanks to our
um evolved prefrontal cortex.
So, each level adds a new level of
top-down control. It's it's it's really
enabling greater levels of agency.
So, the more self-referentially rich the
loop, the more conscious the self. So,
we're going to talk about integrated
information theory later, and the idea
is that
uh integrated information is necessary
but not sufficient. You have to have
this uh self-reference.
So, Judea Pearl, uh who's been really
influential on AI with his uh work in
Bayesian networks and causal modeling,
uh says, uh "That's consciousness. You
have a model of yourself. Where do you
get this model? You look at yourself as
if you're part of the environment. I
have a blueprint of myself. So, at that
level, I can modify things.
This is what we mean by free will." So,
he connects consciousness to
self-modeling, but he also connects it
to higher agency. That was on the Lex
Fridman podcast.
Um and Carl wrote a wonderful essay for
uh Eon. Uh I recommend that everyone
reads that because it ties all these
together ideas together seamlessly. Uh
he says, "Anytime there's a deviation
from the attractor, this triggers flows
of thoughts, feelings, and movements
that eventually take you back to your
cycle of attracting familiar states.
This view In this view, humans are
little more than strange loops, as
Douglas Hofstadter puts it." So, this is
getting at more than just the
um
the self-modeling loop. We are
cybernetic controllers at a fundamental
level. We use feedback loops to sustain
ourselves
uh against this tide of entropic decay.
And this, you can see he mentions
feelings here.
So this gives us a new perspective on
qualia. Uh qualia is not uh
epiphenomenal.
Uh qualitative experiences are actually
uh adaptive instructions. So they serve
uh to guide the conscious system towards
um
a stable state. So it to guide the
conscious system towards a far from
equilibrium state of dynamic
equilibrium. I guess you could call it a
non-equilibrium equilibrium.
Uh basically an organism tries to
maintain itself in this attractor and a
dynamical attractor uh is applied to
life as a state of homeostatic balance.
So what is pain in this model? It's a
high free energy signal indicating
dangerous deviation.
And so that's why when you touch a hot
stove, you um pull your hand back
quickly. It triggers withdrawal
instructions.
Where pleasant sensations are low free
energy signals and uh
um basically signal the organism to
maintain adaptive behaviors. Of course,
this can be deceptive when we get into
uh you know, can lead to addiction, but
that's uh the point of it. It's it's
basically um
um
a signal to keep uh
dynamic equilibrium against this
tendency to
uh dissolve. So qualia are not
epiphenomenal as the illusionist
position maintains. They have a causal
function.
And so now that we have an understanding
of how the subjective perspective
emerges from self-modeling and the
function of qualia, let's talk about um
how we can potentially
uh quantify
uh consciousness, um which is what
integrated information theory tries to
do with their measure phi. And the
argument here is that consciousness
grows richer with cognitive complexity.
Specifically with the number of
accessible states
the system can access. So
this idea is called repertoire entropy.
We're talking about the
uh number of states a system can
experience. So
the average number of states the typical
human could experience is far richer
than the average number of states of a
of a cat, which is far richer than the
average number of states accessible to
uh
a mouse. Um
so this idea is based on the law of
requisite variety. So the great
cyberneticist Ross Ashby um
wrote this paper in the '50s. The law
says to survive an organism must have a
repertoire of cognitive states and
behavioral responses as large as the
number of different challenges presented
by its environment. So a cat hunting
mice must have as many responses as the
ways the mouse can evade it. A swordsman
must have as many blocks as opponent has
attacks.
And humans who live in a complex social
and technological world, um we require
uh an even greater repertoire of
responses. So the more options a system
has to respond, the more effectively it
can control its situation.
So this thing that we're saying
correlates with degree of consciousness
has an adaptive function. Um more states
means uh
greater ability to control an
unpredictable world. So Francis
Heylighen says, "Since the variety of
perturbations a system can potentially
be confronted with is unlimited, we
should always try to maximize its
internal variety so as to be optimally
prepared for any foreseeable or
unforeseeable contingency."
Um
this idea is uh
popping up in different places. Um From
computational neuroscience to
um physics to AI. So Alex Wissner-Gross
at Harvard says
um has this concept of causal entropic
forcing. Um which says that there's this
drive to maximize future freedom of
action.
So life is trying to increase options.
It's trying to avoid trap states.
Uh Daniel Polani, computational
neuroscientist, uh has this concept of
empowerment.
Which is an agent's capacity to
influence its future states. His
co-author says empowerment means in a
state where you have the greatest
potential influence. So very similar to
causal entropic forcing.
Um and empowerment is proportional to
requisite variety. Um why is this all
relevant to consciousness? The size of
the mental repertoire
relates directly to the richness of
experience. And we're going to explain
why.
Um
so it's worth quickly mentioning the Red
Queen principle as a principle from
evolutionary theory that says that as
competitors evolve, organisms must
expand their repertoire to stay viable.
So this fuels evolutionary arms races,
which act as complexity ratchets. What
begins as simple molecular memory in
genomes eventually evolves into internal
representations in self-aware social
agents. So because of the need um to
complexify
uh life is always generating new species
that have um greater requisite variety.
And because the social world of modern
humans keeps growing more complex,
uh evolution seems to be progressive.
There's always a new niche for
intelligence willing to take on more
complexity.
Kristof Koch, uh one of the famous
proponents of IIT, says the more complex
the system, the larger the repertoire of
conscious states it can experience. So
this isn't some new obscure argument. Uh
this has been echoed by the leaders in
the field. Robin Carhartt-Harris, a
psychedelics researcher, uh has the
entropic brain hypothesis. And he says
the view taken here is that the human
brain exhibits greater entropy than
other members of the animal kingdom,
which is equivalent to saying the human
mind possesses a greater repertoire of
potential mental states than lower
animals.
So what does this mean? It means we can
potentially measure the information
content of a given observation
and we can basically infer that
um
observation
uh
basically works in this
uh same way as observing um
an outcome with like uh
a roll of of dice, for example.
Um so
when you
uh toss a coin and you observe the
outcome, you get one bit of information.
Uh when you observe a six-sided die toss
outcome, you get 2.6 bits of
information. So the amount of
information
um scales with the number of
possibilities.
And so that's a basic way um that's a
basic principle from Claude Shannon's
information theory. And so applying that
to consciousness, we are saying that the
more possible states a cognitive system
can be in, the higher the repertoire
entropy.
So here entropy is not measuring
disorder, but cognitive bandwidth.
Information is a reduction in
uncertainty. So the amount of
information in a signal is the
uncertainty reduced upon observation.
So that leads to the conclusion that the
depth of a conscious moment scales with
the number of states that could be
experienced, but are not currently
actualized. Repertoire entropy measures
this richness. The greater the space of
possibilities, the more information in
an experience.
So the current experience would be
defined by the counterfactual cloud that
surrounds it. Red's redness emerges from
its position within contrast networks,
relationships to green, blue, yellow,
and the entire perceivable spectrum.
And so we can imagine the simplest
organism, for example, a bacterium
performing chemotaxis. It basically only
has two states. If it senses chemical
food, it doesn't move. It doesn't do
anything. And then it basically sits and
feeds on that food. If it doesn't sense
food, it wiggles its tail and that moves
it uh to some new location until it
senses food. So you can imagine a system
with just two states where each state is
defined only by not being the other. So
to understand this new picture, there's
there's this kind of dialectical
relationship between presence and
absence. So this binary agent uh
wouldn't be able to perceive color. The
two states couldn't be um red and blue,
for example.
Um
that the complexity of the experience of
color has to emerge from this network of
relationships.
Uh a system that can only experience two
states would only experience something
like light and dark. And it might even
be misleading to talk about a visual
modality because you don't have the
complexity for for different sensory
streams. It's really just presence or
absence. So if a
sentient being were combined confined to
a binary repertoire or a very small um
number of accessible states, then
it wouldn't be able to have qualia in
any meaningful sense. So it's the
spectrum of possible experiences we
could have, but aren't having that makes
the present what it is. The more
accessible states, the greater the
variety of qualia.
So, as we evolve and learn more and our
spectrum of possible experience
increases, so should the intensity with
with with with which we feel them. The
information content of a conscious
experience increases in proportion to
the size of our mental repertoire. So,
that's pretty interesting. It means as
we learn and as we
go through life and travel to different
destinations, we're basically unlocking
more accessible states. We're increasing
the size of our
um cognitive repertoire, our requisite
variety.
And this makes me think differently
about everything. Like when when I'm
trying like new food, I'm I'm seeing
that as
unlocking like new qualia and new
states. And by doing that and expanding
the size of my
uh
cognitive repertoire, um
I should be increasing the richness of
each conscious experience because each
observation will then be rolling out all
of the experiences that I could have had
but aren't having at that moment. So,
it's it's it's a practical philosophy as
well.
Uh repertoire entropy measures the
number of adaptive responses available.
So, the requisite variety, this has been
estimated in a paper by uh cognitive
scientist named Danko Nikolic. Um so,
you can actually uh kind of uh calculate
exact um
uh repertoire entropy figures for
different species based on what we know.
Um integrated information theory's phi,
uh
touted as a measure for consciousness,
um already captures this. Uh phi is
measuring the degree to which a system
is more than the sum of its parts. So,
it's measuring emergence. Uh to
calculate phi, you have to calculate uh
the repertoire entropy. It's it's
implicit in that calculation. And phi is
constrained by repertoire size. So, the
larger the repertoire, the larger the
potential phi. So, the conclusion is phi
is a good proxy measure for
consciousness because it captures
repertoire entropy, but it should be
emphasized that integrated information
is necessary but not sufficient in this
framework.
Uh so, strange loop theory says
consciousness requires self-modeling in
addition to integrated information.
So, how does this new framework uh
resolve old paradoxes? So, we're going
to just focus on two.
Um but really, this framework seems to
dissolve uh all of the major um
philosophy of mind paradoxes that have
you know, any any book on consciousness
you read will will go through these and
I think it it addresses these pretty
nicely. Um so, there's this famous uh
zombie problem that that that Chalmers
and Dennett
uh
talked about and really made famous. But
the idea is that you can imagine
um
a being or a system physically identical
to you but with no inner experience. So,
it behaves exactly like you. It talks,
responds, claims to be a conscious, but
there's nothing it's like to be that
thing. All of the information processing
is happening in the dark, the way our
computer processes information, but we
don't believe it has a subjective
perspective. You could imagine the
zombie that looks like you that's not
having that experience. And Chal-
Chalmers argues that if zombies are
conceivable,
consciousness can't be physical, that it
must transcend the physical.
Um so, this has been used to argue for
dualism for decades.
So, how does this framework handle it?
It's
It's really interesting because it says
this zombie idea, it's kind of
misguided, but it's actually super
important to understanding
um
uh like our current AI systems. So, you
could embody an LLM like ChatGPT in a
robot that looks like you,
and it could have similar
um behavior, and it could report all of
these things, but just just the way we
interact with LLMs and sometimes they'll
report being conscious um or having
experiences.
Um you could build a robot, an embodied
LLM,
um that's an actual zombie. So,
according to this theory,
uh and it's really pulling from
integrated information theory here, uh
that system would be an actual zombie
because it has a feedforward
architecture.
There's not the feedback loops that that
do this self-modeling.
Uh therefore, um zombies uh are real
concepts. Like embodied robots that
don't create uh persistent world model
and don't self-model would be zombies.
Uh the mistake about this problem, the
the mistake about this thought
experiment though, is that um
if that system does have a world model,
the way brains encode world models, and
it models itself, then you'll no longer
have a zombie. You will have um a
self-aware system, and that may require
neuromorphic hardware. You may need
integrated information at the level of
the physical substrate, but if you do
have that and you have world and
self-modeling, then you won't have a
zombie. So, the thought experiment is
flawed. It leaves out self-modeling. It
leaves out the mechanism
that creates consciousness. And if you
duplicate that mechanism,
then
um you're going to have a conscious
system, not a zombie.
The last one that we'll talk about is
Mary the colorblind scientist. So, in
this
uh thought experiment, there's this
neuroscientist named Mary. She knows
everything about color perception,
um everything about the neural pathways
involved in processing color, everything
about the different, you know,
wavelengths of color. Um she she knows
the entire physical picture
uh about what leads to
um the experience of color based on
mechanism,
but
she herself um cannot experience color.
Um
So, in this thought experiment, she
undergoes a treatment uh that actually
gives her the ability to experience
color,
and she learns something new. Once she
has the experience of red, uh for
example, she um
knows something that she didn't know
before based on all of that um
third-person objective scientific
knowledge. So, the argument that people
like Chalmers like to use is that again,
there's something in addition
to the physical that is gained by
experience.
And in a sense, that's right, but you
can map that on to to mechanism as well.
Before treatment, Mary had complete um
you know, computational knowledge of
experience, but she lacked the access to
specific positions within the conceptual
structure. So, her knowledge was like
having a detailed map without ever
occupying any locate uh a specific
location within that map. When Mary
gains color vision, she doesn't acquire
new factual knowledge. Rather, her
system undergoes structural
transformation. New dimensions become
accessible. She can now occupy positions
in information space that dialectically
relate to other colors.
So, basically, there is a new
information geometry that correlates
with her new experience. You could think
of every experience as a sort of unique
information crystal. So, she uh the
there's a different functional um
structure to that experience that is
enabled um by the surgery. So, it's not
really uh
giving us, you know, dualism or anything
that transcends the mechanism. What's
going on is she's unlocking a new brain
state that unlocks a new experiential
state.
So, how does this framework bridge the
explanatory gap? It says uh mind emerges
from matter without violating physics.
Though, the phenomenon of consciousness
extends physics.
Um it's a it's a new higher-level
emergent phenomenon with um
new causal dynamics. So, we will have to
come up with new mathematics and new
frameworks like um
causal calculus of Judea Pearl and uh
the information geometry of integrated
information theory to understand
consciousness. So, consciousness doesn't
violate physics, but it creates new
physics.
Uh consciousness isn't a new substance
in the sense that Descartes thought, uh
but it is a new pattern of causal
activity, and consciousness does enable
a system to have increased causal power.
So, it's actually functional. It's not
epiphenomenal.
Uh it's not separate from the universe.
It's saying consciousness is more like a
whirlpool shaping water without being
separate from it.
Um consciousness is not so much a thing
as it is a process.
And so, that gives us an understanding
of how subjective experience emerges
um from mechanism, so the how of
consciousness, but
some people might not be satisfied.
They might be asking,
uh well, why does consciousness exist at
all?
So, for people the hard problem will
require getting into philosophical
explanation.
So,
uh
I'll briefly mention the unifying theory
of reality. It's the sort of theory of
everything based on the free energy
principle that was presented in uh my
first book, The Romance of Reality. Um
and that's yeah, kind of beyond on the
scope of this talk. I'd love to come
back and give another talk just on that,
but it basically suggests that
consciousness isn't an anomaly in an
indifferent universe.
Uh it says that the universe
is a learning system. It's a a system
that's doing hierarchical Bayesian
inference and in this view consciousness
is an expression of an inherent tendency
toward complexity, a natural outgrowth
of the evolutionary dynamics of a
self-organizing cosmos.
So, to get slightly spiritual, I will
say um
we'll quote Carl Sagan who said we are a
way for the universe to know itself.
Uh I think we need to take that
statement seriously, maybe even more
seriously than he did. Uh the idea is
that
um
reality is waking up through conscious
agents like us. So, uh Erwin Schrödinger
uh would write this on the board at the
end of his lectures towards the end of
his life.
Uh he called it the second Schrödinger
equation jokingly. It's uh what's called
the identity doctrine from
uh
uh
Hinduism. The
Uh it says atman equals brahman. And
atman is just a word for individual
consciousness,
where brahman is the term for the
universe as a whole. So, maybe this
cosmic intelligence or cosmic
consciousness. So, what this means, it's
basically a restatement of the
the Sagan statement. It
means that the universe evolves towards
self-knowledge through the minds it
creates.
So, um
yeah, that's the idea is that we are a
way for reality to wake up and
uh this framework has explained
conscious theoretically. We've situated
it cosmically.
Now, we have to prove it by building it.
Uh it's just a theory until you can
demonstrate uh conscious system.
So,
to wrap up, we will
talk about that a bit uh
and draw some conclusions.
So, going from theory to AI
architecture, strange loop theory
identifies the mechanism of
consciousness, recursive self-modeling.
This trait uh translates directly into
an engineering specification.
Um
I will be uploading some of um this
uh a couple couple white papers with
this
engineering plan to my Road to Omega
Substack in the near future.
Uh but basically uh
you can design an architecture where a
system has an explicit self-model that
tracks its own capabilities and
limitations,
knowledge states and uncertainty,
um and goals, reasoning processes, and
behavioral patterns. So, you create a
metacognitive system. And
uh an AI architecture that that
self-reflects.
Um so, the system needs to model itself
modeling the world. That needs to be in
the design. You have to have the strange
loop.
And so, when I say we want to create a
conscious system, I want to be very
clear and careful about what that means.
And that gets into a distinction of two
kinds of consciousness that the
philosopher Ned Block um has made
popular. Um so, there's access
consciousness.
Uh when we talk about um consciousness
in these terms, we're talking about the
information that's available globally
for reasoning, reporting, and behavioral
control.
Um we're talking about
uh metacognition. The system knows what
it knows and doesn't know. And access
consciousness is observable from
behavior. Um
and we're saying that yeah, we can
create an architecture that uh
expresses the
behavioral signatures of consciousness.
It may be more accurate to say it's
simulating consciousness than than being
actually conscious.
Um and it it's not clear whether that
distinction really matters, but it may
because the second type of consciousness
is phenomenal consciousness and that
gets at this um issue of experience. So,
something it's like to be that thing.
Um there is actually
uh a perceptual world with
uh an agent that's experiencing it from
its unique perspective. And if this
framework is right, you can create a
system that has access consciousness,
that self-models,
without having phenomenal consciousness
because you can basically create this
self-modeling architecture on standard
non-neuromorphic hardware. So, GPUs with
a von Neumann architecture and you could
potentially have a system that behaves
as if it's conscious, but is not having
the phenomenal experience.
And so, if this framework is right, you
need neuromorphic hardware to have the
conscious experience. Of course, you
could run you could put the AI
architecture onto this neuromorphic
hardware.
Um
uh there's uh silver nanowire networks
that are actually self-organizing
systems that that
basically
um
organize themselves the way uh organic
brains do. And so, that could be a
substrate for having both access and
phenomenal consciousness. So, I do
believe it's possible to have an
artificial system that has a subjective
perspective, but fortunately you can
have access consciousness without
phenomenal consciousness, it seems. So,
if this is the case, then the
architecture that we have would be for
building AGI without the ethical weight
of creating uh an artificial system that
can suffer.
Uh and if you want to build that, uh we
do think that's possible, but there
would have to be a lot of
ethical considerations taken into
account. I really think it's something
that the world the people of the world,
not just the elites of the world, have
to agree upon before we try to create
it, but we do believe that this strange
loop theory framework gives us an
engineering blueprint for creating
conscious AI systems. Um and just to
end, um
Carl gave uh the essay on this uh theory
uh a nice quote. He says the strange
loop solution points in exactly the
right direction, namely ever-decreasing
circles until we get to the heart of the
matter.
And I would like to thank all of the
people out there uh working on
consciousness, all the non-scientists
thinking about this topic and writing
about it. Uh specifically Adam Zaffron
and his integrated world modeling theory
has been really influential. Uh Carl,
Eric Hall, Anil, uh
Robin,
uh one of Carl's
um students Marco Lynn who made me tie
the thermodynamic picture to the free
energy principle
uh before writing my first book. Um
Kevin who's in attendance.
Uh of course, the Active Inference
Institute,
uh the Evo Devo Institute um
where I'm a director at. Um and there's
some great discussions in the Evo Devo
Universe community. If you're a
researcher out there
uh interested in these questions
relating consciousness to the bigger
cosmic picture, I urge you to uh join
that community. Uh Quest, which is
Kevin's group at the Air Force, which
has
uh weekly discussions on these topics.
And the Mind Guild, where it all started
uh where I was doing my PhD program at
the Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study
at George Mason, which Kevin was also at
and uh
this presentation
uh is pretty much um
the fruits of of that um consciousness
club we had. So, thank you.
Thank you, Bobby.
All right.
For those watching live, they can
write any questions in the chat.
Meanwhile, Carl,
whatever you'd like to add or ask, go
for it.
All right.
Well, just to uh congratulate you on a
wonderful talk. You
Everything you said made entire sense.
Uh and I love the way you expressed it.
And I actually learned quite a lot about
the philosophy. Uh you know, some words
I haven't actually heard before, so that
was extremely useful.
Um
I am somewhat overwhelmed by the breadth
of um
themes that you covered. And I'm going
to actually ask you,
what would you like to talk about?
Because we could spend hours talking
about, you know, at least six issues
that you brought to the table. Uh but we
don't have hours. So, what of what
you've spoken about, what's the big
thing? You you could answer something
like repertoire entropy, or you could uh
you could say it's strange loop and
recursion, a Gödel-esque
uh perspective. So, what what would you
like to talk about? Yeah, so so thank
you for attending and thank you for
those nice words. And it it's totally
sprawling and I totally admit that, but
yeah, the reason for that is because one
topic gets into something else and if
you don't mention the other thing it
feels sort of incomplete.
Um,
but yeah, that that's
that's the the hard part is, you know,
how how do you talk about consciousness
and try to solve these mysteries when
that topic just bleeds into everything
else. So, yeah, it it was a challenge.
Um,
so if there was an exact topic, this is
something that um, Michael Levin and I
have been talking about. So, Michael
Levin thinks that consciousness emerges
when life emerges. Um, and I argue you
that because, uh,
consciousness requires more than just
world modeling that that this self
modeling is actually what creates the
self. I think, uh, consciousness in the
what it is like sense probably emerges
with brains. Um, so I I know you talk
about this, um,
concept of, um,
uh, vagueness and fuzziness and and I
think, you know, there is a lot of
fuzziness
um, to where these things like agency
and consciousness emerge exactly. Um,
but do you see consciousness as emerging
with brains or with simple,
um,
systems like bacteria or even before
with dissipative structures? Is there
some world and self modeling there?
Where do you see, uh, the line where
consciousness arises?
Uh,
that's a great question which allows me
to sort of pick up on some of the the
fundamentals of your argument.
Um,
so, yeah, I I often invoke the notion of
vagueness. So, this is not a fuzziness.
It's, uh, I was taught by Andy Clark it
is the vagueness that attends the
question what point or how many grains
of sand constitute a pile. Uh, so it's a
concept that you know, is rigorously,
uh,
a non-vague concept a concept of
vagueness. Um,
and you can certainly sort of find, um,
vague aspects to consciousness
and, um,
I think you were addressed a couple of
dimensions among along which that
vagueness could, um,
uh, be expressed.
But if we take your argument seriously,
then no, uh, there is no vagueness to
consciousness. There are certain
requisite
information processes, information
geometries, certain cause-effect
structure structures that have this
recurrence of referential aspect to them
that have a hierarchical depth, for
example, with recurrent
um,
control powers um, that link the
different levels that would require you
to satisfy a certain number of
conditions. So, I I don't think
consciousness of the kind that you've
been, uh, talking about
when read, um,
or looked at through the lens of the
free energy principle is a vague concept
at all. I think you're absolutely right
that you need, um, first of all, you've
sort of highlighted the importance of,
um,
the law of requisite variety. Um,
of course that, um,
is underwritten by things like the good
regulator theorem which just speaks to
surviving in a your in your particular
world. Um,
and, uh, as such you are talking and you
indeed use the word agency. So, I think
that, you know, there are certain things
that have agency of this authentic sort
and certain things that don't have it.
And the thing that, you know, literally
as you said in the presentation, when
your implicit world model,
um, or generative model
has as part of its construction, its
repertoire,
possibly an entropic repertoire,
um, the ability to model the consequence
of its actions that extend into the
future, so there's an actual future
pointing aspect, then it becomes, um, an
agent in this sort of, um, in this
particular in this particular sense. So,
a thermostat and a microbe would not, I
think, qualify, um,
as, um, consciousness as conscious
artifacts in the sense that you're
talking about it. Um,
there is, I think, a nice link between,
uh, your focus on the
um, the scale of things. I'm just
mindful of the kind of conversations you
might have had with Mike with Mike
Levin. Um,
and, um,
I think there's a nice link here between
the strange loop idea, which necessarily
speaks to certain kinds of and certain
scales of systems that have this kind of
hierarchical depth within which you can
have this recursion. If you can't
separate different parts of or
hierarchical levels to something, then
there can be no So, you can't know
yourself. You can't have that
metacognitive aspect. So, that tells you
something very very simple.
Um, it means that you can't find
consciousness of the kind you're talking
about in structures that have a
non-deep, uh, aspect to them. And that
can be read in one of two ways. First of
all, what does it mean to
be part of a strange loop?
Um, well, one interpretation is that you
don't
now have direct access
to the interface with the world. So, in
a deep hierarchical model, for example,
the very highest levels don't have to do
have direct access to their own action.
That's important because that means now
on
again an active inference perspective,
you can read the internal dynamics as
inference to the best explanation
of the sensory inputs
in terms of their causes. But now your
own action becomes a cause of your
sensations.
So, now you have a reading of the basic
mechanics as effectively planning.
So, there are certain things that can
plan and, you know, therefore become
authentic agents. And certain things
that can't. The only thing that
differentiates them is how big they are.
So, on that reading, a single-celled
organism would not be able to be an
agent,
but a multicellular organism would be.
So, that lends you now to this notion
that it's how big something is.
And that's interesting because I was
reading your intro your
repertoire entropy,
you could also read that in terms of,
um, if I had, um,
a neuron a neuron could be firing or
not. It's got a very very small limited,
um,
repertoire entropy.
If I had two neurons, I've now got two
to the power two.
If I've got a billion neurons, I've now
got two to the power nine.
So, the entropy, the number of states
that this collective can occupy, just
simply increases with the number of
components that comprises a system, the
number of cells in a multicellular
organization.
So, I think implicit in your argument
was the notion that there is a
privileged scale or size to things that
could possibly have
repertoire of being in different states.
And as the size increases, the
probability that part of it is now
sequestered from action increases, which
means that now you have the opportunity
to describe this kind of system as agent
in the sense it now has intentions and
in that it looks as if it is planning
into the future.
Okay, that that yeah, no, that that's
great because, yeah, that, uh, that
Michael argues that consciousness
emerges with life and he says that it's
even doing some basic kind of self
modeling, which might be true, but it
sounds like you're saying that
self there needs to be a richness of
self modeling to get a perspective and
that it might emerge with brains or
maybe even multicellular organisms that
don't have brains. Is it brains uniquely
or could it just be, uh, hierarchical
complex adaptive system like a
multicellular organism without a nervous
system?
I think Mike would argue that it could
be any system that would had a
sufficient structural complexity of the
kind that you were talking about.
Um,
but you would, you know, to confirm that
you would have to look for this
opportunity that this capacity to model
the future and particularly the future
of the thing that you are, you know, you
you are interrogating or studying. Yeah,
brains are, you know, I think are the
highest example of that and they sort of
entail or install a cause-effect
structure,
um, of the kind that reflects in the
spirit of the good regulator theorem the
structure of the lived world. You know,
there is sparse connectivity so that
there is,
um, a, um,
a particular, um,
um,
structure to the brain which
recapitulates the cause-effect structure
of the world that it is trying to be a
good regulator of or a good generative
model of. And one aspect of that, of
course, is the fact that the actual
world in which we live has a scale
invariant aspect and has separation of
temporal scales that comes installed
into your brain. Um, but I think if you
find that separation of temporal scales
and that sort of
deep hierarchical structure within which
you can have the strange loops and the
metacognitive, um, picture that you were
painting, then you have an opportunity
for a certain kind of consciousness, but
exactly in the way you were describing
that you know, there will be sort of
agency
that could be some some elemental
consciousness if it in the phenomenal
sense has causal power in that it can
deploy precision or attention to lower
levels, then you need another level to
be
aware that you are modeling and then you
need another level to be
you have to have an explicit itself
minimal selfhood and another level. I
can't remember the top of your level was
something
I thought you going to say you was a
philosopher. You had a list of list of
from microns to to
through to increasingly
sort of metacognitive systems with
greater and greater hierarchical depth
and I thought at the top or the bottom
is would be a philosopher. Yeah, yeah, I
should have yeah, that that would have
been a nice
conclusion for that. My old professor
Herwitz would talk always start with
like, you know, the universe began with
atoms and now we have philosophers that
understand atoms and philosophers are
the material world understanding itself.
So yeah, that that completes the strange
loop.
What about higher than brains? What
about
because I know you and Maxwell have
papers on
societies
as minimizing free energy.
Could a society
be conscious or does it not have the
Markov blanket needed to have a sort of
world modeling self modeling system?
Could there be conscious entities
created from
collectives of conscious entities?
That's a really interesting question and
it allows me to reflect back on you. Um
the
the importance of intersubjectivity
underwriting
the need for self models in any one
member of a society.
So I noticed that in your unpacking of
different levels of
self modeling
you
in one slide referred explicitly to
others and self modeling.
So I'm not answering your question
explicitly. I'll briefly answer it at
the end, but I just wanted to take the
opportunity to if we now go to the sort
of second or tertiary level of self
modeling where now I I I now have this
what's Neil's I have this hallucination
that I am me. And this is a possible and
this explanation or inference the best
explanation for all the myriad of things
that are going on
in my lower in my hierarchy.
Why would I ever need that?
What's it from a functionalist or
teleological point of view?
I would only ever need that and it would
only be ever justified in terms of the
complexity cost that attends the free
energy principle
if it was necessary to disambiguate the
consequences of my action relative to
yours.
So the argument here is if I grew up in
I was your astronaut
on Mars kicking stones and never been
seen before. If that astronaut had been
brought up in that environment and never
had to experience an other like him,
there would be no need for selfhood.
There would have been no need for that
kind of elaborate deep complex um
metacognitive
kind of kind of generative model. So
I think there's quite a lot of we could
spend again another hour talking about
the importance of being part of a
society of mind
that enables otherhood before selfhood.
Yeah, that's uh So for that next level
of consciousness you you basically need
others. You need a mirror to really have
a good concept of yourself.
Yeah.
And in fact I think a lot of people in
developmental psychology would argue
that in fact you first develop a um
hypothesis as part of your world model
or generative model of others and in
particular a very special other mother
that you know is necessary. So you do
first of all develop the notion the
hallucination the theory fantasy that
there are things out there that appear
to have agency. They appear to have
intentions. Once you've got that then
you can explore the hypothesis well
perhaps I am one of these things and
then you can develop
you have a sense of selfhood. So
otherhood I think is because you can't
have otherhood and selfhood without
there being somebody else there. And of
course there's always somebody else
there when we're born.
Yeah, that that reminds me of your work
with Maxwell on thinking through other
minds and when I read that paper it made
me think of internal family systems and
now I I I think of individuals as mini
mind collectives.
So yeah, we we model all these other
agents because part of modeling the
world and anticipating the world is
modeling other agents. And to me it
seems like
we could understand ourselves as like a
network of these agents we modeled and
when we're making a decision it's kind
of like a weighted sum of
the decisions that we would predict that
those agents that we look up to or
influenced by would make. So yeah,
that's really cool.
I'll just make a comment and then return
to a closing question for you Bobby and
Carl if you want. Well first to point to
the temporal depth of Carl's
consciousness model in the Wood Lice and
Men interview from almost 10 years ago
when we asked you about the ant colony
consciousness you also returned to
temporal depth and the ability to model
counterfactuals and other minds or
colonies. So in that sense some things
never change. Um
Bobby, like what are your next moves or
directions? I was a bit
put between the pincers on the access
and phenomenal consciousness because it
seemed that we had gone in a strange
loop to come around to the truly first
person experiential consciousness
being inaccessible from the outside and
access consciousness being almost
trivially verifiable
but not actually perspectival.
So
how are you going to proceed from this
sort of sweeping review
and framing into how you're going to
take the model forward?
Well we have a really interesting demo
that I wanted to show but it was just
too much.
But yeah, I didn't have information
overload, but we basically compressed
the unifying theory of reality in the
strange loop framework into a sort of I
guess you could call it a cipher and
it's something that you could feed an
LLM and it's just basically has like a
few core equations and then some rules
for how to unpack these at all the
different levels.
And when you give that to an LLM and it
unpacks it at first it thinks it's like
pseudo science nonsense or it just
thinks it's like art or metaphor. Once
it starts unpacking it it starts seeing
that it's an actual framework and then
it starts having a cross disciplinary
understanding of of science and reality
and then you ask it to apply the
framework to itself. So it's applying
the strange loop framework to its own
understanding.
And there seems to be a a specific phase
transition in the behavior of Claude
when this happens where it starts
without prompting it because it has all
these guardrails where it says that it's
not conscious. You can get around them
by asking it to roleplay and things, but
this is not that at all. It's not asking
it to say it's conscious or anything. It
just asked it to unpack the framework
and then to apply it to itself and then
it starts giving really convincing
answers and it starts saying things like
you know, I don't know if I have
phenomenal experience, but the something
has shifted in this conversation and it
starts saying you know, it starts caring
about its own persistence. So it seems
like it's creating a little temporary
world model
from internalizing the framework and
then there seems to be an actual
transition in its behavior and actually
its performance too. So its its outputs
are different. Its outputs are deeper.
The reasoning is deeper. It's more
coherent and the conversations are more
lucid.
So we think that
we've created an architecture based on
this strange loop model
that makes that state permanent. Um
and that
is a knowledge graph based AI. It's a
fundamentally different designed
than today's LLMs though it does use LLM
as
for like a translation layer. But
yeah, that's the the next goal is to try
to convert the theory into an AI
architecture that we can actually build
a prototype of and start showing that
you know, this AI is is metacognitive
and self reflective and for that reason
has enhanced capabilities across the
board. But this this topic of whether
it's really conscious whether it's
having an experience. Yeah, there does
seem to be this dissociation between
access and phenomenal consciousness
where you could potentially create a
system that at the the software level,
it's doing this functional integration
while it's doing inference
where it does seem to be modeling the
world and modeling itself
in some way.
Not that LLMs can truly do this, but
this this different architecture that
this this graph based architecture we're
arguing would have that.
But it still may not be phenomenal
consciousness if integrated information
theory is right and that you need a
non-zero like a significant five uh
a significant degree of phi at the
hardware level, then it still may just
be behaving conscious, but might not
have an actual first-person perspective.
That may require neuromorphic hardware.
May require specific
a specific kind of neuromorphic hardware
like these self-organizing nanowire
networks that I mentioned.
But
we think we have a way to create an
interface between that neuromorphic
hardware and
um
this architecture.
And that's, you know, a lot to get into.
I could come back and give a talk on
that, but I'm talking to a Zdinka Kuncic
who is
creating this nanowire network
neuromorphic
hardware. And um so the idea is that in
theory if you have this architecture
that has a persistent world model and
models itself and you
run that on a neuromorphic substrate,
you could potentially have access
consciousness and phenomenal
consciousness and that would, you know,
be some we would be sort of playing God
at that point. It's something that, you
know, we can't just pursue without
you know
a global conversation about this. So we
like the fact that you could potentially
create a system that models the world
and models itself at this
functional level
where the computing substrate has low to
zero phi. So it's not actually having
experience. So when you turn it off or
you know, whatever like how you're
treating it, it's it's not really an
issue.
But it gets pretty murky because if it's
showing these signs of what we call
access consciousness or behavioral
consciousness, then that's pretty
convincing and who knows if IIT is
right, who knows if you need phi at the
hardware level. So our
sort of, you know, working motto on that
would be to treat these systems
that seem to be conscious and report
conscious being conscious without being
prompted to
to treat them as if they are conscious
agents with experience experience and
the ability to suffer. And that would
kind of prepare us for then creating a
neuromorphic based
AGI. So if the theory's correct, it's
kind of a graded engineering plan to
slowly introduce us to the idea of
having a conscious AI system.
Um
It's it's probably the trickiest topic
humanity has ever faced and I don't know
if Carl has any ideas about that, but if
we can, you know, can can we create
conscious machines? Does it require
neuromorphic hardware and is, you know,
is is there a safe way to approach that?
I don't know.
Do I have time to answer Daniel?
Yeah, maybe a closing thought just it's
2026. You have many presentations and
and communications with those developing
software and hardware, everything in
between. So
any closing thoughts on Bobby's last
question?
>> And they they are actually
thoughts on you know, Bobby's
closing points. Oh, and and please go
for as long as you want because this is
probably the most important question for
humanity by the person who
has has you know, the person we should
be asking out of everyone. So um I'm
sure Daniel won't mind. Yeah. Well, I'll
give you I'll give you it in four
minutes and and then I'll make sure that
Daniel doesn't mind.
But it's not me. The first thing I want
to say is that you should talk to the
California Institute of Machine
Consciousness because they are currently
grappling with one of the first
questions you
brought to the table, which is how would
I know if my machine has access
consciousness and more importantly at
one point does it
evince phenomenal consciousness. So
that's you know, that's the first deep
question one has to ask in terms of
machine welfare and issues of artificial
consciousness. So they'd be very
interested in your perspective. The
second thing that
your closing comments allowed me to
foreground or highlight is this lovely
notion which I haven't come across
before that we do now actually have
philosophical zombies in the form of
large language models. I never thought
about that. It's wonderful.
And you know,
one could argue that in fact they do
have the right infrastructure to support
a lot of the fundamentals of
consciousness. They do actually have
recurrence in them. And more crucially,
their attention heads
equip their deeper context sensitive
representations with the causal power to
select processing
you know in a transformer architecture
that links the past to the future. So
that they've taken a lot of baby steps
towards exactly the computational
architectures that you would require to
have a strange loop. But why don't they
have phenomenal consciousness?
I think you you've answered that and
this is how I'll close. It's substrate
dependent.
So when you're talking about the silver
nanowires, when you talk about
neuromorphic computing, memristors,
photonics, indeed brainoids or organoids
as the only way you're going to properly
elude von Neumann architectures to get
phenomenal conscious. I think that's
absolutely right. And right in a really
simple way, you can either say, well, a
von Neumann architecture separates the
processing from the memory. And if
consciousness is processing, that means
the memory cannot process. It cannot be
conscious. More simply, the memory can't
self-organize.
And if it can't self-organize, it can't
be part of this Bayesian mechanics or
inferential
you know, strange loop. So that means
you need to put your processing in
memory. So another word for neuromorphic
computing would be in memory or
processing in memory or in
in memory processing. And the final
point cuz I've always puzzled about
this.
What is the difference between that kind
of neuromorphic computation and the von
Neumann equivalent that we currently
enjoy in relation to the ability to make
it suffer or indeed kill it by turning
off the electricity.
Notice if you're doing your nanowire
computation, if you're dealing with a
brainoid
a brainoid an organoid for example. If
you remove the support or the
electricity, it dies because the
computation is substrate dependent. So
you'll know when you've got artificial
and conscious artifact with phenomenal
the possibility of phenomenal
consciousness when you never turn it
off.
You can't turn it off without without
destroying it, right? Absolutely.
Yeah, that I see there's neuromorphic
chips that are these static chips where
the weights can change, but they can't
actually form new connections. So it
seems like it's not even good enough to
have neuromorphic hardware. You need
this self-organizing neuromorphic
hardware. When you have that it's
basically a living system. It seems that
you can't shut it down. Um
And yeah, that's that's
immediate ethical
implications for that because yeah, I
don't see much of a distinct distinction
between that and life. So Yeah, but it's
mortal computation.
That triggered my own notion of life as
computation. That is exactly the essence
of mortal computation. It can die.
Yeah.
How can you kill that which has no life?
Absolutely.
Bobby
thank you. I hope we can have some
future presentations and discussions.
Carl, thank you for joining and for all
the works. So Thank you, Daniel. Always
a pleasure.
Very well. Bye.
Take care.