SPEAKER_00:
Okay, we're in cohort six point question mark and discussing some applying active inference questions, and Jeff has turned us to the inspiration topic.

So where were we, Jeff, or continue?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so several of us, Dean Tickles and Anna Magdalena Hurtado and


SPEAKER_02:
Hector Menrique has, we've been going back and forth for about two weeks on what inspiration means through the lens of active inference.

And for me, inspiration, and I think this is a really good definition, and I think Dean offered this up, and it was what happens when you have a new

model or a new artifact that has no through line, no contiguity for how you receive how you arrived at that specific

phenomena or or experience or or bit of information right it is it is that that is seemingly without cause okay a lot of ways we can model it just are there any more general


SPEAKER_00:
comments or or definitions or or thoughts and then otherwise we're going to kind of walk this pseudo chapter six path for how we would move towards structuring it you're basically asking like how does like insight arise into like the shape of some like object you're looking at or some insight you're looking at is that what the last question was


SPEAKER_05:
zach yeah this uh this reminds me of really core active inference right whenever you're talking about like if you just have a whole bunch of particles you can differentiate the states of the particles are in by the states that seem to have this kind of sub thing going on and the maintenance of the sub thing and this thing wants by virtue of existing very core definition of active inference right or i'm sorry the uh

I'm forgetting the word of it, though it's a very important word.

The idea that because it exists, we can talk about the dynamics of it existing.

I'm sorry, I can rephrase that if you need.

I did not say that very well.


SPEAKER_00:
Conditioning modeling of something on that thing being existing or measured.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, absolutely.

And so it's going to maintain its own state.

But

the question I have is could you guys describe the no three line or continuity because by saying that it is a thing aren't we already talking about it has a thingness about it we are already talking about some states where it is instead of some states where it is not yeah like even a really inspired new line of poetry it's like it it may have a chain of causation


SPEAKER_00:
then if we were if we were um tasked to make an active inference model um and in that first question chapter six like what system are we modeling it's like what what question are we trying to explore are we trying to reify our definition or observation that inspiration is that that arrives at without a cause

Or are we looking to quantify like some index of inspiration where on the lower end there's like complete continuity and then on the upper end there's less continuity?

Here's one older paper.

with the kind of more on the insight.

Okay.

So from chapter six, we have those four stages of the question.

Let's just answer the first question and then we'll look over to a few other questions.

kind of uh tools for modeling but what what system are we going to model like could we pick some specific inspiration setting just to make it clearer a song comes to an artist in a dream

okay here i'll i'm going to pop over to this other um active block friends coda just because um it complements the chapter six so in the textbook chapter six gives these four steps

that suffice to design active inference generative model.

So big picture, the first part is like system of interest identification, systems engineering, systems modeling.

Then you get into the kind of chapter four, chapter seven and eight questions.

like is it going to be a discrete time or continuous time what kinds of state spaces are the variables and then question three and four are about setting up basically the agents and the niche and it's this is dealt with at a pretty overview level in the textbook and um depending on how how

complicated the setting is that this can be like very straightforward like thermostat and the room or this might be really uh sophisticated like having a bunch of nest mates in a colony but here's just a few um compliments to those lists here's from the block front side um

the cognitive modeling side, first off the settings, many discussions over the years and, and sub discussions and things like that, that, that people have brought up, but just focusing on the recipe, um, all, um,

this kind of just gives a little bit of a different flavor which is first take take a structural approach to the project like it asks a few more background questions about what what is being addressed and not then this was like some of the earliest um memes with Jakob which was like

we're map building with these cognitive models and then we're playing with this like deriving because you could derive something as kind of like to squeeze out but then also it means to take the derivative

And then there's different notations for the derivative.

Like sometimes it's a dot, or it's a prime, or it's like f prime of x. So then if we derive a model, but then there's different notations for the model.

And then the table that I'll copy back into our textbook group, this, I'll just take it from the ants.

model okay here are active inference ontology terms i'll delete these columns and their um notation so we see a b c d e pi a o s and then

here we'll do artist generative model once we fill out these cells for like if if we're going to use a discrete time model um then we'll basically have all the variables we need but this is just a way to use the ontology to scaffold making a generative model

Because basically you just fill out what would these things be for that situation and then already just manually or with a LLM, there's enough information to get you to the POMDP.

Okay.

What should the observations be?

not the components of the song I suppose yeah this also this is like part of that beginning um going from the qualitative and starting to give some structure it's like is it going to be just a sound model

and then how many layers to go into detail.

But that's kind of that journey is to take the pre-structured situation, like just situation as it is, or not explicitly categorized situation, and then be like, what are we gonna pull out as observations for whom?

So it's like, will there be a bodily awareness?

Will there be a time awareness?

If we're going to ask a question about time, then, I mean, we may need that to be explicitly included or, but maybe it's not in the observations.

Let's start with just music sound and we can figure out what types.

Okay, what hidden states are being inferred?

So what are unobserved but hidden causal factors that actually exist or are proposed to exist?


SPEAKER_02:
If there's lyrics, then you have to suppose the understanding of the language

Same with instruments, right?

You have to have a model of, of which sounds or at least how you can instrument the sounds that you.

Yeah.

How you can instrument the sounds.


SPEAKER_00:
There's also an interesting piece there with, with this, um, if, if we're gonna come back to the time perception, because music has a time rate, but like a architectural vision or something that might be static or so then, but the song,

I mean, does the artist hear the song at 1x speed?

Or do they hear it faster or slower?

And then what if it's not possible to be played?


SPEAKER_02:
Or do they get it partially and then fill the rest of it in when they wake up?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, true underlying song.

It sounded like they were underwater, but I heard something.


SPEAKER_01:
Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Let's just also just to be clear with the letters, and I'll just bring it over.

Okay, so we have some observations coming in.

At the very least music, possibly some time observations, or some rhythm.

In the S, we have two kinds of S's.

states related to the music, and then states related to the flow of time.

Okay.

What does that give for the A matrix then?

The simplest answer is A is mapping between S and O, whatever those are.

So that could be pure intra-domain.

So that would be like sound O maps to sound S, time O maps to time S. So in that situation, there'd be like two separate S maps

um variables they could be different shapes and then each of them has an a leading to separate o variables or there can be more of a domain fusion like um single um s with mapping to

sound oh and sound and time oh i mean this is like why it's just like get it down and like kind of iterate over it it's like oh because like what is what is the really the time observation it's like well is that an internal observation is that a metronome is that a breathing so it's it's like we can kind of run back over and check for for a consistency but

basically a is going to do whatever intermediation work is required to get from O to S but this is the sense making partially observable elements that's going to go from whatever you're saying is data as measured to variables as proposed


SPEAKER_03:
thinking like another ingredient like sometimes as a musician you can like feel the song in terms of like how you hear it more like through your spine or like energetically but then you might also like that might get mapped to how it feels like to play the song you might have some kind of intuition of like the fretboard or whatever it is yeah that's a good good idea like using um kind of like intermodal


SPEAKER_00:
heuristics like um this cake is gonna taste good because I just touched it and it's bouncy so then there could be in that situation that would be more like the domain fusion for a because you'd have like the latent state would be like quality of the cake and then it'd be like um here's how the color uh profile is associated with it

And then here's how the touch, here's how the springiness is associated with that latent variable of cake quality.

But then in the dark room, you still could use the touch modality to assess the cake quality.

Okay.

Let's move Pi up.

So what actions are being modeled as being taken?

actions are going to intervene they're going to pick out a slice of b and then the chosen slice of b is going to be used to control the time evolution of s so again kind of an interesting case like what are the actions in this situation where um the inspiration


SPEAKER_03:
is putting on a show for the artist what action selection are we looking at for them so they can get grounding or saying like the action is like basically like as the dreamers like as the person's like waking up from the dream and trying to like grasp onto the song and solidify it or is this like a different kind of question


SPEAKER_05:
We can make this really like non-physical, right?

Because it's coming from a dream.

Therefore, we can say, well, could we say that like one of the actions is changing our model of the world as in now I want to make this song before I did not want to, but then I had the dream, which is the perception.

And the action I take is the desire to make this thing in reality.


SPEAKER_00:
OK, yeah, let's let's get some of those.

So let's just say that one one kind of action would be if S equals.

Motivation to make song.

I would be.

So through time, there's this motivation to make some song.

And then there's B, simple two options for B. Either keep your motivation where it was or increase your motivation would be choosing to increase motivation.

Obviously, other ways to model that too.

Here, if S, Martin brought up this like waking up.

There's modeling of attention as action.

That's some of the work with Lars Samved Smith, where internal action policies, covert action policies are modeled as attention.

So this is like S would be, what am I paying attention to?

And then pi is a policy on what is being attended to.

it's but but kind of using this pomdp skeleton like our um recipe outline it's like um whatever whatever s is there's going to be some s's that don't have direct policy control those are called uncontrollable states like in pi mdp

And then there are the S that are controllable, which means that their Bs, their unfolding is controlled by Bs that have some policy efficacy.

But then this dream setting kind of stretches out.

the case because it's like is this a lucid dream where the person is seeking to um you know is is it really them from behind the veil inspiring themselves but then obscuring that it was them but then this goes back to that first question of chapter six which is like which system is are we modeling

and um inactive inference just like any anywhere else people have done systems modeling that's not necessarily trivial because once you start tracing the physical and the informational exchanges of a system you can you know you you tug on one part of the world then everything else comes along with it so that that does become the question like which modalities to restrict to

On the other hand, a great strength of active inference is that if the models are constructed appropriately, at least they'll be interoperable.

Like you can say, we're making just the dream auditory track, and then just the dream proprioception track.

And then you could test those two models separately, and then you could more easily also fuse those models, see if there was like synergistic outcomes.


SPEAKER_03:
so there's still a lot of possible modeling but at least what you make may be more interoperable let's see what other S could be get an idea of like the framing here maybe it's a fun question but um the pie is like some kind of like action that changes the state but does that also like create the flow of time in a sense that like it's just how states change over time


SPEAKER_00:
yeah great question just the the narrower answer is pi is a probability distribution over policies policies are the affordances that can be taken in a given moment over the given time horizon so if there's no planning then pi are just the actions that can be taken in the next moment which are the affordances like up down left right if there is planning

Then pi starts getting bigger, like exponentially bigger with the time horizon, like two time steps.

If there was four affordances, there'd be 16 options in pi.

So pi is a probability distribution.

It sums to one.

because some action is taken.

And then depending on which of those indexed policies are selected, that's which B transition operator is chosen.

And then that's what controls how S at T minus one goes to S of T.

But then when it comes to modeling, it's like, and again, time perception is another fun and interesting case.

But it's like, whatever, it doesn't reach in directly and change the temperature of the room.

It's like temperature of the room at the previous time, and then you decide, turn on the air conditioner or not.

And then if you choose to turn on the air conditioner, then you get the prior temperature, turn on the air conditioner, and that results in the next temperature.

So it's not that Pi directly goes in and changes the temperature in the room, but it acts through this beat.

Perfect.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I appreciate that.


SPEAKER_00:
Where and and there have been a few.

Time perception active inference papers.

I'll try to find.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, we're definitely playing with the weird system because time perception and dreams changes.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, here's Bogota and Givera.

I forget which number we can look, but it was a live stream previously.

So here they're using the Heseralian phenomenology ontology.

So retention is what is retained or sedimented from the past.

Protention is what is anticipated into the future.

So this is kind of like the thickness of the present where like what was anticipated moves through the present into the, and then parts of it becomes retained.

Here.

Okay.

This might help us.

See here, okay, font looks a little bit odd, but this is state S O. This is basically the table.

Don't know where the table are.

but this is basically what the table is and this is a like this is what applying active inference looks like in this setting where we're doing the a b c d e s o it's about defining what those variables look like for the given system or question of interest


SPEAKER_05:
is it just me or does that look a lot like relativity except the gamma term has been replaced by a probability distribution which which part uh mostly that first graph that you showed where uh there was that kind of diagonal set of squares that's what really set it off for me uh and talking about uh the object time versus the model time uh using tau and t that was another thing that made it really seem similar that one right there exactly


SPEAKER_00:
So what would this be like in relativity?


SPEAKER_05:
That would be changing reference frames, which would mean that they are perceiving space and time differently than a different observer would.

which is to say that like one person at point B would look at something and say, oh, maybe point, I'm sorry, top left D would look at something and be like, oh, I see two events in two different points in space.

They happen at time one and time two.

But at person's point A of T to the far left would look at those same two events and say, no, they didn't happen at time one and time two.

They happened at time three and time four.

They would happen at relatively different times because their experience of time would be slightly different.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yes, I see this.

Or it could be like, here's message one, two, and three.

Person A has gotten none of them.

Person B has like, yeah, I got message one, but I'm just getting message two now.

But then for this person, they were closest to this.

I don't know if that's exactly how it's laid out here, but it's like already for them, the messages are in the past.

But for someone else, those messages haven't even happened yet.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, exactly.

The time is relative.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, well, we'll see what we can bring back into the model, but also looks kind of like a fretboard.

Like a diagonal line on a fretboard for a bass.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, it totally does.


SPEAKER_00:
We can make him song compression.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, that was that just a was that just an example of inspiration there?


SPEAKER_00:
might have been i don't know it looks like it how much how and also this is kind of related to hector and michael walker's work on the side by side in the zone of bounded surprisal which is like there's um the question of the the insight to one agent and then also there's the question of like whether it can be observed

and whether that can be transmitted like the the just to make it more concrete they're studying these flaked rock artifacts that that um like sort of human ancestors made

and then they're always like popping up but then they go away but like it will be it will have been made a certain way but then it's not transmitted how it was made so just because something can can can be seen by one doesn't make it seen by another let's just see if there's any other pieces to this paper and then we'll return to where we were I mean the this is

there's obviously a lot to it here and they're they're going into the they're kind of bridging the husselian phenomenology with the future present and past with the active style but that's kind of the meta recipe which is combine the act infantology the the letters and the functions and the methods that we know

with some other domain time consciousness is kind of a particularly there's it it has because the the um the measurements come through another modality there's not like approximate time sense

Like you could have a vibrating clock or a metronome or breathing, but then the time inference is something that's added on to some other modality.

Whereas in sound, it's like sound observation, and then you're observing a sound latent state.

Let's just pick one kind of policy to model.

if s were true song tempo pi would be speed up stay same let's just say that it's a lucid Dreamer with with this limited kind of control over the music that they're hearing they can they can change the tempo

so if if pi has three elements for slow down stay the same or speed up so this would just be like a simple vector with three um cells if it were uh uniform it'd be like one third one third one third

see these are preferences so does the person have a preference for the observations is that kind of like if the song seems salient to them they'll try to like remember it or something like that there's some kind of preference of what the song feels like yeah i mean

it would have to be sketched out but what this is going to go this is going to load on pragmatic value C is basically is is 100 where pragmatic value gets specified if C is flat then there's no pragmatic value in the generative model you only have epistemic value

it's kind of interesting like um yeah is is it is the song recognized as valuable because it's what they prefer or is it recognized as as insightful because it is recognized as novel something could be both novel and preferred


SPEAKER_03:
however if if you recognized to the extent that you recognize it as part of your prior preference that would not be novel or if there's like notice that there's some kind of like beauty to it and a sense of like truth beauty and goodness like it's maybe some kind of meta structure that has some geometry to it


SPEAKER_00:
yep i mean this is why we're um why in the textbook it's like the teammates and and the simpler cases because once we're dealing with a kind of um mental kernel that that has these um that for any input is going to start exploring like good true beautiful structured etc

then it's like it kind of makes the sensory inputs just a small piece of the picture.

Whereas in the textbook examples, it's a very kind of closed form model where you can trace exactly how the observations relate to like changes in the model's behavior.

So D, this is the prior on hidden state.

So if we're going with S is the song tempo, let's just say prior on initial S. So this is kind of like interesting.

Maybe even the song tempo could relate to the time and the rhythm.

So it's like if we're hearing sounds, we hear one beat.

so but we haven't heard a second beat yet so we can't yet estimate how um how fast the song is so all you have is the prior on the song that's that would be all right when you're right here right yeah E this is the habit that habit this is prior on policy

um it's it's not it's it's right here um so this is this could be uniform or not but basically just your your prior on policy and then a is the action but we we it's the it's what policy selects okay then

What about the generative process?

Again, this is a very interesting question where it can go back and forth between sketching out a little bit about the agent, then going back to the niche.

So what is the niche of this artist that we've been sketching out?

mean by niche like a musical niche like the genres that they like or something different um i think it it could be um i'm just gonna go to the the paper with the attention

just just generically the observations that the artist is getting are coming from the niche and then the actions that the artist is emitting are being received by the niche so it's just that's when you plug in the agent model into the niche

so that can be um like in the case of sensory data and action like bodily overt action that um is sometimes related to the physical Niche like it's getting thermometer observations from the room and then it's sending control signals to the air conditioner but then

for example and this is the model where policy is is attention um here like here let's look at this top level um attention let's look at okay just the two level model okay

the blue is the proximate sensory so this could be like visual data from the eye and then here is on the orange levels nested model it has the same structure as as this as the pomdp um except come in sa and then instead of sao

instead of like, what shape is, what color am I seeing?

And then what are the raw pixel data coming in?

That's the primary proximate visual layer.

But now here, the SA, but then the observation that this higher order agent, basically this metacognitive agent is receiving, is related to the precision or attention on the lower level perceptual task.

So from the point of view of this orange agent,

its generative process its niche is the blue agent the blue agent's niche could be considered to be like the outside world but that's where you actually get to plugging in essentially systems across the interface everything about the generative model like defining the agent's generative model

is defining your race car, and then you have the track.

So you can generate a really sophisticated model, but essentially it's just gonna stand freely until you close the loop.

with something even if it's trivial like the environment just um hands out random observations and it just soaks up and absorbs the actions the actions have no efficacy you could do that then then the agent's generative model policy selection doesn't matter


SPEAKER_03:
So the context within a dream often just gets like rapidly moved around to the environment of this like internal representational world is kind of always changing.

But then if you're in the process of waking up, it's almost like it's growing, you know, back into baseline reality.

You like slowly open up different doors of perception, right?


UNKNOWN:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_00:
i i like the doors of perception uh connection and also makes me think like when things are quote normal seeming it's like me looking at my desk and and uh you know seeing a little flashlight it's like well that didn't take inspiration because the flashlight's actually there and then it's like but then if it were something fantastical then

that but then it's then it's kind of like but if it was fantastical and on invited then that's a very fine line with like is that inspiration or is it just delusional if it's something that's that's not that's not that others don't see on the desk it's like okay inspiration but then

is inspiration always associated with a positive sentiment like motivation or like with the valence or with a feeling like some something has been achieved or could be achieved or you know is is in is the is our definition of inspiration going to include like a persistent um anxiety inducing delusion


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's a good point.

Like hallucination, we're not like converging on reality, I think is what you're saying.

You guys have done this before, I'm assuming.

You've done this like thought experiment before to find this model.

but I'm assuming it's not usually in such an abstract dream space concept.


SPEAKER_00:
Applying active inference models in different settings?

Yes.

Yes, definitely.

I'll paste in the chat.

If you want to see, here's several dozen code examples.

These are written by many different authors.

And then what the textbook since 2022 and what all this other collaborative work has done has like helped us set up more of that recipe and the procedures around it so that like within one to few conversations across these different settings for cognitive modeling, like we can actually move forward with a domain specific application.

which is kind of the goal of the textbook.

It's just the textbook doesn't take one all the way there.

But that's the kernel, and that's helping familiarize with the structure of the model, capacities, some kind of features and aspects of the model.

And then anytime you apply it into a domain, this is pretty much what it comes to look like.

You just say, okay, here's the general model schema.

like if we were doing a linear regression on healthcare be like okay observations are the healthcare data hidden state is the risk odds for this or that let's do the regression this is like that except there's this downstairs sense making component and the upstairs action selection component but yes we did choose a very um

with time and then with this like with all these unknown unknowns where where are what is the niche is is it and is the dreamer creating a a mental niche for themselves or something so some some useful elements but with some things that are simpler in if this had been a um robot moving on a chessboard it would have been a simpler model


SPEAKER_03:
I appreciate this context.

It's cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's fun.

It is fun.

And here's Jens.

He did this for his internship in the Institute, but he used those figures from Lars's paper.

So this was just about time perception.

Proximate

perception, sensory perception, precision, and then attention on time, yielding a metacognitive estimate of how much time has passed.

Yeah, it is really cool.

then that's kind of again where the interoperability of these models can be can be really powerful let's just say like this is a very strong time perception or you know let's just say we have this and other time perception kernels then somebody on the music and aesthetic side has made a music model then there's at least a path towards fusing the time and the aesthetics model

without needing to perhaps go to square zero for both of them.

I'll copy that into the, here.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you for that.


SPEAKER_05:
It also, with the large paper that you were talking about earlier, kind of makes me, it leads into a deeper question that I have, because I,

just don't feel like I have a solid understanding of how time is put into these models.

And the relativity thing makes me question how space is put into these models.

It makes me feel like there's going to be some kind of heuristic, some kind of motif that models are generally going to have in order to move through their environments that we relate to what we perceive to be time or what we perceive to be space.

And so I think that there's going to be some relationship of variables that goes to that.

But whenever it comes to the hard definition of what is time, whenever we're talking about this, I might be overthinking it, but I think that there's still an open question there.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

think i think so like for for um agents that work in time but don't necessarily have time awareness like if there was going to be a hundred robots and they were just unfolding in time but they didn't necessarily have to like bootstrap their own time concept that would be a simpler setting

But then when we start to kind of take the Chris Fields physics as information processing seriously, and if we want to get to the first principles, then we're dealing with agents constructing their own spatial temporal reference frames.

And then as the modeler, there's that question of like, how does the modeler or the model sew that fabric together?

Like if two agents have different, one thinks it's two o'clock, one thinks it's five o'clock.

But then like, is the modeler gonna just say, okay, the earlier one is right.

Or we flip a coin to decide who's right.

It's like, will they even be able to talk to each other?

And then if the modeler says, well, yeah, it's three o'clock, they're both wrong.

Then what system are you modeling?

you're modeling how time delusion can can um can coexist then that's one versus i don't know it really comes down to what you're trying to model and and then more of the the research and speculation side might take us to what structure could the models have and then more on like the rx infer rx environment side

we'll explore more empirically like what are the nuts and bolts of getting of um different time agent agent specific time systems to to interact but that's that here it's this is just sort of the skeleton well

okay facilitators time question mark um in the coming weeks we'll go to chapter eight continuous time so that'll actually be fun and uh exit the discrete into continuous time setting um chapter nine

putting empirical data in rather than just generating synthetic data fitting with empirical data I hope by that point whether with pi mdp or another method let's let's like get an example for that tens wrap up or if you are going to be coming to the chapter seven then we have chapter three coming up the high road chapter four generative models and then chapter five neurobiology so cool

Thank you all.

Thank you so much.

Cool.

See you next time.

Bye.