SPEAKER_07:
All right.


SPEAKER_06:
Hello and welcome to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 39.1.

It's March 2nd, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We're a participatory lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

Please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow good video etiquette for live streams.

To learn more about ActInfLab, go to activeinference.org.

We're here in ActInfStream number 39.1 and we are learning and discussing this paper.

Morphogenesis as Bayesian Inference, A Variational Approach to Pattern Formation and Control in Complex Biological Systems by Kuchling, Friston, Georgiev, and Levin from 2020.

And we had a fun dot zero and time probably all individually going through the paper.

Pretty much in 39.1, we'll just kind of go over introductions and then can go to a blank page and just see where especially Stephen and Blue want to raise any questions and also anyone can ask in the live chat.

Okay, so we'll just do introduction.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm Blue, I'm a researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen Sillett, I'm based in Toronto.

I'm sort of an action researcher and practitioner in community development and participatory theatre, and I will pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Good morning, I'm Dean, I'm here in Calgary.

and not much to say other than I'm kind of looking forward to hearing what Blue and Steven have to add to this rather big math question and how that fits with morphology.

So back to you, Dan.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Well, if anyone wants to start with a specific question,

question or figure or we can review just sort of the main points of the paper like let's look at the roadmap so what section would people like to enter in or have a question or idea related to or we can just go yeah dean


SPEAKER_03:
So you wanted to talk about this, and I wanted to talk about this, and it was this whole section on the least action principle, which I think we both find quite interesting because, yeah, why?

And it led me to the question of, is there something efficient about search

over somebody sort of passing along and sharing.

So I'm kind of curious what people think of that in terms of the math and the morphology.


SPEAKER_06:
All right.

Based action, math, morphology.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I don't know if we could unpack a little bit more what Dean was saying there.

I'm interested in some of the implications of that work around looking at the math and morphology as it scales from these, what you might call smaller scales than we can normally perceive.

Often what's going on with morphogenesis is not something we can be consciously aware of a lot of the time.

However, who we are is built upon

morphogenesis.

So I'm very curious around how some of these first principles can be thought of as rolling out.

So when we talk about lease action as being one way of approaching it, where people often think about energy and efficiency of energy processes as being the route that everything will take, the more informational Bayesian inference

and learning that is implied by this.

Without sort of distracting from the paper, I'm curious about people's thoughts about what sort of implications that has for thinking about these bottom-up ways of knowing.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So I have some questions going back even to before least action in the paper, talking about generalized flow.

And it's really interesting just in light of the paper that's coming up in number 40, but here,

you know, we see that this is like a spatial, like we're talking about spatial motion here, or like the foundation for the way that they model morphogenesis is, you know, positions of particles through space, right?

Like, and time.

And I just wonder, like we have a time evolution here, and we're talking about motion in space,

but could we do the reverse and talk about like a space evolution in terms of time?

Like in terms of like, can we invert space and time here?

So that's just, it's something that I was curious about if it's possible or mathematically illegal or why am I even thinking like that?

I don't know.

And another question that I had, you guys were really talking about,

you know, in the generalized flow, we talked about the equations of motions, coordinates of motion, and the derivatives.

And something that I saw in the paper, specifically at equation 15, that I've not seen before is p with a dot.

And it was not defined in the paper p with a dot, but I'm assuming it's the first derivative of p. And I just thought that that was interesting.

So it's the probability density, but is it the derivative of the probability density with respect to x with a tilde?

Or is it just p dot because x has a tilde?

Anyway, that's my question there.


SPEAKER_06:
All right.

Wow.

Well, we have a lot kind of on the table.

I think the think blue appended with generalized flow is a good entry point because this is sort of what the systems state evolution is.

And in live stream number 26 with Bayesian mechanics, we also talked about the generalized coordinates of motion with relationship with control.

So it's kind of like a thermometer cybernetic model

If you only have the position of the temperature, there are certain strategies that can be applied given that modeling just simply the temperature.

And then if you are modeling progressively higher and higher levels of how the system changes, it's kind of like a Taylor series.

It equates to basically a better depth of control.

And then part of the hard part is that because over the time course that action is being planned for,

even hypothetically changes in like the unknown consequences of one's action complicate the estimation of different policies so this is just not like a total perfect way to roll out the system and understand how it's going to happen but it gives like approximation terms to higher and higher levels of the system changing and so that's the um

and all of the levels of analysis are being linked to each other by being derivatives of each other so then some stationarity like is capped out at some point so the derivative becomes zero and then that's like a heuristically approximatable um depth of that model

So that's just like one note of what is being estimated on.

So it's like temperature and it's higher order components in some either analytical kind of infinite generalized way, or just more practically with some smaller realization.

And then the dot is like a derivative, pretty sure two blue, like it's like a prime, like prime prime for double derivative, two dots for two derivatives.

then morphogenesis is like position of particles um here it's like the cell body or the cell nuclei or the center of gravity of something and then those are spatially moving so that's the lowest level of this chain of the integrator chain with the generalized coordinates of motion so that's how it's from a bayesian mechanics

getting to morphogenesis with just how particles are moving in space.

But instead of just modeling like their X and their Y, it's like X and Y and the higher level derivatives.

So that's the developmental motion of particles.

Just to summarize that part before,

space and time okay any thoughts on that because the generalized flow is definitely where whatever least action is is going to be based in um okay so then let's just look at that formulas

Here is the derivatives.

Okay, anything on this, yeah?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

So if you're going to look at the formalism, did you pull it up here?

Yeah.

Yeah, generalized.

There you go.

So go ahead, and then I'll interject where... Yeah, here's 2.2.1.


SPEAKER_06:
X tilde is the total blur of all the dots on top.

So yeah, go for blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So just here, the...

My question more is the noise and fluctuation term.

And is that just like Brownian motion or I don't know.

So yeah.

Like what is the, where's the Omega random fluctuation?

Like, is it just, I don't know, random in, in terms of Brownian motion or is there some other random fluctuation positionally?

Like do things wiggle?


SPEAKER_06:
Definitely someone who knows more about stochastic processes, and I know several people listen who do, could help with this, like in a math stream on a little bit of the stochastic aspect here.

But I think at a first pass, there's situations where what is modeled as noise

versus what is modeled as signal have differential ratios.

So there's times where like the regression is very, the F, even if it's a regression, another function is like very tight and then the noise is modeled as low versus one where just the location of X is just dominated by the noise term.

But I'm sure it's way more than that too.

Steven or Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I was just going to, you know, often when we see, I'm just thinking broadly in terms of the modelling approach as an active inference, often it brings in temperature as a way to sort of bring in the kind of noise fluctuations into models, whereas here it's directly seen as a noise fluctuation term.

So I think that's...

Maybe, again, because we're going down to even more first principles here, it's getting down to stochastic dynamics, which isn't necessarily even thought of as temperature, but as something more foundational.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Yeah, Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So temperature is like, yeah, right.

Like with increasing temperature, like random motion would increase.

So that does make sense to me.

So another point out of this section, or maybe if anybody else has a point here, going down into the next like set of equations.

unless anybody else has something else.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just to summarize that it's kind of like the temperature parameter is understood sometimes to play this role of mediating the difference between the particles motion being driven by

some sort of directed motion um like change in position through time not at stationarity of position which is like kind of the observable in that chain that directed motion versus thermal slash brownian and then um

that might be kind of where these statistical assumptions come into play so it's like variance estimation but temperature is just one kind of variance with the motion of particles but and it has a it has a physical interpretation and i mean it's not an insignificant piece i don't know

We could explore more where temperature specifically comes into play, but Stephen, I think you're getting at the right thing that this is not temperature bound, but it does relate to that sort of situation.

Okay, Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So I don't know if you want to go down to equations 15 and 16, probably where my next question or comment is.

Do you have them in there or no?


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, copied in right now.


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_06:
Go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
So it says equation 15, I think that's x tilde dot, yes, p x tilde, is a probability current, which I thought that that was cool because I've never really heard of that term of probability current, like how probability changes over time or how...

the probability density changes over time.

Like what is a probability current?

Like that was just, it's an interesting, I don't know, like term that I hadn't heard before.

And then in the second equation 16,

It says that this is a partial differential equation that describes the time evolution of the probability density under dissipative and conservative forces.

So where the term on the left is the dissipative forces and the term on the right is the conservative forces.

And I felt like that that was interesting, especially relating back to the dot zero video where you guys were talking about a tensor and Dean was talking about tension.

And I think that there's is like an interesting tension here between like conserving and dissipating.

And it just makes me wonder how

how like, like is death when like the dissipative, like term is winning?

Like, is that like what causes like a system or I mean, I know that the the term, you know, winning or term being greater doesn't cause a system to die, or when the system is decomposing, if that can be represented here in terms of these dissipative and conservative forces in the process of an organism dying or ceasing to exist.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, I have way more questions than insights.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice, nice.

Let's look at 15 and 16 a little bit.

So yes, probability current, it's kind of in this dynamical systems framing.

It's being bridged with formalisms that are like more like a current, like a flow on a dynamical landscape.

There's that sort of angle, but then they're...

And maybe there's also more of a fluid flow component.

Blue?

It's a .. Sorry.


SPEAKER_04:
I was muted.

So it's funny.

When I look up a probability current, also foreshadowing the dot 0, it says, in quantum mechanics, the probability current, sometimes called probability flux, is a mathematical quantity describing the flow of probability.

Um, so, so it's interesting that it's related to quantum mechanics and in terms of these, like, instead of these classical physics, um, things that we've kind of been looking at or dealing with so far.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

So this 14 is.

Okay, this might be only a partial element or example, hopefully one that is useful.

So this is x tilde with a dot.

So that's x tilde, all the coordinates of motion, and then x with a dot means derivative of.

So this left parameter with a tilde and a dot is how the generalized coordinates are changing through time.

So that's kind of what is being modeled.

the data that are being, whether they're an observable or an unobserved estimated state in a Bayesian graph.

So whether it's an O or an S, that plus all of its derivatives, and then that is being partitioned into one big complex function, F, modeling it,

low and then this noise omega tilde over both are over tilde so the these are both over like each of these higher derivatives also have an associated noise term and then it says yeah okay steven


SPEAKER_00:
In some ways, there could be an analogy.

I'm not saying it's the same, but there seems to be a mirroring of the enthalpic term and entropic term that you get in Gibbs free energy, where one is where the energy is bound within...

the molecules at play, and then the other term, this entropic term where it's kind of dissipating.

So it's another, because these things are translatable, just like mass and energy are translatable, and they're known to ultimately be conserved.

um they can only be the overall mass energy of a system is always conserved but it could be translated between normally we don't think about that because it only happens in nuclear reactions but if you're thinking informationally it's still and this and i see they talk about this idea of probability mass so that there's almost an ability to think about that

conservation of energy in a form which has mass, which has form, as opposed to when things have dissipated as light where it doesn't have mass anymore.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, Bloop.


SPEAKER_04:
So I think where they're talking about the conservation of probability mass, I think that they mean the conservation of the total probability there.

So the probability mass function, right?

So I think it's that, which relates to, it's the conservation of mass, but it's also the conservation of information.

using that conservation of probability.

Like the probability of all of the possible things happening has to add up to 100%.

Like that probability is never gonna change.

And so I think that that is there.


SPEAKER_06:
That it has to add up to one, like a fraction or 100%, has the realist and instrumentalist take.

The realist take is something has to happen.

And then the instrumentalist take is,

if we model it this way we're going to be able to use statistics but if it was like well the chance of getting heads is 60 and the chance of getting tails is 60 in this next flip it would open up the space in a different way um it it's it's kind of outside the bounds of the model you could have a model where both happen but still there's it's a different thing you know can you model things that can't happen in the real world or

If it's not a good measuring stick for statistics, which is kind of like that one, something must happen.

We have to model something happening.

We have to model a data set row being added.

Otherwise, what is happening if it were like one every 1.2 rows?

So, and then here, yeah, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
In relation to the point you just made, I'm just curious if these functions can be used in multiple particles.

Say, for instance, the idea is the probability of a coin being flipped is 50-50, for instance, or a rigged coin could be 60-40 in one way.

However...

the probability if there's noise on how rigged something is so for instance you've got you've got a coin and it's flipping between being rigged 60 40 50 50 40 30. so there's kind of a there's a random fluctuation in that behavior which may be contextually contingent that in itself wouldn't be in the one equation but if you had multiple particles

they could start to behave not just as one predictable thing.

They themselves could have to change in probability approaches.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So I think specifically as related to here, and I think that this is derived.

I don't really know.

I don't really do these derivations.

It's definitely not my area of expertise, but I think

in terms of the conservation of mass, like we're not creating or destroying matter, the conservation of the probability mass, it just says that all the particles, if you're looking at, it doesn't matter if it's one particle or a thousand particles, the particles are somewhere, right?

Like, so the particles are not nowhere, like the particles are somewhere, right?

So, so it's that kind of concept or that's like the idea that, you know, all the probability has to add up to one, like there is 100% chance that you will find the particle of interest somewhere.

I mean, you're right.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Yeah, blue, good section to pull out important, some important bridge equations.

So we have the signal to noise.

Now when the signal that we're modeling, the instrumentalist take, we're modeling how much the cow weighs, defined as the one that comes to walk over to me when I call for it or something like that.

That could be dominated by different functions or could be driven by different noise on different time scales.

So the signal sort of directed motion component or modelable component of the motion through time is the purple.

And here is like some

flow with the upside down triangle that we talked a little bit about in dot zero, but it would of course be good to hear from someone who knows more about this flow operator object.

Signal is like the movement on a probability distribution on those states changing.

And then the noise is the dissipative component


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

It appears as well that by breaking it into dissipative and conservative components, it's serving a similar role to separating into complexity and accuracy.

It's giving a way to break apart the dissipation where the

because you're not actually talking about a final target, but more like things just doing what they do in some ways and having a very kind of physics fundamental process.

I think that's proven to be useful because it's also, again, something which can be translated into different types of math, different types of physics.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, so let's connect it to the morphogenesis.

So what do they do in the paper?

They're modeling the motion of cells.

So why does it matter?

This whole discussion that we're having about how to get from the motion of generalized coordinates, if you're the modeler, you get to define that and get to set the parameter between this

If you're the experimentalist, then you're inferring this kind of like a regression.

Like if this was a regression term and a noise term on the regression, then there's some function that helps you fit a certain solution to the one linear regression that fits it best.

So it's like kind of in that same genre here.

So if we take the realist take,

on that it's like how the actual system is defined as or inferred to be as from experimental data and then flowing the probability density on that of our inference on that whether we're getting that from the data or whether we're defining that system formally so that modeling we could help from the authors or someone else like

it engages some new future.

It's like a bridge to some other set of equations.

So that's where it would be good to learn more, like what is actually enabled here, but it enables a new vista that separates, that enables this separation.

so we can talk about instead of this like potentially extremely open-ended and non-linear change on the system can be bounded within a statistical inference zero to one inference framework that is more amenable to certain kinds of analysis

so that would help model cell location and all of that but i think there's still a lot more to learn there and um unpack okay dean yes so i want to just sort of step back for a second here because i want to go we started out talking about so one of what are the implications for least action


SPEAKER_03:
So the act part, and then we sort of stepped into the idea of what came before the action.

Well, it was these flow states.

Now I kind of want to go back to the action part.

Under that section 222, the second paragraph says that the least action principle can predict the emergence of forms.

So what Daniel was mentioning there, that sort of the morphogenesis.

In terms of the flow or paths of least action in biological systems, for example, in colonies,

Ants find the paths of least action to harvest food and bring it to the colony.

The example considers their paths as flow channels or trajectories finding the least average action for each instance of foraging given available resources.

So this gets me thinking about, well, what do we mean by least action as opposed to, say, most action?

And that...

general way the general way that things tend to follow like if you thought of an analogy of of uh maybe a 19th century war where armies would line up facing one another uh parallel to one another this is speaking more like a flow state more like you find in nature where the

The molecules, we talked about it here, are sort of flowing and following down the side of a bowl to the least potential energy.

And so now my question is, okay, so why does nature tend to flow with the advantage of least action, whereas people with instruments don't necessarily...

or follow one another unless they're mirroring some other form or some other shape.

So it's interesting to me because I think by nature we are quite adaptable, but when we start making non-living things as instruments to necessarily take the nature away, the life away, we're maybe not as quite as adaptable.

So

I'm trying to step back and now pull us back into this idea of, so what advantage is there in this physics view of least action?

There must be something advantageous there in nature.

So what is it?

I'm not the geneticist, so I don't know what the signal milieu is that makes that so.

So I want to tap your guys'...


SPEAKER_00:
and gals's expertise on this because i don't have it all right thanks dean stephen so following on what dean's saying there i think with um in the traditional sense we tend to take what we call equilibrium dynamic approaches so for instance the arm we the armies are lined up like dean said

Then there's a battle, and then there's the final state.

So we talk about the initial conditions, which is equilibrium, everyone lined up, and the final state.

And then the bit in the middle,

We sort of talk into our shirt or our shoulder or whatever, cough a few times, and somehow it happened.

And in some ways, with the biological approach, it's like it's in that, because all that bit in the middle is where the flow is happening.

So essentially speaking, and biology doesn't have those initial conditions in the sort of traditional sense of pure equilibrium, it's always in this non-equilibrium state.

or at least a large component is in a non-equilibrium state.

So this is an interesting thing as it's flowing down towards the least energy.

it never reaches it.

So we might, you know, I think that's it always.

So for instance, in the chemical reactions, you set, you take your pure reactants, you mix them together, you stir it up, you do the reaction.

And then once you've got your product, which could be a precipitate, for instance, which, you know, it could be a ton of the precipitate, it then gets filtered, it gets washed, it gets dried.

it gets measured for how pure it is and now it's in this kind of stable product form you know um so i think yes this this this question about what does it mean to flow um is really important thanks steven all right dean well what this what this flowing and following thing


SPEAKER_03:
kind of says is that that that the desire line or the or the termite mound the result is of signaling which which is i don't know if that's collective signaling i i don't know if it's the stigmaty part of it like i i don't know why nature sees the advantage in the following but there has to be something there why why

Why is that advantageous?

Why is that more adaptable versus the alternative?


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

Thanks, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I suppose one way of looking at that is it's the only cause.

I mean, if we're going to take a realist route, recognizing that it may be, it's the only plausible route on the table.

Um, we, we, they don't get to, you know,

forge teeth in a kiln or you know in a way that's partly why all chemicals that are available in nature have to be within certain plausible temperature scales and pressure scales that that can yield those react those products at so

And that kind of doesn't answer the question exactly, because I know that's kind of a bit of a, but it's part of it's what's available, I think, in terms of biological plausibility.

And I suppose, in some ways, humans, we we've adapted a cognition to try and move outside that.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, yeah, Dean.

One last thing on this, and that is that following implies that there's also something leading.

There always has to be something taking that initiative for others to fall in line behind.

So shifting that and making leadership something that's more lateral, so sort of going forward together as opposed to who do we decide to...

follow behind that's an interesting thing in terms of sort of sussing out how this least action principles things turns into things that we actually see phenomenal phenomenologically so again we're going to get into the what what the final form takes i just think that when we were sort of treating this in the point zero this was kind of a pivotal moment because it went from what are all the things that have to be in place for formation to occur

to now let's look at what the form now results as.

And as I said in here, in that one paragraph, it said,

Well, the previous paragraph says, physics offers a useful formalism to understand at a quantitative level the ability of biological systems to work towards.

So now we're basically now moving to something that is adaptable.

So I think, like I said, I don't want to over-talk this one point, but I think it's an interesting part in terms of, especially when we get into the discussion at the end.

around why, what, what some of the assumptions were in yada yada.

Okay.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
So this work towards, um, idea, I mean, that can be thought of as a modeling and a life realist problem.

Like how, how does that work towards, uh, and in some ways, uh, accuracy and complexity can

be used if we're at the level of assuming that we are actively inferring to stay alive.

But prior to that, something like conservation and dissipation or conserved are a bit more foundational.

Because if by conserving or working within this conserving dissipating noise dynamic,

at levels which are below what we are consciously aware of, however, which all our cognition is effectively built upon somewhere, we're able to potentially give that towardsness without necessarily having set a goal.

And it could be, and I think that might be an interesting, see how that rubs out in the real world of active influence labs and papers and stuff.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

Cool.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

A lot you linked there, Stephen, just now, like accuracy, complexity.

And then, okay, we'll leave it for a future day and work.

And who knows how many of these are just concordances versus tautological, but accuracy within a model is like pragmatic aims within a model with the imperative to prefer to fit as much data as possible.

And then it's like conservative using the reward structure that worked at one time step.

using that generative model moving forward versus changing it any sort of dispersion around the parameters as evidenced at the lowest level of the chain the position of the particles or the actual parameter that's being modeled like the actual image that's being percepted on versus these higher generative models which don't realize like at the kind of

um you know tip of a javelin so to speak so then the signal and noise is also like conservation and dissipation with respect to the model and then that is coming all the way back to morphology with like the position in stasis versus vibration of the particle from thermal so it's like a lot that gets linked here but where's least action in all of this


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So just to read a quote from the paper, it says,

Since self-organizing open systems are not conservative, their structured flow is quintessentially dissipative.

And that's in the third paragraph in the least action principle section.

So that goes back to what I was saying earlier.

does that equate to death?

Like when a system totally dissipates, like it's ultimately dissipative.

So, you know, we stay in this like nest for a little while and then we dissipate, right?

Like, can it be modeled like these processes using these equations?

I find that super interesting.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Thanks, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
This idea of the least action, I think tying in with what Blue was saying there as well, is it's least action, maybe we should say dynamical least action, as opposed to least action, which we normally think of, i.e., well, like I was saying, reactants, products, what's the route to get from A to B, or the army lined up to final space.

Normally, we are taking

starting conditions ending conditions um or you know where i am now what's my goal what's the least to get there but those two things are defined in some ways they're they're definable so i think it's a good now all the bit in between is um trying to go to least action um

in some way, using that kind of in the space of chaos, I suppose, if we're going to take the kind of complexity approach in human systems, it's in a chaotic state where you're trying to at some time make sense of how to act.

But however,

know in some ways there's only chaos moving into complexity which is available at some biological systems theoretically maybe not the idea of complicated and kind of simple sort of reproductive sort of steady like equilibrium state systems like mechanical systems aren't necessarily available although you could argue that maybe certain properties of our morphology like our

our bone structure and that sort of gives something which is approximate to that.

Once we know how to move our arm, we have a relatively simple thing that we can now bring into our regime of attention.

But yeah, I wonder what people think if dynamical least action is somehow what's going on here.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, thanks, Stephen.

Just

here's one take on that it's a good idea or question i hope this is accurate too because i think we're all learning here but this is definitely a really challenging area in some ways to approach especially given our realistically limited familiarity so again it'd be awesome for people who have more familiarity with these equations to

join us like either in preparation or even just joining us on these streams so that we can actually learn and connect to these other areas somebody who sees this formalism like every day just like we might see some other one okay but steven brought up is this a dynamical least action okay so first kind of

a hopefully non-contentious point that we're analyzing what we model.

We can only ask the computer to calculate the numbers that we ask it to model an at.

We can't expect something that goes truly beyond that.

Not to say that the models can't have surprising outputs or interactions, etc., but we can't have it go beyond what we specify.

And the model is over x tilde.

which is the generalized coordinates of motion, which is the position and all of the higher derivatives, the whole integrator chain.

Position and all higher order moments of the statistical distribution.

They're called moments, like the first, second, third moment of the derivatives of the statistical distribution.

And these are basically,

terms of approximation of motion that allow a high order like a taylor series approximation or a volterra series approximation to allow snapshot modeling with real-time flow action cognition perception it's the flow over as gets explored

the blanket states.

This is like the flow over S, A and I, states, actions and internal states.

So like this is enabling a flow description of Markov blanket states.

and their perception cognition action their flow overstates their change through time including higher order moments of time so that it is a dynamical systems model but still there has to be a snapshot like a time series model of a stock price it has a value at

whatever time resolution or continuous or discrete it's being time series model that so it's kind of the relationship between snapshot modeling and capturing higher order Trends and this is a certain way to think about that in the direction that they're going to take it towards the Markov blanket partitioning and bridging it to everything that that affords okay um Dean and then Steven


SPEAKER_03:
This is really important because I want to tease something that maybe we can look at right here, but only in the point two.

So between us doing the live stream zero and today, there was a report about the rate at which

I think it was a UN report, the rate at which climate change is happening so rapidly that as people who are sort of in that highly changing flow state aren't able to necessarily going to be able to adapt to the rate of change.

And so I wonder if some of what this paper speaks to might help us understand why the authors of that report

indicating to us that the environment in which we are existing in is going to change so quickly that as cells within that larger structure, our form is not going to be able to adapt quickly enough to the way that the

external system is changing.

So I want to save that for the point too, but I think this least action principle part would be a good entry point into some of these bigger questions going forward.

So I just want to park that, but I think it matters.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just to give one note on that, the rate of change and how it changes, those are kind of natural language descriptions of derivatives of how things are changing.

Might be a simple claim to some, but that's really important to keep in mind.

So how things are changing and then that's always going to be unknown to some degree.

So how things change and so on, this is the generalized coordinates of motion.

And so it is about modeling rates of change and predictability of systems that have rates of change.

And okay.

Yes, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
with this we mentioned there about your action perception cognition and in some ways the cognition is cognition on the generative model and the generative model is an action policy model okay so we've got this recognition coming in but it is drive by this action and of course one challenge you've got in the climate change scenario is um

really what you think is one thing but being able to act and being i mean the danger is we hit a point where no matter how much we know it's beyond the ability to act in our capabilities and uh capacities as a as a as a species um the so this this while i think the word cognition is useful it may be useful to be careful just that

the inference process is more general because it can be a process which is, like I say, happening beyond thought.

So thought is another action almost giving a higher order understanding on the generative model for an action in active inference.

And of course, a lot of what's going on underneath is beyond our perception.

literally um way beyond so uh that that that can be interesting or useful to strip out nice yeah blue thanks


SPEAKER_04:
So just to kind of go back to dynamical least action, I do think that that's what they're referring to.

At the very end of the section, the authors say, from our perspective, the key observation here is that any dissipative random dynamical system can be formulated as gradient flow on the log likelihood of its states.

This is reflected in our solution to the Fokker-Planck equation in 17, which means the action is the time or path integral of the marginal likelihood or self-information for any system or model M. So this is really the key thing.

This means the least action integral over the Lagrangian turns into an integration over the self-information of states.

which is known as entropy in information theory.

In short, the principle of least action manifests as a principle of least entropy for systems that possess a random dynamical attractor and thereby obtain non-equilibrium steady state.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks a lot, Blue.

Great point.

Good day, Franz.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi.

Hi, sorry that I'm late and I hope

Only have a half an hour or two.

I'm in the middle of finding preschool.

So daycare is a whole mess right now.

I do apologize.

I don't want to take this time.

It's a little bit of a mess.

Next week should be better.

I think we found a school.

So hopefully next year will be more easy.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

unexpected but preferred you know how will we model that uh but thanks a lot for joining this is really cool so we were just describing some of the formalisms but where would you like to begin it'd be awesome to hear like any just introduction and context on the paper and then we kind of jumped in at least action and would love to hear your take on that


SPEAKER_01:
sure um all right full introduction so i guess um i'll just start with myself so um i i work in mike levin's lab and tufts and doing a phd in biology and this is the whole kind of active inference um part of my work is came actually before my entire phd so i joined mike's lab because i wanted to do

really learn what kind of information physics do in a biology context.

So I didn't want to study the whole level of, you know, I mean, I'm still doing it as a technique, but I didn't want to have the focus on protein interaction and, you know, genetic information where you measure all these things.

So I was basically wanting something a bit more broad than that.

And so when I reached out to Mike and once I got somebody accepted, I was like, you know, I have some months to kill.

Can you send me somewhere or do something cool?

And then he sent me to Carl Frist.

And that's the first time I heard the term active inference.

So I spent about four months in Carl's lab and then basically started working on it.

I think half the work in the paper was actually done in those couple of months when I was in Carl's lab.

So the overall goal of the paper and of that part of my work is to see if we look at morphogenesis and similar biological processes, can we look at something where you have a very kind of baseline stem cell-like behavior where you have cells that can't do, like morphogenesis basically, I don't know how much you're familiar with the whole biology aspect of this paper, but essentially it's the idea as you model cells that are uninformed, they have some kind of genetic code, something that encodes their structure, the

Basically, you have the generative process already ingrained in the generative model into those cells, but they're completely, right, they're stem cell-like.

They don't have actually yet achieved their final form.

And they are, just like in the simulation in biology, right, they're starting off with very few asymmetries.

I think there's a famous, I forgot who said that, but some physicians at once said most of physics is basically just symmetries.

There's symmetries everywhere, and that's exactly kind of

how most biologists think of morphogenesis.

There's some asymmetry in the beginning.

in the egg or some, some, some different information, some gradient of something, some localization of certain agents.

And then from that on, basically everything else just follows through.

But it's, it's, it's hard to believe that's the whole side of the story because there's just so much complexity and so many cells doing this at the same time.

So if there isn't any capability for them to adapt to signals in the environment and to learn from each other, it's hard to believe that the timeframe they're given, they can really, um,

you know, achieve the complex morphogenesis outcomes that we know do exist.

So coming to this paper, basically this model is actually already like the father or mother of this paper was already done before I even heard of this topic, that that was the annoying one's place.

So the model structure itself was already done by, I think called it most, if not all of it.

And Mike just basically was on the paper and Giovanni as well.

They basically gave him some input on, on, on what,

what the background of biology would look like.

And so they already figured out, basically, let's do a simplistic model, eight cells.

As far as I know from Carl and as far as myself and my simulations, many practical concerns don't want to be too complex.

If you have too many cells at once, then you're going to run into problems in the beginning.

Something I actually add onto the model, even the baseline model, was

that damping parameter, which I talk later on in the results, which might often like, it's not, it's not a key part, but I find it very interesting because it's one of the requirements for, for active infants for, for phenogenization, variational phenogenization, there's a smooth landscape.

And when you have all these cells initially clustered together and they're trying to infer their place and they all kind of have some random

randomly initialized prior beliefs, they don't know where to go from there.

And if you, right, if you have already high precision in their, in their sensory apparatus, initially, they have a really hard time, they still end up mostly fine and getting later, but they jump all over the place.

And you can imagine that'd be very bad for an, an biological scenario of every cell immediately jumps to the first cue they have.

We actually think now in, in the Mike Levin labs that, um, love cancer initiation happens a little bit like that, where, where positions are, are set too high.

there's a paper coming out soon by a colleague of mine that talks a bit more about that argument.

But so basically from, we had the target morphology already, Carlos encoded that, and he saw what you see in the baseline control experiments was already done.

What I was interested in is basically, again, coming back to my question and my approach to this from the biology side of view,

is how can we use the aspect of information flow and specifically active inference to manipulate and better control morphogenesis outcomes and control biology.

So the two main results in that paper are looking at if you sort of, you know, instead of like a normal biology experiment where you basically interrupt one part of the machinery and then see how everything reacts, you actually control the process information processing itself.

So one was basically if you put in an asymmetry in the response of the cells to the signaling ligands, they get the signaling concentrations in the environment, how can you basically completely remodel the entire morphogen as outcome?

Even though you actually left the entire coding itself, that's always one thing I tried to stress in that paper, the target morphology in all the simulations is exactly the same.

None of them, they basically said there's that coding,

of where they're supposed to be, but how the process information has been changed.

So the first figure is that where you have those two heads and two tails, I don't know if I did the two tails in that, or if I just did it myself and didn't publish it, I think it's in there as well.

Then that's basically something that we also see in the lab.

I think that was mentioned as well, that that's something that my 11 lab has done with an area where they basically induce those two head types, right?

That's something that's really weird to a biologist.

And again, in the type of,

manipulations that we do in the lab that have been done in this lab, they didn't manipulate the genetic code.

Again, the DNA from those panaria that was exactly the same, but somehow they perturbed the actual bioelectric network itself.

So basically on the state space, essentially.

So that kind of like where this inspiration came from.

And then the second part where the malformation, or I also talk about cancer information,

And of course, it's completely called cancer because we didn't put proliferation in this simulation.

So it's the initiation stage.

But it's the idea is that, again, and there's something that we talk about also in the lab and with Carl and many emails afterwards.

And it kind of also goes back to this whole idea with how different psychiatric disorders work in the brain where you have some of these inference processes being disrupted and then lead to large scale outcomes, but they kind of start somewhere.

So the idea was here is that if we disrupt only the

the information flow from one cell to the other cells and the other cells to that one cell, then what would that cell do?

So it basically just completely reduced its sensitivity to the environment and then saw it happen.

And what happened was that this one cell basically kind of like, it didn't move a whole lot.

It got inferred the wrong kind of cell type.

And it was completely out of place, right?

So that's always bad in biology if a cell is doing something that's not supposed to in a place where it's not supposed to be.

And what I thought was interesting afterwards, well, okay, so how can we rescue that?

And again, like, right, not trying to rescue it in a traditional cancer therapy idea where you bombard the cell or just kill it.

How can you actually have the system remodel itself?

So then the idea was to increase the, so the sensitivity was still disrupted from that one cell.

but then the flow, like how much the other cells reacted to it.

So basically we manipulated how the information flow from the other cells to that cells was flowing and increased that.

So, and then what was interesting is that the kind of, they were just kind of like going more close into an interaction, which is seen in this time-lapse figure.

And then eventually they reshape.

So even though the cells, like normally if you run this, it's a deterministic simulation, right?

it's always the same random seed.

So you run the simulation and you run it again, there will be some outcome.

So you can kind of know which cells go where, even though, you know, no cell starts off with like knowing I'm supposed to be in that cell.

That's not how it happens.

But because we run the simulation with a fixed randomized seed, we always know which cell ends up going where.

And then in that cancer simulation, that was not the same anymore.

So actually, even though at the end, after that rescue experiment, they ended up with a perfectly normal shape in the morphology at the end,

It wasn't what normally was supposed to happen, right?

The cells that normally work on to their fixed positions didn't all do that.

So there was some reconfiguration, which is something that that's, that's an ideal strategy that you would like, right?

Something that you exploit the systems interaction itself to then rescue it.

And overall you want to work on the, the, the few type, but you want to work on what's actually wrong.

You don't care.

exactly what Cell does and is implemented.

There's a lot of cool science, a little tangential, but there's really cool work by Eve Marder that works on neuronal networks and lobsters where they see that this works in lobsters because it's a simple enough system to work neuronally.

But what they're seeing is that there's actually a multitude of implementations that the neural network can use and do use individuals to use entirely different parameters with like two to four differences in ion channel concentrations to achieve the same end result.

And it's actually the response, the response to stress, to perturbations in the environment is then in the details.

But in the end, the actual homeostatic aspect of it is kept the same, right?

The goal of having something

end up the same.

Stephen would like to speak.

Go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, hi.

Thanks.

Yeah, I was just going to... One question.

Is the idea of flow... In a way, more flow is better, even though that... So unlike, say, a generative model where you maybe don't want too much complexity, you can have a lot of flow, but as long as that flow is not noise...

Um, it just is able to inform.

So that's the first part.

And the second part is, are you saying it's, it's with this flow, it's about finding where the choice point is or where the threshold is to say, okay, that's now going to decide that that's going to create a morphological target as opposed to it just being a gradual gradient descent on energy.


SPEAKER_01:
It is more a gradual aspect.

So the, it is, I would say it's, it's not ideal to think about decision points, even though in the end it doesn't happen.

It's something that we're just, we're used to in our level of, of speech, but on the level of, of, of I would say the underlying cells, it's very much a gradual process, right?

There's basically, you have all these different probabilities, which are probabilities of being one cell in the other in the simulation.

And the idea of increased information flow or increased sensitivity, whatever aspect you're modeling and manipulating or precision as well.

is that you are trying to get the vibration of your energy to be minimized, but also specifically to converge on a system where those probabilities actually end up somewhere meaningful, right?

If you don't want to be in a state where they're constantly kind of fluctuating, constantly randomized, so you mentioned noise, that's one aspect you want to avoid.

You also want to avoid that they basically do this and that

that's where you're right with the decision point, right?

Like the, the, the cell was basically going towards one state and then there was wrong one.

And then you increase the information flow of the other cells and the cancer rescue from, um, simulation to bring it away from that.

But you're not, you first of all, not actually working on like, you know, identifying that point and then you're fixing that.

You're basically just, just realizing that the, the simulation overall, it basically, you basically look at the, the probability changes over time.

So how are they updating and how fast are they updating?

And then, of course, in the end, what are they updating towards?

And that gives you a cue.

If you think from an experimental point of view or even like experimental or simulational point of view, then that tells, okay, so if that happened too fast, if there was malformation happening too fast, then you probably want to act and you want to increase sensitivity or something early on.

You don't do it at one time.

We just set the pattern for the whole simulations, but it tells you basically the strength that the sensitivity is.


SPEAKER_00:
respect to how early and how strongly that misinformation is happening does that answer your question somewhat yeah i think that does one i suppose one question just on that is is it is there like an optimum level in terms of this flow um i it peaks or is it like the more flow you can get the better and it's just literally a limit on how much information flow is possible


SPEAKER_01:
Hmm, let me think on that for a second.

Well, the short answer is that, the boring answer is that always will depend on the context, I would say.

There is no, I don't think you can say, you know, more, like, a broad statement, like, more information flows always better, doesn't make sense.

And I think you already gave the answer to that, why that is, right?

Because in the end, it will end up too much noise based on the system.

So that answer has to be with respect of how much information actually is being

can be processed?

What is the timescale of the sensor apparatus?

My experimental work works a lot on basically having different variation of input signals to my model system, which is actually an algae.

I will get to that.

But long story short, I actually once got the question where I had these randomized signals that was feeding it.

And then someone asked like, well, you actually, this is actually taking in more information.

Cause you're having, and I was like, well, and then like white noise technically carries more, right?

More variation, but it's not a formative, right?

So that's more information flow by itself is not better, more informative information flow.

The informative part being is actually does it, how quick does it change over time?

So there's a lot of the important aspects, other derivatives there.

And with respect to the, also the sensory precision and, you know, the timings, there's certain timescales involved in like how sensory states, how fast

Sensory states lead to updates of internal states.

All these things together make up basically how fast an agent can react and how much information it can process.

And the optimal level would be dependent on that, essentially.


SPEAKER_06:
OK, awesome.

Dean or Blue, before we have anyone, go again.


SPEAKER_04:
So I have a question.

Can you flip to figure four, Daniel, please?


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.


SPEAKER_04:
So you had mentioned earlier, Franz, hi, by the way, it's nice to see you.

I'm really glad you could make it.

I'm glad you could make it.

It's a pleasant surprise.

But here in figure four, you mentioned that you didn't

model proliferation in this model, but it seems to me that there's like more, like it looks proliferative here.

So is it just like a very dense cluster at the first time step or do you duplicate it every time step or like how did you end up with so many more like feeds or whatever, you know, agents at the end than at the beginning?


SPEAKER_01:
there might be an optical communication problem on my part.

So the actual cells are eight in each of those images, all of them.

But what you're seeing is the trace of it, right?

So only the ones that have like the strongly colored dot and then like the little star around it at the end.

But if you look at the last frames on there, those are actually the cells.

What you see in the back is basically like time lapse kind of like,

snapshots, they're not actually cells in there.

It would be actually interesting, I never even thought of that, that would actually be a fairly simple introduction at each of those point steps, you just make that a new cell, that would be pretty cool actually.

I know, I think basically Carl, in one of his, when he initially published that, I think he had, at the end of the simulations, he basically added some new cells, but he never went further with that, and I think it's the same problem that I mentioned that when you have initially, and in the first

timeframe at T equals one, that if you have some cells close together, you have to kind of set the sense precision lower because otherwise they're too close together.

I mean, it works somewhat, but it's very susceptible to perturbation in that stage.

So in order, if you basically want to reintroduce perfluoration, either like you said, or like you gave me the idea to do in between or you do at the end,

you would have to come all that, which of course, what, what cells do, right?

If you have new cells formation that are not going to be the same kind of, uh, sense of rest that then a mature or reform cell is.

Um, but that was basically, I think just for the simulation, what was making a little bit com complicated, but, um, it is, I'm not right now actively working on that simulation anymore.

If, if I did.


SPEAKER_04:
um that would be great yeah maybe i'll come back to that no that would be way cool and if it needs to be like less sensitive at the beginning like you just double the earth or yeah you just double the sensitivity at each um time step and then that way like you know you would get that enhanced sensitivity over time and it's also very interesting from the point of view factor also there's some really cool work right now also done by i recently read that wall from the guy behind from alpha


SPEAKER_01:
He's citing this whole new physics approach where they basically just have a simple set of rules and then they just use fractal kind of multiplications.

And then each time that that goes on and they create all these kinds of physics laws, which I haven't yet gotten deep into.

I can't really say anything about how good and useful it is, but the fact that we all know is a very kind of informative mechanism that's used in biology extensively.

And that's something you could use here as well, where basically at each step where you introduce a new cell,

of just have the same rule set with the initial and you run like a small simulation in that simulation essentially and with the same simple set of rules you could probably make up a whole much more complex so it probably looked nothing like this i wouldn't expect this to then afterwards still have like the same shape but cool stuff cool ideas right now but one day


SPEAKER_06:
Just kind of unpack that because it's a great suggestion.

And thanks for kind of giving your take on it too, Francis.

It's really cool to hear.

Like when the cells divide, you may need a first symmetry break or to introduce a symmetry break, you get some gradient.

It can be gravity.

It could be a nutrient gradient.

It can be the entry point of the sperm that triggers like a calcium wave.

But it's like asymmetries can give rise to asymmetries and then interacting, you get two morphogens and then now it's high, high and low, low.

And then the alternations,

influence gene regulation and that's like very complex but um adjacency effects are really important and that's how we get the self-organization like of the insect eye or of tissues because they don't have to do what this challenge is which is sort of like getting formation spaced out this is like the bird flock morphology which is also so cool because it does apply to other systems too which i'm sure we'll be exploring more but like

bodies fill out into a morphology not just dissolve this is yeah cool though i mean of course we really learned a lot let's return to least action just and feel free just to leave anytime you'd like but on least action where does it come into play or what is it doing here yes so it's it's there was more of a background um section so um georgie gorget was also on that on that paper was also my um


SPEAKER_01:
We kind of talked to him because this is not, nothing that I did in there was like novel.

I didn't like, it was novel the way we framed it, but I didn't make it, I didn't make new math for that.

But the idea was that, is that what, what Yogi was doing, a lot of these action principles, you know, the classical action principles apply to biology questions.

And he was like, well, you know, it's really, I think you're missing like a communication,

aspect of this where you're not communicating clearly how this fits into these action principles.

And you're not communicating clearly of what, like where diverge essentially.

And Carl actually did write a paper on it where he sprinkles it in there.

But I wanted to make this more explicit essentially that the variation of the aviation principle is at least action principles by definition essentially.

But what I was trying to show here is simply kind of like the whole idea of this

paper from background was that anyone could start from this that has more of a physics background and then can work themselves through active inference to biology.

And that's something that physicists are very familiar with, right?

And the idea is actually where does this, what is the interesting take on it from the variational free energy?

And that's what I think in the, so you start with a general definition, what is an extrema?

And then you kind of see later on that the whole definition of the, of the Clubber-Clubber divergence of innovation of energy very much corresponds to that.

And it's also just interesting to see basically where, where that takes from.

So that's, that answers your question.

That's basically the point of that was more not, not that least action that I used that particular equation.

I didn't use the classical, the typical equations that Carl uses for his variation of energy.

There's more of a motivation and I hope

It goes to show essentially where this all flows from.

How do you get from the Apunna function in the beginning for stability, or the Lagrangian function, how do you get from there to a variational PI interview to really make that kind of integration to physics tighter, which I know I failed at because there were the comments to that paper that were published with it.

And if you read that, two of them were like, we still don't see how the integration is doing.

And then my comment to that was then, I think I called that

that mini paper response paper, like a TIPA integration to physics.

So I know I didn't succeed in that, I apologize, but that was the goal.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, awesome.

Dean, would you like to go anywhere, ask anything?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I don't even know.

I'm just going to sit back and then, because, well, for me,

you've taken a whole bunch of stuff around what a form might turn into based on what signals it's capable of acting on.

Is that, is that a, a gross, besides being a gross oversimplification, can we start there?

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So like, yes, yes, that makes sense.

Basically what, what

I always like talking about models, like what you put in and what you get out, right?

So what we put into the model is an encoding of signaling responses, which is like a classical, like if you see signaling A, B, but not much of C and D, then you think your cell type A, whatever that means, head type, and then you adjust your own signaling expression.

So each cell basically has four signaling molecules that they can exchange, they can express, they can sense.

And based on different combinations of those, they think they're one or the other.

And that is semi-place encoded.

So they have basically from that map, that's what the target morphology is meaning.

So what we put in basically is that encoding, the generative model, generative parcels, how they update that, the tickling diffusion constants, all that stuff, that basically holds information and spreads to each other.

And then what we get out essentially is what kind of shapes, like you said, can emerge from that.

Of course, initially, right, the initial model was basically you're not interested in how many shapes because you're interested in can it do the shape that you put into it.

So the point of this paper was keeping that same target, the same kind of like each cell has these options that it can be based on what it's sensing and then it's all secreting.

But keeping with that, can you get different shapes just by messing up the way that the information flows in and outside of the cell and it's being processed around the things?

And again, the inspiration from that comes from the lab that I'm working in where we do a lot of this, where we don't actually mess up the genetic coding.

So we don't mess up the genetic model in that inference terms, but we mess up how basically the state space looks like, how the information at each point in time is updated.

And that's the idea of this.


SPEAKER_06:
What does it look like to engineer or design a different target morphology?

How did you fit the Bayesian model or fit the flow descriptor, whatever it was in its representation towards the anatomy that's described in figure three?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So the outcomes that we get, like the experimental outcomes here, we didn't design the

Like I said, we keep those the same.

We just basically had some intuition that some of them turned out to be true of how we could change it based on just the asymmetry that we put in the information flow.

How would we design this one?

Mainly, so this is an abstract level.

And again, this model itself is not, that's already called this before I joined it.

So that's not, I didn't do this new.

But how do you approach this?

So basically the idea is, the idea of it is fairly biological.

The idea is that you have

showing encodings where certain transcription factors basically will, based on whatever you sense, will then basically activate gene expression in the cells that were then allowed to differentiate.

So cells, most of morphogenesis essentially starts off from something I mentioned initially.

You have some asymmetry in signaling that there's this thought that basically even when you already have the unfertilized egg in an animal system,

there's some asymmetry where that's being stored actively by the whole organism of the mother, essentially.

And the base from that asymmetry, then you have a gradient of already of difference.

And then, so basically some cells will sense more of signaling type A and less of B. And then from that, they will make, they will be, so certain genes will be expressed that will then change a sulfate to a sub sulfate.

And that, and then you have more sulfates and the same thing happens there.

You have now more asymmetry, but starting off in the same one.

So you, again, will have cells that will sense more and less of some signaling ligands that will basically then turn out to be incorporated through transcription factors, differential genetic expression to differentiation.

So this is essentially what this is doing, right?

You're encoding what the codes here are, essentially those different relationships between transcription factors, between signaling receptors, transcription factors downstream to a genetic code, where then basically

We don't do proliferation again, but that's the first step.

There's basically one snippet of target morphology, one aspect where you have at that point in this hypothetical morphogenesis experiments, you have four different signaling ligands that are being expressed, that can be expressed by the cells.

And based on where you are in the cluster, you'll see more or less of it.

And based on that information,

you will then yourself as a cell start to express more or less of what you basically start differentiating.

Um, so then you will start expressing more and less of that.

And at some point of that, you will reach a certain threshold where they actually will fully have undergone the differentiation process and have a new cell fate.

And that's what these different, um, head, tail and stuff.

So of course, like, you know, there's no animal system I know of that has a, you know, eight cells and, uh, four cell types.

It makes a whole body.

That would be pretty crazy.

Although there are some interesting, um,

There's some small owners and systems where there are the C. elegans, these worms are one example where they have a complete map from cell to cell, from basically a gene.

They know exactly which cell basically turns out to be what cell at the end.

So they can go from the embryo and they can tell exactly this cell is going to be at the end of time.

This is the minority of examples.

Most model organisms that I know of are a lot more messier than that.

And that's what this is trying to basically answer, given that you have a lot of messier, that cells can be different things.

And then if perturbations happen, like they happen all the time in environment, and often we do see then, you know, misformed embryos, a lot of that we saw in the lab, other labs do it too, we see it in nature all the time, where you get completely different

uh outcomes in the morphology even though not all of these occur because of some genetic mutation that's not always the case sometimes it's just basically some perturbation environment and the same genetic code with some little differences that was here it's basically the the differences here between one simulation and different if you did it that way we didn't but if you did at least not in this paper if you had different minimization initially of the prior beliefs you can also get different outcomes but

even with one minimization of the initial beliefs, you will get certain outcomes for those cell types based on the coding, but also on what the environment does.

That's the kind of the goal is you have cell types, you want to see how can you change the line of cell type differentiation based on an interplay, not just like saying you do this and you tell the cell to do this, but based on how they interact with each other.

Hope that answered your question.


SPEAKER_06:
It makes me think of Waddington's landscape, the epigenetic landscape, which I'll copy in.

How would you say it relates to epigenetics or the epigenetic landscape?


SPEAKER_01:
If I have my shirt here, I have a shirt with it, but I don't see it right now.

Yeah, I love the Waddington.

Yeah, it's exactly right.

So that was the big, I love you big enough.


SPEAKER_06:
I'll put it onto a slide.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Basically, the whole evolution was that initially when we started understanding genetic information, it was thought, oh, well, that's the end of it.

Now we know where to be done here.

We know basically that there's some certain signals that will be assessed, and then you will get certain genes, but the thing rolls down.

But basically, from that, it's all straightforward.

What was new then later on was the epigenetic part of it.

There was basically actually modifications happening, not on the

Like you did not, not the mutations of the genome, but which genes were more or less accessible for expression, which, you know, can, so basically you, you kept the coding the same, but based on modifications, a lot of system modifications, right?

The, the, the way that the chromosomes where the DNA is wrapped around itself in chromosomes, the more or less tightly they are called to each other, the more or less accessible to transcription factors.

And that started basically happening later on.

And now we think a lot more about this and we even see that's even heritable.

And it's also interactive with a lot more of the physical forces of it.

So, you know, perturbations in the mechanical or bioelectric environment will lead to a lot fast epigenetic transformations.

Of course, it's also important to mention that there's a lot faster process.

It's faster to basically modify some of the proteins that make up the histones and then make up the accessibility of the genetic code than to start off going some evolution experiment where you start to do mutating and crossover until you get the right combination.

So it's a different layer of information flow that is interactive with genetic level.

So what this paper kind of interacts with a little bit or intersects with it is the aspect of health.

In that initial kind of formation where you have the same genetic code within basically one lifetime, how do certain modifications in sensory precision, which you can think of, right?

I didn't make that explicit claim.

I hate to make claims that I'm not actually then afterwards answering on some relevant biological mechanism.

I could think of easily that way that these modifications of the response function, the sensitivity of the double-tail experiments and the reduced sensitivity and the cancer initiation, those could easily be thought of as short-term epigenetic modifications.

And we do see that a lot.

This happens especially in stress environments and embryos and stressful environments and embryonic genesis.

where there's very quick changes that can lead to drastic outcomes.

And it's thought of as a quick response mechanism to basic perturbations.

And it's involved, of course, in cancer as well.

That's well known.

So that's kind of how I would think about that.

The landscape here can be thought of as the variation of fantasy landscape in the sense of what different outcomes you can get, how quickly to update your parabola is based on your changes in the environment.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome.

Thank you, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
When I was reading this, I was thinking of a company that I'm invested in that has taken stem cell derived isolates because people have diabetes and they have created an environment to protect against the perturbation.

So instead of

injecting those pancreatic cells directly into the portal vein, they tried to, they have, are working on trying to sort of create the environment in which the isolates survive.

So essentially it's, again, rather than looking

from the bottom up, it's sort of creating that safe environment in which these isolates can then carry out their function.

And so that's what I was kind of thinking about throughout when I was reading your paper.

Now, I'm not sure if that, again, whether I was thinking of the correct analogy, but yeah, in terms of what the pancreatic isolates can do depends on their survivability.

So if you don't have the right kind of environment for that,

they tend to die or worse, they don't die.

They become cancerous.

So it's kind of interesting that you're looking at it here.

And then I know of some sort of practical application where the research is really trying to build these environments so that they can actually protect against the perturbations.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, no, that's exactly the long lines that I'm thinking as well.

I do, but I have like two more minutes.

If I can then I have to push and go.


SPEAKER_06:
um really appreciated you joining if it works for you to drop in or out at any point in the dot too please feel welcome and any other time you or anyone else are welcome to participate but thanks a lot for joining you're welcome my pleasure see you later okay bye bye thank you

excellent that was great fantastic great yeah fun times um okay so here's here's one thought on the relationship with foraging kind of picking up on what we were just looking at so he described some of the manipulations as kind of like interventions that were epigenetic so it wasn't the addition of um

like another changing the model structure like changing their from four to five transcription factors um it was just changing their state it's like picking one cell up and moving it would be changing its position but then there's other levers of intervention like changing its sensitivity or other aspects of its cognitive or its generative model and the whole point with

Science and active inference, though see Anticipating Brain is not a scientist by Brunberg's paper.

So it's not exactly the same thing, but it's about informed or directed experimentation.

And that's true from the epistemic foraging with the isocating to the scientific experiment.

When we make targeted interventions into systems,

based upon a good understanding of them, we can learn about the cognitive model that's underlying it, or the as-if cognitive model.

So there's a lot of interventions that would not be informative about morphogenesis, like jokingly, you know, hitting the petri dish with a hammer.

It's an intervention that does kill cells.

It kills cancer, but of course, isn't that the joke, right?

Like there needs to be more to it in the experimental design and in the

the measurement of the outcomes so that we're actually learning something.

And so to make increasingly nuanced designs and learn more and more and apply better and better, that's where having like this kind of formal modeling really matters.

So this is kind of taking just saying like, well, changes in receptors might be a precursor or a biomarker or an early mechanistic warning of X disease.

you'll read that a hundred thousand times in the molecular biology literature and this is picking up there and putting it into a modeling architecture where we actually can talk about changes in signaling and position in an integrated way so that it might be able to actually model real settings just like people use the epigenetic landscape heuristically but also increasingly quantitatively

to model self-fade decisions.

But just to kind of close that, again, it's the interventions that we as the investigator know, based upon our understanding of like the natural history of the system, that...

give us updates on our cognitive model of the system.

So like an ant foraging example is they'll take a desert ant that forages alone.

The nest mate goes out without following like just simply a pheromone trail and pick the ant up when it's like, let's just say 30 meters away from the nest or 20 meters away, and then move it to like 90 degrees rotated the same distance.

So one extreme case would be it continues from that location 100% as if it were walking back from the north, let's just say.

That would be a pure direction step integrator model.

There might be an angle it takes between that and, for example, heading towards the nest.

that might reflect the usage of other sensory or cognitive features like detecting the polarization of light or scene memory or other ways that it might be able to adjust and turn its vector to some other direction.

So that's the kind of experiment where

we can start to learn like how much are the nest mates in their foraging adjusting between their own onboard memory versus these external cues that might be picked up like in one instance by any nest mate in that location.

So there's some cells where moving it into a different tissue, the first thing it would do is die.

because it's just like too acidic or just like not a good environment for it but there are certain interventions that do seem to happen that lead to at the very least we can say states we don't prefer or just more directly like states that are abnormal or unhealthy um though it really does come back all to blue's question about death and aging and how is that related and what is this living phase between the developmental part

and the death part, even though there's such a complex continuum between them.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just ask a question on what you were just saying there, Daniel?

Do you feel that, or do you think that the level of what's happening with epigenetics is fairly flat?

And once these other types of changes happen, the adjacencies permeate out and can

the the cells are kind of finding their place um and is that a bit different to the nestedness you know that we're talking about the nestedness is because um like for instance a tissue or is that also does it then fall into some other type of um behavior where it's like into this idea of the nested um the nested kind of markov blankets

And is it then a case of what was the types of information flows which were conservation at one scale have become noise?

That makes sense.

So maybe I'm just curious about if that ties in here.


SPEAKER_06:
Um, it very well might.

I mean, what it just makes me think about is the eye specification in fruit flies and similar in other insects.

So this is like an example of a developmental genetics pathway.

at a relatively downstream level being worked out through a lot of work.

But these cells are pre-committed to being eye precursor cells, but then they undergo a second or a future stage of differentiation that results in a compound eye.

And then it's the modularity of this developmental framing of first eye precursor cell and then to a specified eye compound cell

that lets the insect eye scale in different ways, for example, than the mammal eye, developmentally.

So over evolutionary time, there's different affordances for insect eye evolution versus mammalian cell eye evolution, because they're on different pathways.

So it's kind of fractal because this eye field precursor, it's not...

the second one that comes out of the embryo.

So there's multiple like fractal layers and pre-committals, and it's not possible to jump from a canyon way at the bottom

directly over there's a few cancer cell papers that do a little bit more of like a reversion and around or a perturbation that pushes and then changes to like susceptibility or kind of like changes in the elevation of these hills between so it's a landscape which isn't just simply flat um it has some scale and then the

between how jagged it is and how much noise or flow there is is about how navigable that landscape is in that one model.

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So I have a question for Daniel and Dean specifically.

So when Franz was here, he talked about

the block matrix operator that he used in equation 39.

And you guys, well, maybe it was Daniel specifically, were talking about some kind of housekeeping term in the dot zero.

And I couldn't remember or place the housekeeping term that you were referring to.

And I wondered if it was like the same or similar in a similar or used in a similar way.


SPEAKER_06:
i think it's connor i'll bring in a housekeeping term slide it was from 32 livestream 32 stochastic chaos markov blankets and um here is the slide in slide 45 here it was um basically the helmholtz decomposition

is usually discussed in terms of just the gradient the solenoidal so sort of like directed term and then the isocontour circulation change in elevation ruler on the hill and then around the hill on the isocontour and then this paper um 32 um brought in the housekeeping term

then there was like a supplement so we didn't really totally go into it but together um they represent the total flow so it's a slight kind of um friction variation on the helm holds decomposition in this context but as connor mentioned in 32.3 it also has like sort of antecedents and maybe even similarities with other um areas so totally remains to be a little bit unpacked but it's the influence of how movement changes the landscape

at least that's a little bit how we were framing it, like change on a trampoline where the movement is going to influence it.

You can't just snapshot the landscape and then calculate what would happen and what the gradient and the solenoidal flow would be at every point because it's going to be the future.


SPEAKER_04:
That might be related to what Franz was saying, because he said he used it to smooth out the landscape, because otherwise you get stuck in a little local pocket when you're talking about something that's bumpy.

So it sounds like it could be a similar type of housekeeping thing, or just a smoothingness.

When you're going into the bowl, you don't want to get stuck in a bump down along the way, if you're marble traveling down.


SPEAKER_03:
I thought it was a cleanse.


SPEAKER_06:
There's just too many jokes to be made.

Wow.

I think in our last 10-ish minutes, we should just chill, land the plane, prepare for Dot 2.

It was pretty unexpected and awesome.

to have the um time that we got to speak and i think that's like the housekeeping term in action which is a process and a protocol and then people who have different perspectives on a situation but the group can always readapt to a changing landscape and so even if that's interpreted as structure learning at a higher level from the sort of

agent view looking up it's equivalent to adapting to a different situation in some fractal way slightly different or very different using the same affordances and perceptive and cognitive features as it had in the time step before and that's why this model that looks at the flow of the autonomous states so the states that can actually be controlled in the Markov blanket partition

in 30 by defining a specific function that we want to like be fitting well by really focusing on the flow over the blanket and internal states it allows inference on that component perception cognition and action of the given modeled entity to be

uncoupled in a certain way from inference on the hidden external state evolution which is fundamentally unknowable but in a slightly different way if that makes any sense and a classic moment blue to suggest the the mitotic elements and like

just to bring in the continuity and then the way that that gives rise to symmetry breaking sort of for free.

And that this sort of, and so it's cool conversation that we had today.

And so I ended up as a dot one might.


SPEAKER_04:
I didn't get to mention, and I was going to mention it, but, like, you know, there's that fractal fMRI brain pattern paper that I'm, like, dying to read and would love to discuss with the authors also.

But it's interesting just in terms of the fractal dimension also that Franz was talking about.

It's super cool.


SPEAKER_06:
Is there anything else that we want to, like...

write down to think about in the DOT 2 or questions that we'd like to ask Franz if he returns or just things that we want to take moving forward in the DOT 2 already.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm still digesting that one.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I agree.

It's like you're eating dinner.

It's like, what do you want dinner tomorrow?

Inverting space and time, we didn't really get to.

And some of these initial points, it was...

Right.

Least action, math and morphology, and then generalized flow, then taking us all the way back.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
So I would like to maybe ask Franz about quantum mechanics and what role, if any, that that played in, like, is there a quantum perspective that he was perhaps viewing in from?

when he was writing this paper.

I would like to ask just that one question because that will encompass inverting space and time and it will encompass what we were talking about with the probability current and the probability mass conservation.

So like that all is like bridging into the quantum where we'll go in the 40.

So I think I would like to ask that one thing.


SPEAKER_06:
Dean, what are you looking forward to?

What would you want to add here at the end?


SPEAKER_03:
I'm just going to go back to the drawing board and basically look a little more closely at some of those math operations because I don't tend to give those as much attention as I need to.

I think it's really interesting now that we've had a chance to sort of bring more people into the conversation.

I think...

think there's three parts to that.

I think we can agree there are three things that we can really center on now.

There's the forming, which is what figure four and five do.

But as soon as you go to figure five, what's interesting is that the attention seems to be on the shape that the cells eventually take.

And yet in the blackness around each one of those cells,

moment captures, there's signaling and there's changing, right?

So there's all the part we've talked about today, which is the whole flowing piece and where is it going and how is it channeling and how is it narrowing or how is it spreading and how is it dissipating and all that stuff.

But even in those diagrams, it's hard to figure out where the signal is.

Even when they introduce arrows, they introduce the arrow pointing at the form

not necessarily the signaling and the changing.

And that's where the math really comes in, I think, because without the math, you lose sight of those other two present factors that are all moving and mixing and turning into something.

So I hope Franz comes back because, man, he's got a heck of a lot more...

You've got a lot more to tell us about, really, because this is such a dense paper.

Like I think I mentioned to you, Daniel, before the point zero, this could be a 13-week course, this one paper, if you really wanted to.

I don't know how many hours he spent on this, but he already admitted that going to Carl's lab and from the lab he's at, there's way more multiples of 10,000 hours of work that were done before he started typing things out.

So, yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome with that.

Maybe like think about is this idea of like multiple kinds of invisibility or overlay or unpacking like projection up into a bigger dimension of interpretation.

Like you pointed out how the focus was on morphology.

which is to say the final realized, like this picture is of the morphology of the animal.

It's not of the signaling density, but this could be like presented as just a gradient of transcription factor A, or it could be presented as a gradient of vitamin A, or like, it's kind of like Carilion photography, like looking at the morphology with the energy field.

I don't know if that's exactly what it is, but that sort of idea with the field based perspective is,

But then it gets hard to show many overlaying fields because like, what do you do?

20 overlaying colors, but we can't actually see that.

And so that's just kind of interesting, like a question about visualization of higher dimensional models with a lot of overlays.

And then that's like one kind of invisibility, which is something that's modeled, but just not graphically shown easily, like the density of 50 pheromones or 50 transcription factors or vitamins.

But then also, but it does exist and it's like modeled as an actual chemical component of the biological system, like the generative process.

And then there's this generative model with the mathematical derivatives, the generalized coordinates of motion of cellular position.

And those are also like invisible in a different way because they're a modeling tool

the derivatives are not anywhere in reality like what is where's the seventh derivative of the baseball's movement just relative to what where is it hiding in the current moment this is just a purely tool driven way of thinking about the current moment not just in terms of its composition and like anatomy and position and the lowest level of the observed model but like these higher levels which are

real yet not existing in the moment structurally real in the structural realism sense i'll take your word for it i've been wanting to say that for a long time i have to now go back and figure it out so um but what a discussion i hope like for those who stick around to the end here that they enjoyed this that this wasn't just um

Total morphotastrophe.

All right.

Well, fun times and awesome to have all the good discussions and appreciate everybody who was here, Blue and Steven and Dean.

So see you all next week or any other time.

Peace.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_06:
Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.