## mEP-E9Q92Es

Hello, this is a New Year's Eve 2023 video that's giving a bit of a look towards how we'll be doing
projects and participation at the Active Inference Institute in 2024. So I'm on the
homepage of the onboarding document and I'm going to head over to projects.
As figure one from our recent 2023 paper shows, projects are at the heart of participating in the
Institute and in the Active ecosystem. Projects include the core Institute projects that are
commons-like or infrastructural, such as the Active Inference Ontology, Journal, Productions and Live
Streams and so on. And also there are so many projects, learning and application that people are
working on in the Active Inference ecosystem and some that engage with or are hosted at the Institute.
So drawing on work in Quantum Active Inference, which the second half of this video is going to
explore a little bit of, we're planning to structure project proposal and reporting at the Institute in
2024 according to these two stages and each stage with a form. And the two stages are preparation
and measurement. For preparing a project, it's like proposing a project that could be informing the
Institute about a project that is already going to be happening and doesn't require support all the way
on up through requested support in the form of calendar events, Discord channels, funding, different
kinds of support and hosting at the Institute. And then active projects will be found in the activities tab
so that there can be this updated list of what is really living and ongoing at the Institute. How can one
get involved? What is that project looking to do? And then what else has that project already done
will be reflected by the Always Open measurement form. And this could be a project that was proposed
initially to the Institute and carried out internally, or it could just be a research paper that somebody
found or created and can be an opportunity for future preparation engagement or not. So here from this
projects page, you can click into the project preparation form, unfold and see the questions if
you want to copy them out, and then directly complete the form for project preparation here, or click the
form link. And similarly for project measurement, you can unfold what questions are on the form,
click the form link, or you can fill it out directly on the coded document. That's a little bit of the how,
a little bit of the low road, and we hope to continue to fine tune and develop on that. In the second
part of this video, I want to look a little bit to this part that was mentioned about the quantum
active inference. So clicking that link will take you to the syllabus for the course Physics as Information
Processing, which Chris Fields taught with the assistance of André Guiré in 2023. And we recently
published just today the transcript from this course. And so I'm going to pull up in the transcript where
preparation measurement was mentioned. So here's the quantum informatic Alice through time preparing
and measuring a quantum reference frame. Everything not explicitly forbidden is mandatory. All the paths
and then what's really taken is measured. So this is the proposal stage. Here's how it could go. Here's
our situation in context. And here's the kind of distributional or procedural approach that we're taking.
And then measurement empirically what happened. And so here, basically, what Feynman realized was that in
any physical process, the observer Alice prepares some state that she's interested in. She prepares some
input to an experiment. Then she lets something happen. And then she sees what the result of the experiment is.
And the canonical experiment in physics is scattering. You know, fire two protons at each other, and they
intersect someplace and stuff comes out, and you measure the stuff that comes out. So I'm sure there's
many other areas where we can search for prepare and measure and find a lot of technical depth and a
lot of discussion from this very interesting course. But even from that short selection, there's so many ways
to think about preparation and measurement. So it's really exciting that people on their own timelines,
make sure to make sure they make sure they make sure they make sure they make sure they make sure they



the support that is going to make the project continue or not, or whether we can help something
get off the ground or just learn about what you're proposing. We will try with this new system to
stay on top of things, stay responsive, and we look forward to versioning all of this with everyone.
So email us at blanket at active inference dot institute if you have any other thoughts or
questions. Otherwise, see you in 24. Peace.
Thank you.