## 4JfGs_m5QHo

SPEAKER_03:
Go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to Acton Flab live stream number 25.0.

Today is July 1st, 2021, and we're going to be talking about this paper, The Computational Boundary of a Self, Developmental Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition.

I'm Blue, and I'm here with Daniel.

Awesome.

So welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

We will be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

Here at the short link, you will find all of the live streams and different series that we do in the communications unit of the Active Inference Lab.

And today we're doing the contextualizing paper, the dot zero video for two upcoming discussions in the first half of July 2021 on the 6th and the 13th, when we have discussions 25.1 and 25.2 on this paper and hopefully the author joining.

Today in ACT-INF Lab Livestream number 25.0, we're going to be trying to set some context and give an introduction to the following paper, The Computational Boundary of a Self, Developmental Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition.

by Mike Levin.

And this video is just an introduction to some of the ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

It's kind of like a three way intersection where we have people who might be within the active inference community looking to be exposed to some different areas like developmental biology or cognitive science.

And then another group of people who are coming from the developmental biology or cognitive science background and curious about active inference.

And then also we hope that this is exciting and interesting even for people who are not familiar with active inference or developmental biology or cognitive science.

We will hopefully try to connect it with some broader questions.

So we're going to walk through some of the aims and claims of the paper, the abstract and the roadmap, and bring a few big questions and some key points of the paper so that whether you read the paper or not, you'll hopefully be in a good spot to ask questions and learn more.

And of course, in the dot one and two videos in the coming weeks, we'll be discussing the same paper.

So save and submit your questions and let us know if you'd like to participate or contribute in any way.

So here we are on the paper itself.

That's a screenshot of the cover and the aims and claims.

And I'll read them so that then, Daniel, you can give a first thought on what you thought was cool or what you thought was important about the paper.

So the aims and claims of the paper.

First, they define individuals and selves in a way that facilitates taxonomy, comparison, and communication with evolved, created, biological, artificial, and exobiological agents.

He says, I propose a fundamental definition of an individual based on the ability to pursue goals at an appropriate level of scale and organization and suggest a formalism for defining and comparing the cognitive capacities of highly diverse types of agents.

Second, he proposes a plausible naturalistic framework for the evolutionary scale-up of cognition from the earliest origins of life, hypothesizing about the forces that drove it and the major transitions along the continuum.

And the goal of this research program is to show how complex agency and goal-directedness evolves naturally from ancient mechanisms.

So, Daniel, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_04:
Nice work.

I thought the paper was pretty exciting because it touches on just so many big topics like goal setting and agency, cognition and natural and artificial systems, multi-scale systems.

And then it links it in a way that people might not expect, which is through developmental biology and bioelectricity, which are kind of like processes that these life forms or other forms create.

engage in so to be able to connect things that are awesome about systems that matter like again their goal seeking nature their ability to do cognition and then connect that to a process theory it's kind of what we're all about in active inference connecting the cool features of the world to process theories that are tractable


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, so moving on to the abstract, I'll read the first part, and then you can read the next slide.

So all epistemic agents physically consist of parts that must somehow comprise an integrated cognitive self.

Biological individuals consist of subunits, organs, cells, and molecular networks that are themselves complex and competent in their own native contexts.

How do coherent biological individuals result from the activity of smaller subagents?

To understand the evolution and function of metazoan creatures, bodies, and minds, it is essential to conceptually explore the origin of multicellularity and the scaling of basal cognition of individual cells into a coherent, larger organism.

So I find this line of research truly fascinating and really a burning question for me is how information is consolidated or prioritized across skills, whether it's core screening or salience or something else.

So do you want to read the next part?


SPEAKER_04:
Yep, just one thought on that, and it's going to be a theme that's returned to.

It's that cognition or agency doesn't just blink into existence at a larger level of analysis.

It's actually composed of smaller cognitive units, and so it's kind of like cognition all the way down.

That helps us integrate across scales, but also recognize what's special about larger levels of organization, like culture.

So part two of the abstract.

In this article, I synthesize ideas in cognitive science, evolutionary biology, and developmental physiology towards a hypothesis about the origin of individuality, scale-free cognition.

I propose a fundamental definition of an individual based upon the ability to pursue goals at an appropriate level of scale and organization and suggest a formalism for defining and comparing the cognitive capacities of highly diverse types of agents.

Any self is demarcated by a computational surface, the spatial-temporal boundary of events that it can measure, model, and try to affect.

The surface sets a functional boundary, a cognitive light cone, which defines the scale and limits of its cognition.

I hypothesize that higher-level, goal-directed activity and agency, resulting in larger cognitive boundaries, evolves from the primal homeostatic drive of living things to reduce stress, the difference between current conditions and life-optimal conditions.


SPEAKER_00:
So I like this goal-directed aspect of this, and it really kind of implies to me that it's biological.

Cognition has to be biological.

But I wonder about what is the goal of molecules in their organization, right?

Is that a goal-directed activity, like the protons and neutrons and electrons want to reduce their uncertainty about where they are in space?

Or how does it work at a non-biological level?

Makes me wonder that.


SPEAKER_04:
Or strain.

Strain and stress.

Those are things we psychologically experience, but then you can have, you know, like a ring with four carbons.

It's under strain.

And the carbons, they seek to do what?

Well, get into a less stressed position, like an unstrained arrangement.


SPEAKER_00:
For sure.

The next part.

The mechanisms of developmental bioelectricity, the ability of all cells to form electrical networks to process information, suggest a plausible set of gradual evolutionary steps that naturally lead from physiological homeostasis in single cells to memory, prediction, and ultimately complex cognitive agents via scale up of the basic drive of infotaxis.

Recent data on the molecular mechanisms of preneural bioelectricity suggest a model of how increasingly sophisticated cognitive functions emerge smoothly from cell-to-cell communication used to guide embryogenesis and regeneration.

This set of hypotheses provides a novel perspective on numerous phenomena such as cancer and makes several unique testable predictions for interdisciplinary research that have implications not only for evolutionary developmental biology, but also for biomedicine and perhaps artificial intelligence and exobiology.

Do you have any thoughts on that, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
I guess it's just cool to see development and cognition come onto equal grounding because there was ecology, evolution, and development, eco, evo, devo, and then it's sort of, that's natural things happening.

And then often cognition and especially computational perspectives on cognition are seen as unnatural or designed.

And so again, all of these pieces are going to be woven together with a few pieces like bioelectricity and light cones that maybe people aren't expecting.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So the roadmap of the paper, we're going to go through the introduction, then the paper is broken up into lots of different parts.

What is a self?

How do you define an individual?

Body patterning, cognition, multicellularity versus cancer, defining individuation from a cognitive perspective, the agent's evolutionary backstory, conclusion, future outlook, discussion, and then some predictions and research program.

And then in the end, what does it feel like to be a pancreas?

Which I renamed that part, but maybe you changed it back.

So we'll see.

Do you want to read over the keywords?


SPEAKER_04:
So here's the provided keywords were development, bioelectricity, and the related gap junctions, primitive cognition, and our favorite active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
So development, I like this quote from Seth Smith, Seth Mary and Maynard Smith, which I can never say Oris's last name.

I feel bad.

Sorry, Oris.

Developmental biology can be seen as the study of how information in the genome is translated into the adult structure and evolutionary biology of how the information came to be there in the first place.

So that's a kind of cool definition of development.

Do you have any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_04:
It reminds me of earlier discussions we had about Tinbergen's four whys, which are kind of related to Aristotle's four whys.

It's like, why is there a foot?

Well, the easy sort of material answer is because there's matter in the shape of a foot.

But maybe you want to know something that's historical.

And over really long periods of time, it's a story about evolution, how the foot came to be selected on through time.

But development is just right there in the middle where it's the story for that individual, how that foot came to be.

Thanks, Sed.

Blue, could you turn down my mic?

It apparently is a little loud and distorted.

Thank you for the feedback.

Yeah, if anybody has comments on, like, the audio, Blue's doing an awesome job of first broadcaster role.

So thanks, Sed.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

All right.

Hopefully that's a little bit better.

All right.

Bioelectricity.

So this is a quote from the paper.

Developmental bioelectricity is the ubiquitous exchange of slowly changing ion-based voltage signals within and among cells.

All cells are electrically active and modern neurons evolved from preneural precursors that were already reaping the benefits of ionic signaling for computation.

Ionic signaling for computation.

So there's some ion channels.

I like that cool digital image of ion channels in cells.

And of course, this painting by Alex Gray isn't officially bioelectricity, but whenever I think of the word bioelectricity, I always think of this picture.

Do you have any thoughts there?


SPEAKER_04:
To connect the developmental aspect to what is mentioned here about the cells being electrically active,

the neural tissue arises during development from neuroectoderm.

So before there was sort of an inner layer of these electrically specialized cells, the ones that we call neurons, there was an outer layer.

And we see that recapitulated in embryogenesis when the neural tube is closed.

So that's combining sort of

Ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny, which is just to say that the development of the organism carries some resonance with the way that the organism evolved through time.

And then just to remind that every cell has those pumps that maintain charge.

Maybe not all of them are involved in rapid fire signaling, but to maintain ionic gradients and therefore bioelectric gradients is essentially what cells do with their membranes.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And awesome segue into talking about gap junctions.

So this is something that's near and dear to my heart with my neuroscience background.

So gap junctions were originally attributed to neurons.

That's it.

Gap junctions are there at the synapse, and they facilitate the electrical signaling between neural cells.

But really, they're channels that permit cell-to-cell transfer of ions directly

And they were originally described in nerve and muscle, but they're really found in virtually all cells that are present in solid tissues.

And then I just did a quick, like, brief lookup of a recent review of gap junctions, and it's cool.

Like, they're involved in all kinds of...

um things right like so cell proliferation immune response migration optosis carcinogenesis hyper hyper proliferative skin disorders lymphatic vessel diseases inflammatory lung diseases that's like asthma liver injury and neoplastic disorders that's also cancer so i thought that that was kind of a neat um thing any thoughts on this one daniel


SPEAKER_04:
Just that active inference helps us think about how agents communicate and interact.

So if there's two cells and they have totally disjoint membranes, then they can both modify a niche in common.

So they could pump ions in and out of the fluid, like the extracellular matrix that's surrounding the cells.

So there's a common niche that they're sharing.

That's like the least connected they could be.

And then there are also ways in which they can have a long-term connection with a higher throughput.

So we're seeing a lot of these ideas of communication where you can talk about these two agents now directly exchanging information with each other as their electrochemical niche, rather than just jointly modifying the shared fluid that they're in.

Cool.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, next.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, primitive cognition.

Let's see if I can play this video.

Did you want me to play it?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure, if it works on your side.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's see it.

Perfect.


SPEAKER_04:
Role of actin in cell motility.

Stunning 3D animation.

Maybe we don't need the sound, but nice.

Well, what is written in the paper is the emerging field known as basal cognition tracks the evolutionary history of learning and decision-making processes beginning from the dynamic problem-solving capacities of cellular and subcellular forms.

Many examples of memory, anticipation, context-dependent decision-making and learning are exhibited by organisms from yeast and bacteria to plants and somatic cells.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So down at the bottom, what does cognition or intelligent behavior look like across scales?

Where and how does cognition arise?

And how does it develop or evolve convergent and divergent features?

And where does active inference come into play?


SPEAKER_04:
I think that first question is fun, because it's a little easy to off the cuff, just say, well,

I don't recognize the intelligence of a cell because it's not doing an undergrad course or it's not doing skillful performance like we talked about in a previous discussion.

So will we have a human centric conception of intelligence tied up with all of our cultural understandings?

Or is there something about intelligent behavior that might help us recognize it across scales?

And that's what turns us to these fundamentals like memory, anticipation, context-dependent decision-making.

And then once we open up to that functional level of intelligent behavior and cognition,

We start seeing it everywhere.

And so instead of just seeing these cells and their behavior as taking part of an intelligent system that, again, only blinks into existence at the top level, they're in and of themselves intelligent actors.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Let's see.


SPEAKER_00:
The video got me locked in here, sorry.

How about that?

You want to take us through that slide, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
Yep.

So it's written in the paper.

I propose... We'll come back to homeostasis in a second.

At the top, it's written...

Developmental bioelectricity is the ubiquitous exchange of slowly changing ion-based voltage signals within and among cells.

All cells are electrically active and we talked about that just a few slides ago.

How ancient are these mechanisms?

How early was bioelectric coordination exploited by evolution?

so this is raising the notion that early cognition was biomechanical it was biophysical it involved morphological computation like we saw on the previous slide with the movie of cells but also electrical affordances existed from the beginning and so if biophysical affordances existed from the beginning and allowed for cognition to arise

Then it makes just as much sense to say that electrical affordances for cells to communicate and do these types of cognitive processes also were exploited very early in evolution.

So primitive meaning at a smaller level, but also earlier on and suggesting that it's bioelectric was one of the earlier mechanisms of cognition is pretty cool.


SPEAKER_00:
And I like this quote from the paper that says, the ability to operate toward a region and state space may be the primitive origin of complex cognitive systems that can entertain counterfactuals, which is to remember or anticipate events that are not occurring right now.

So we'll touch back on homeostasis.

But how are the goals related to homeostasis?

How does bioelectricity play a role in homeostasis?

And I think we come back around to that.


SPEAKER_04:
On 17, I wanted to give an example about where bioelectricity and development came together with cognition.

And for some people, genetic reductionism makes it so that, you know, the story is not complete until we know what gene is involved.

And I think that they'd find this recent 2021 paper from Drosophila fruit flies to be really interesting because what they do with a series of experiments is actually demonstrate the importance of membrane depolarization, which is to say bioelectric capacity in

Gene regulatory networks.

So like HH and PTC are proteins that are produced by loci in the DNA.

And they're part of feedback loops involving the depolarization of membranes.

So they show that regulation of that membrane potential has an important role in signaling hedgehog.

And that there's a mutually reinforcing relationship between these two processes.

And then what does that allow?

Well, it allows morphological computation of this developing disc of the fly that later turns into the wing.

And so there's advantages and disadvantages.

Like with diffusible molecules, there's a tremendous amount of expressivity with what that molecule is.

Like you have an infinite number of hormone possibilities, but

But on the other hand, it's very slowly diffusing and maybe you can only signal a short range.

On the other hand, there's only like one electricity.

There's not like the blue membrane potential and the pink membrane potential as parallel membrane potential.

There's only one membrane potential.

So it's kind of a big knob to turn.

However, as shown here, it really does play a functional role in stabilizing gene regulatory networks.

If you were missing that part of the puzzle, it would be as incomplete as if you were missing a critical signaling molecule.

So I suspect that as it advances,

the kind that are going to be referenced in this paper, advances in being able to visualize and track and manipulate bioelectric fields become more accessible, that more and more systems that were thought to be purely chemical or purely mechanical, I think that there'll be a more important role for bioelectricity.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

It is like one big surface, one membrane potential.

So you have one membrane and that's like the differentiator, right?

Between that's the boundary, right?

Is what is enclosed or encapsulated in the membrane versus what is not.

Okay, so here we are, active inference.

This is the final keyword.

And I pulled this image out from the Active Inference Lab, a previous live stream that we did with Ines and Thomas.

So this is the free energy principle of computationalism and realism, a tragedy.

And so this is just the basic action perception loop.

So you have active states, external states, sensory states, and internal states.

And so both of the active states and the sensory states are the blanket states, right?

So you have the internal can act on the external via these two blanket states.

So this is all of the sensory perception of the organism and the degree on which they're able to act on the environment.

Do you want to add any thoughts here, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
Just that active inference is a unifying framework for thinking about perception, cognition, and action.

And it does that in a scale-free way that's grounded in Bayesian statistics and physics.

So it's going to be deployed as a way to help us look for different kinds of behavior across scales.

Because the internal state could be internal to a cell, it could be internal to a tissue, internal to the organism.

etc.

It's that expressivity of the active inference framework that is going to come into play in the paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And it's a process, a scale-free process.

OK.

Active inference, as brought up in this paper, the author says, agents scaled up by evolving from basic homeostatic loops driven by active inference, surprise minimization, via addition of delays, which are memory, anticipation, which is inference, and networks,

spatially distributed processing that enables learning and progressive abstraction or generalization from the data.

Gathering into larger collectives with optimal information structure also improves the computational, i.e., predictive capabilities and gives rise to functional relationships such as memories, encoded goal states, test-operate, test-exit loops that exist over and above any individual member.

These levels coexist, enabling numerous coherent selves of different scales

to be implemented by any collection of living matter?

That's intense.


SPEAKER_04:
One of the other pieces about active inference that differentiates it from a framework like reinforcement learning is right there, that there's the minimization of surprise.

And in order to minimize surprise through time, you kind of have to be doing two things that at first pass don't seem like they're going to facilitate each other, which is the pursuit of what you already know is going to be useful.

That's called pragmatic value, as well as the pursuit of sampling things that will be informative.

That's epistemic value.

And so in active inference, the way that agents through deep time minimize their surprise about perception

That's what's referenced in the top paragraph about perceptual control theory.

The way that the agents minimize their surprise about their future expectations of perception is going to be by jointly working on pragmatic and epistemic aspects of their behavior and thinking about what behavior is going to be minimizing free energy in terms of kind of existing on the optimal trade-off where you're

performing, but also learning.

So these are a few features of active inference that differentiate it.

And then if we think about like a growth cone of a neuron, is it doing reinforcement learning?

Is it doing reward maximization?

It just barely makes sense.

But once we start to think about surprise minimization, like it's a dad with an evolutionary prior, it expects to connect to a neuromuscular junction, then maybe some of its searching behavior makes more sense.


SPEAKER_00:
And in the top section, also the author, you know, states that the sensory input layer is what enables active inference to operate.

So because there's receptors and channels that that's the perception, the perception for a cell.

Yeah.

Anyway, just thought I'd add that in.

Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
Greetings, Sarah.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, Sarah.

Daniel, do you want to read these core assumptions and I'll fix the thing.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Classic.

So I'm only going to read the two highlighted parts here because these are paragraphs that people want more detail on.

They can definitely read the paper to learn more about.

There's three core assumptions that are laid out really clearly.

So I appreciated that about this paper, that it makes clear assumptions and shows how those assumptions come into play.

And then basically there's two avenues for disagreeing, I guess.

One would be, I think those are invalid assumptions, but they're properly applied.

Or one can think that there are valid assumptions, but improperly applied.

And so that helps structure discussion with the contents of the paper.

So the first core assumption is a commitment to evolution.

Every capacity has a natural history and emerged from simpler variants.

I guess also evolution can proceed through a reduction of complexity.

So eventually it had to have emerged from simpler variants, but in the short time, I guess it could have emerged from more complex variants.

But the commitment to evolution means the commitment to the dispelling of magical thinking and not looking for some sort of a metaphysical answer to our physical questions.

And the second assumption is

of the three is it is assumed that all metaphors are to be judged by their utility in driving scientific progress, and there is not a binary categorization of scientific pictures which should be taken literally or not, which can be decided a priori.

So we're not going around with post-it notes saying what's real or what's not.

We're using utility as a guiding metric.

We can actually just take a quick visualization and then Sarah, you can say hello and give any thoughts if you'd like.

But we previously in live stream 15 and 20 talked a lot about this continuum from realism to instrumentalism.

Like is active inference the territory itself?

That's realism.

We're really describing what's really there when we make an active inference model.

Or instrumentalism on the right side here is like active inference as a map.

We're just using it as something that could be used to capture some features of a system and then used instrumentally like a model.

Then here we've introduced this third vector of utility, which is like, okay, whether it's the map or the territory, orthogonal to that is, is it useful?

And so this is a space that's describing not just where we can think about active inference existing, but also ways to evaluate different models.

Not that one is better than the other, but these are just different dimensions that models exist on.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I thought that was cool.


SPEAKER_04:
So Sarah, how goes it?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, maybe go to the third core assumption.


SPEAKER_00:
On to the third one.

So much of the discussion centers around goals related to teleology, a hotly debated topic.

Here, goal-directedness is taken in the non-magical cybernetic engineering and control theory sense of a feedback system that operates to maximize some specific state of affairs which can be modeled as a dynamical system with attractors in its state space.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So to reiterate these three assumptions, the first one is evolution.

The second one is utility.

And the third one is a non-magical sense of goal-directedness.

So these three assumptions play nice with each other.

And then they also lead directly to this final statement that except for a few briefer marks at the end,

No claims about consciousness defined rapidly as first-person experience or sense of self as qualia are made.

All the examples concern functional, third-person, objective capacities, computation, and behaviors.

So we're kind of like outside of systems, looking at them as an investigator,

This isn't about the first-person perspective, and there's always so much fascination and interest in what consciousness is, but in a way, these three assumptions go a really long distance towards just saying, hey, let's look at the system's behavior as we observe it rather than as we imagine it to be like.

So that's at least a starting point for a great discussion.

Before we jump into the figures, Sarah, do you want to...

Do you have any thoughts or say hello?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, yeah.

I'm kind of coming in pretty disoriented, but I've tried to follow Michael's work quite a bit, and I'm enjoying discussing it from whatever angle comes up.

And, oh, I don't know, background, who cares?

I'm in philosophy right now.

Yeah, that's all.


SPEAKER_03:
nice well any slide you want to chime in on is great so i have to find the slides okay they're yeah anyway um


SPEAKER_04:
Go for figure one, Blue, if you want.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

So this is a continuum of cognitive powers.

And this is just the first part of the figure.

We'll show the next part in the next slide.

So this is a TOTE, which is Test Operate Test Exit Loop, which is a schema of a basic homeostatic cycle.

So the author says that by continuously taking action to minimize the distance, the difference and error between the current state of affairs and a set point describing a different possible future state of affairs, it enables a system to pursue goals despite perturbations from the outside world and intrinsic noise.

So this is I thought, cool, like, you know, the first like possible counterfactual, like, yes, it's 75 degrees, and I have plenty of sodium and potassium and, you know, calcium, but but what if I don't always what if it's not always this way, right?

What if what if it my state changes?

So like that the first counterfactual maybe enabled this kind of homeostatic feedback loop.

I thought that that was a neat idea put forward in the paper.

So how is this related to active inference or systems engineering, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, the terminology reminded me a lot more of engineering than we often see, like sensors and actuators.

It makes it sound like it's going to be a robot.

And also this like test exit sounds like we're going to be doing sort of software evaluation.

But we can pretty clearly see the skeleton of action perception loops, whether it's framed as it was a couple of slides ago with internal external states and then blanket states.

Or here, where you basically have the difference between the desired and expected value leading to policy selection, not shown here, leading to action.

Actions cause events in the environments on the yonder side of the blanket, and then the state of the external environment influences the measurements on the inbound side, which are again contrasted with the idealized state, and that leads to another round of action selection.

So this is an engineering way of laying out the TOTE test operate test exit loop.

But who knows?

We're able to jump from Active Inference pretty nicely into a more engineering frame.

And so perhaps engineering could be integrated closely into Active Inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it seems like the blanket states, like the sensors and actuators, like our, you know, the action perception part are here in the middle.

And so it kind of reminds me of the active inference loop, like diagram that we showed earlier.

So it's interesting.

Next part, do you want to go through this one, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so in figure 1b, the caption reads that the scale is showing how different types of activity and systems can be ranked according to their degree of purposeness.

So again, think about purpose in the third person, not the first person.

It's not the sense of purpose, but more what I believe Hofstetter called the anti-spexus-nish.

I'm not sure how to pronounce it, but it was like, think about the most mindless behavior, and then

push away from that.

And that's what you can call purposeful rather than imagining that there's like this pure crystallized purposeful behavior.

And it sort of goes from bottom to top in terms of the degree of purpose ability.

And on the bottom we see basically just action that doesn't appear to have any kind of sense or purpose to it, like maybe gas molecules bumping around.

then we progress through higher and higher levels of feedback loops and then each one of these brackets it's kind of like a distinction so like starting the left behavior you can take the right branch or the bottom branch passive behavior like a ball that's being thrown or active behavior okay active behavior is it going to be non-random um or random like

Many things are random, but is it a wind-up toy that's just doing something that is not appearing to be too purposeful?

And you continue up and up the branch, choosing the higher branch each time until you get to these first and second order predictions and higher order recursive logics, which are seen as higher and higher levels of purpose.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Do you have any thoughts, Sarah?

OK.

Daniel, do you want to take this one?


SPEAKER_04:
What is an individual?

Well, there's so many ways to go about this, and as an ant researcher, that's always the debate.

Like, okay, is the individual the six-legged next mate?

And then that makes the colony like a society or a super individual, or...

is the colony of the individual and then the nascent is like the tissue.

So there's a lot of discussion around what constitutes an individual and how would you determine where the boundaries of individual individuality are and that

A piece I just referenced about establishing the bounds can be done in a few different ways.

One of them would be looking at where information theory is strongest or where information flows are occurring.

That's the information theory of individuality.

And here we're going to take a cognitive perspective on individuation.

And McCulloch is quoted so early in the neural network days.

The definition in the paper is, I propose a definition of an individual based upon its information processing structure, the scales and types of goals that a system can pursue defines slash determines the boundaries and contents of the putative agent.

So it's an informational lens on what constitutes an individual.

Like we can say that individual people become maybe an individual mob, just one mob, not multiple mobs when they start integrating information differently, or when they start pursuing different kinds of goals in a different way.

And it touches on these big questions, like why does it matter how we define individual as well as what other ways of thinking about individuality exists.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's intense, right?

So not only like in the information theory of individuality, is it like the most concentrated information, but it's also like that bi-directional information flow, right?

Is how Krakauer and that group, the defined individuality in that paper.

And so that's super interesting to me.

Like at what point is there downward causation in an aggregate?

Like...

So at that point, that is like the crux for how they talked about individuality, which is, I mean, it makes sense to me, right?

Like, you know, my brain tells my foot to kick the ball, or I decide I want to kick the ball, and so my body then acts accordingly.

But it's really interesting to think about when that emerges, that downward causation in a system.

Anyway, something I think a lot about, probably too much.


SPEAKER_03:
What about you, Tara?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that is actually one of the few papers I actually have read.

And I like went with a highlighter and everything.

And I always wonder on on I was looking through the math on that and actually learned a lot about like math I didn't even think was possible yet.

But it was it was binary in a sense.

It was digital.

And I'm never clear about when that matters and when it doesn't in these kinds of models.

So that's one thing that came up for me.


SPEAKER_04:
Sounds good.


SPEAKER_00:
Next slide.


SPEAKER_04:
Figure 2.

No, it's not The Sims.

It's a cone of individuation.

And in 2A is this sort of cone-based representation of individuality that's going to be returning in a few different guises in the paper.

and on the plane going out in different directions from a central point is like the zone of influence or the extent of the system's ability to perceive act plan and then piercing that coming up and down in the z dimension is going from the past to the future and so

This is a cool way to look at how multi-scale systems or what are called compound intelligences down there on the bottom right exist.

So we can use this kind of a cone representation to look at single cognitive agents and potentially contrast them, like in part B, where we have a tick with what's hypothesized to be like a smaller scope spatially in the now, as well as a shorter temporal scope in the past and future, compare a tick with a human, and then also ask maybe about what kinds of other

cognitive forms exist, and then these cones can be composed really nicely.

So like on the example on the bottom right with an ant colony, again, controversial to say that the ant is the organism when potentially the colony is the organism.

That's why I usually call them a nestmate.

But we can see how the nestmates are inside of the colony within this cone.

And so the colony pushes out the boundaries

of what these ants can do.

So they're kind of like on different parts of the spatial plane in the current moments.

And then the colony is something that is cognitively able to move beyond the time horizon of an individual nestmate by virtue of its collective organization and information processing.


SPEAKER_00:
This is cool, and something that we talked about a lot offline in preparation for this and preparing the slides is the inversion of the typical light cone.

So maybe, Daniel, you want to walk us through this light cone, and then we can maybe go back to the other one.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so this is a similar light cone notion, and it's just that instead of having the two cups meeting mouth-to-mouth and then coming pinched off in small time,

Another way that light cones have been represented is actually with the current moments, like the eye of the needle, like an hourglass, the pinch point.

And then in the past and in the future are the set of states that influence a given point and then the set of states it influences.

So let's think about that butterfly flapping its wings in the here and now.

So if you go back one time step,

the air molecules that might influence it are like one layer of air molecule away.

And as you go back and back and back, more and more spatial extents matters for the state of the butterfly in the moment.

And then similarly, one time step in the future

the butterfly's flapping is only able to influence a small zone proximal to the insect, whereas further and further out into the future, more and more spatial extents might be modified because of the actions that happen in the here and now.

And then this is a Lee Kors cabinet, a joke on a liquor cabinet, but it's a paper that actually uses this kind of an approach to do modeling of empirical data and to fit machine learning models, which we can talk about going forward.

Why and how do you get a speed up of certain kinds of simulations or data fitting by approaching it like a light cone?


SPEAKER_00:
So it's just interesting, the axes here, and this is kind of how I'm used to seeing these represented, are time and space, right?

So in physical space, I am physically in this space that I am at right now.

And it's interesting, as you go forward in time, given enough hours, I could theoretically fly from New Mexico to Singapore.

But for right now, I'm kind of limited to my house or my block, or I don't have point-to-point transport.

So I always like the way that Mike represents this light cone, like in this way, like in the inverse, it's like time and space and, you know, it starts in a very broad space.

And it proceeds to a very narrow space.

And it's like, of course, in the past, like if I go to my distant past, like I came out of an egg that was in my mother's uterus, right?

Like, so in my mother's womb, like I came, that's where I came from.

I was in that one point.

And I've gone all kinds of places, I guess, until now, but I'm not, I don't feel like I'm many places now.

And I also don't feel like I'm going to be many places in the future.

So I'm interested to talk to Mike when he comes on to the live stream about the way that this is represented, because it's very different.

Do you guys have any more thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I have one.

I mean, it seems to me he's almost trying to do, he's almost trying to take the case of the light cone and look at a particular ambition that you might have at this point in time

And then, and then can you carry out that ambition through time?

And as you get further and further, you realize there's all these impediments, you know, that, that come in your way.

And so it's this like one access is the ability to envision, um, what it is you want to do.

And the other act access is the ability to enact it is the ability to, well, even control or whatever your environment, any number of things that are required to enact, uh, this, this vision that you have.

And that's interesting.

Interesting access transformation.


SPEAKER_04:
Agreed.

The light cone that looks more like an hourglass is kind of related to our limited degrees of freedom in the current moment.

but it you know expanding out into the future of what we can influence and then the the diamond shape that we see in figure two is more like our zone of what can be cognized which goes beyond what we can influence in the current moment because there's some future time when you won't be able to imagine you know you know as as the the curtains close on life

and it narrows in and it's like smaller and smaller and then there's some point where your capacity to influence is actually kind of toned out and so there are two complementary ways to look at the same thing although it's interesting i want to say because i uh you know like


SPEAKER_01:
You look at that, like, there could be some inner supervening or intervening thing where it actually helps you that you never considered in this in this cone of possibility.

So you become wider, like really, it's just the winding road, right?


SPEAKER_00:
For sure.

All right, moving on, let's go to 28.


SPEAKER_04:
This is sort of taking the light cone.

There's just one and a half more slides that take the light cone in a little bit of a different, more physical direction.

But again, it's all part of a continued conversation.

So we can look at the now.

That's the middle of those three layers where there's two different individuals, Sally and friend N. So it's like two of those are at different points now.

And so then we look over on the time cone on the right.

And so Agent N is, you know, Nick, that's the one that we're focusing on.

And now, at the same time, they're at the same moment, but they're in different points in space.

So from the point of view of N, S is a space-like point.

But then in the same spot,

in the future or the past f or p in the same location you know the same address 20 minutes ago is time like and the same address 20 minutes in the future is also time like but then on the edges of this cone is like light which i i don't know the physics behind but i think it's kind of a cool idea that space and time have this

boundary nature and that there's things that are more space, like, like things that are instantaneously at the same moment, but in different spaces and more time, like the pure case being the same location at a different time.

But then it's like, Oh, I'll meet you in 20 minutes, two blocks away.

That's like moving through both space and time.

And maybe light does that in a kind of unique way.

So that was just one way that in relativity,

that they talk about light cones, and indeed the light cone concept is a physicist's concept.


SPEAKER_00:
That's really cool to think about, like, that light is the boundary between space and time.

That's kind of a neat thought.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

And then on 29, I just wanted to pull one again, the details going beyond me and this discussion, but here in a recent paper that explored how you could do simulations using light cones.

And so this is not just like sort of a metaphor, a cognitive heuristic.

This is something that you can use for large-scale data analysis.

And so the way which I alluded to earlier in which you can speed up a simulation potentially by using the light cone is by having a point that you're focusing on, and then you only need to consider one time point in the past at a radius of one spatially, two time points in the past, a radius of two spatially, three to three out.

And so it helps you reduce the space of what you need to calculate from all versus all

to the idea of calculating more and more out in more and more past steps and more and more out as you go into the future.

So that's because in the physical interpretation, there's a speed of propagation through a media.

So things don't happen instantaneously.

So that's like light moving through a media at the speed of light.

And then in the case of information propagation, it's similar.

Like if you wanted to focus on a given person and their role on an informational network, you would maybe make like an informational cone instead of needing to calculate all by all at every single time steps.

So it just made us curious about how active inference related to light cones.

So how can we apply this to some of the simulation models that we've already seen?

And then just what does the past of the light cone represent?

What is the current moment?

What's the future?

Just fun, eternal questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Ah, so I made this slide.

This is funny.

This light cone I actually showed when I gave a seminar at Mike Levin's lab a couple years ago.

It's from Andrew Gallimore's paper, Restructuring Consciousness, the Psychedelic State in the Light of Integrated Information Theory.

But I was thinking about this in terms of shrinking and expanding the boundary of the self, which the author discusses a lot in the paper here.

And just like how that would change your effective light cone, right?

Like, so if you have your self boundary, it's like a limited light cone, like the darker one that's shown in this figure on the right.

And if you expand the boundary of yourself, it expands your light cone.

So it made me think of that as we were talking, as he was talking, as Mike was talking about the

shrinking and expanding the boundary of the self in the paper.

And so I'm really curious, here's a couple of quotes from the paper about boundary establishment and maintenance.

So he says, the surrounding body becomes an informational shield or Markov blanket for the stem cell.

And this is, he references Carl Friston's 2013 paper.

And so I wonder about like the Markov blanket.

And I think that, you know, Daniel, this is something you and I have talked about as well about the Markov blanket, like being the defining boundary for the individual and like how, I mean, things must pop in and out of a Markov blanket, right?

Like if I think about the cells that are in my skin layer, right?

Like,

I mean, I'm losing them all the time and new ones are constantly being added.

So there's no distinct hard line to be drawn.

So like under, like how do things pop in and out of a Markov blanket?

Like, and what do you, can you like just have like peripheral boundary nodes on the edges there?

Like I've talked before also about like the difference between like your fingernail and your cuticle.

Like there's like a small tiny layer that doesn't know whether it's a fingernail or a cuticle.

So it's like,

How do you, like, have these, like, boundaries, right?

Anyway, another quote from the paper.

Crucially, by organizing into a partial electrochemical and informational pool or synctitium.

Somebody say that for me, please.


SPEAKER_04:
Sincidium.


SPEAKER_00:
Sincidium.

There we go.

All of the cells are able to measure and detect events occurring within the same boundary, creating a larger individual that emerges from the collective.

And I think this quote was like in reference to

the gap junctions and how they expand that electrochemical pool by like, they open up like some, like they pull the plug on the electrochemical gradient.

And so it kind of enables this like cell linkage.

So that's one one way that, you know, boundaries are maybe established, but any thoughts on this, guys?


SPEAKER_04:
We'll come back to it.

I think I have a few thoughts on where the Markov blankets come into play through time.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

All right.

So homeostasis, which we promised to come back to.

So what evolutionary pressures led cognitive boundaries to expand?

This is from the paper.

And the author proposes that the atom of this cognitive hierarchy is homeostasis.

So reactive homeostasis evolves into predictive allostasis under the pressure to predict signals from the environment and other elements of the biosphere.

And that's like what I was talking about earlier about the first like counterfactual about, you know, what if it's not always 76 degrees and full of nutrients in my environment?

How can I regulate that, reduce my uncertainty about future availability of the supplies that I need?


SPEAKER_04:
And also there's this nice progression from homeostasis.

So that's sort of like similar, you know, same homeostasis.

It's the thermometer is trying to get within the bound.

But the best way to stay within the bounds when the environment is changing is actually to not just be reactive, but to be proactive or predictive.

And then what's the best way to be proactive?

Well, it's to have increasingly rich generative models of the niche.

If you know that nighttime is coming, you're going to be able to take really good predictive behavior right now for tonight.

If you know that winter is coming at a larger timescale, it's another level of you being able to make adaptive decisions.

So what looks like homeostasis sometimes is,

can actually just be very skillful predictive allostasis.


SPEAKER_00:
Do you have any thoughts, Sarah, on that?

Cool.

Okay, so this one is memory and scale-free cognition and active inference.

So, I don't know, I just had some thoughts here, like memory as a gene regulatory network, and this is kind of something that not really was stated in this paper, but really, like,

You know, it's our evolutionary memory of, like, where we've been before and how we've come to regulate and, you know, work within our environmental condition and, like, also memory as a process.

Like, I don't know.

I think about that.

Like, where is it stored?

Is it externalized into the niche?

Like, we do a lot of niche modification.

And so...

i don't know um it's interesting to think about our our ram and our rom in um in like a biological sense so it's the author says a second step in the simplest homeostatic loop is the inclusion of a richer set of hidden layers in the neural network sense so these are additional biochemical nodes between sensors and effectors of a given system that enable a degree of memory

And importantly, memory can serve as the beginning of modularity because learning essentially groups diverse stimuli into compressed representations.

Complex states of affairs become remembered as compact biophysical engrams.

This is the essence of the kind of modularity when a simple biophysical event kicks off the formation of a complex morphogenetic cascade, such as building a hand in embryogenesis.


SPEAKER_04:
one nice point there is the difference between modularity and memory about how they enable each other it's sort of like if everything is being mixed in one cup there can't be a memory of different colors okay well if you have two separated cups you can remember two different colors and so on so memory can serve as the beginning of modularity is saying that it's this um relationship between things becoming distinct

and being remembered through time.

Distinctness carried through time is memory.

You can remember a longer number when you have more modularity that's being propagated through time.


SPEAKER_00:
And then the paper on the right is an older Friston paper talking about memory, attention, and salience, and active inference, where they described memory, working memory, as a process of evidence accumulation in a temporarily structured hierarchy.

So I guess like going back through deep time, like that's where the gene regulatory network kind of comes in as a process, right?

Like the process of evolution.

And that's like the working memory there.

Anyway.


SPEAKER_04:
And just to give one note there on the multi-scale active inference models, sometimes the way that memory is being modeled in active inference is as a state variable that changes at a slower rate.

And so within the longer time scale model, we have a shorter time scale model.

And then that can be modeled from setting to setting as memory carrying over.

And so it relates to this idea that the larger cognitive system is able to also act over longer timescales as well as reach back with a deeper memory.

Because if you have the kind of short-term model that's just standalone, it's like a memoryless process.

But if that has inherited from a hierarchical model, the state from a previous click of the model, it's memory.

And then if it's able to imagine one more click out into the future, it's goal planning.

It's anticipation.

And so in active inference, one of the ways that we integrate memory and planning

together is by thinking about hierarchically nested models.


SPEAKER_00:
So also I wonder what role memory plays in policy selection.

Like I remember every summer when I go to Scotland, it is cold, right?

Like, I mean, I live in New Mexico.

It's like 120 degrees Fahrenheit.

So every summer I remember that when I go to Scotland, it's cold.

So now it's my policy to bring a jacket when I go, right?

So even though it's the summertime and I wouldn't normally do that.

So is that memory also ever modeled in the policy selection, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
It's a good question.

I wonder if you can plan to forget, or I'll make a note, I'll plan to remember.

I'd say active inference just gives us a way to think about all those different affordances that real cognitive systems have, like offloading memory to the niche through external computation, or in terms of what you just described.

But that's a good question we can ask.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

I don't actually even need to remember that it's cold in Scotland because, you know, I can just ask Google.

They will tell me the weather and it will be cold in Scotland.

So if I just remember to, you know, check my cognitive offloading device, then I don't even need to remember to drink a chocolate when I go.

Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, next.

I have one random thought.

Maybe it comes up in another slide, but this question that Michael Levin has about how does it know when to stop in terms of cell growth and morphogenesis, if it's the case that it's connected to memory in the way that he's suggesting, then maybe it's related to information flow.

I guess that's maybe obvious given the focus of this.

But it is interesting, you know, it's like the cells are just like, oh, we've got to now become multi-bodied or, you know, or become social rather than individual in order to store memory.

Like there's this funny, like, break point.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I didn't see the stop mechanism really brought up in this paper, but I have seen it.

So I'm not really sure where it ties in here.


SPEAKER_02:
Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_00:
Figure three?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, if you call it a morphogenic cascade, you know, it's like, well, we're born, we grow, we grow to a certain point, and then we shrivel and die.

So it's like, how does that connect to memory and information?

It's kind of suggested.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep.

So figure three is looking at a sort of cell's eye view of that time cone.

And now we're going to step away from, you know, is it a time diamond or is it a time cone?

And we're going to think about the trajectory of a given cell.

Go back to the assumptions of the paper, though.

This isn't about whether the cell is experiencing things.

It's not what it's like to be a cell.

It's about how the cell has a given spatial extent in A. It has a given spatial extent that can be thought of as having a memory.

It inherits a history through time.

And then also has an anticipation zone in the future.

it can do anticipation and memory as a sole agent or it can interact socially so what happens when it interacts socially with other agents like itself well it expands the spatial dimension in the now that's what's being called integrated spatial perception

And that allows it to have expanded memory in the past.

Like if each of your five friends have a book, then there's more memory as a group because there's more books.

And then also the ability to extend the anticipation into the future.

And then this part I just highlighted in blue is

Joining into communication networks allows the cell to have temporarily delayed access to the information obtained by neighboring cells.

This is where the time cone comes into play.

It's not that when something is perceived by one of these cells off on the fringe, the focal cell doesn't instantly hear about it.

They hear about it one time step later.

So that's where the time cone comes into play.

Because from the point of view of this focal cell, just assuming that information moves one cell per unit of time, then at zero time points, its radius is one.

one time point away, its ability to integrate sense is one more radius away.

And so you can keep on clicking back and that's reflecting a broader and broader zone of memory, or you can carry it forward with a broader and broader zone of influences or of states that it can affect.

And so the resulting larger individual, and again, individual is being used cognitively here, not like evolutionarily,

is formed with a cognitive world that's unified by the cell's sharing of information across time and space.

So, no teleportation and no time travel.

The limitations of propagation of information in our physical universe means that from the point of any given cell or agent, it's existing in this time-cone-like structure.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that was like the expanding the boundary of the self and like kind of like what happens, like the time cone is expanded.

And you know what, this just makes me think of, well, first, I just want to remind everyone that this like cell-cell communication is like what gap junctions facilitate because they're really connecting all cells and solid tissues.

Um, but, but really I thought about, you know, the old adage that you are your company.

And like, if you think about, you know, your five, like closest friends and that like communication, like network that you have, like you hear about, you know, world events or events that are relevant to their lives, it might be relevant to you.

Like you hear about it one time step later and just how like, you know, your cognitive like boundary is expanded by like your inner circle.

I don't know.

Made me think of that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Hey, Blue, can you just re-highlight or talk about the cell tension that you were just mentioning?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah so that was earlier in the talk it was one of the keywords so let me just go back to that slide um so here uh these gap junctions so they they are they were originally you know categorized in like neural tissue and uh and muscle you know to facilitate like rapid communication but they're really present in every cell and solid tissue and they they just perform

Not ion exchange, but it's like passive diffusion of ions so that it's like almost a shared intercellular space.


SPEAKER_01:
So would it be safe to call that a kind of a information bottleneck?

I just wonder.


SPEAKER_00:
So maybe not as much of a bottleneck as it is like it pokes a hole in the informational boundary.


SPEAKER_04:
The more rapidly, let's just say that the gap junction, so the no gap junction, it takes three time steps for the signal.

One time step to release the molecule, one for it to diffuse, one for it to be perceived.

So every three units of time, you're getting a radius expanding out by one.

Now let's just say that a gap junction allows one time step, the direct diffusion.

So then the time cone is expanding wider.

because the diffusion from the target cell is able to sweep out a larger time cone.

Whereas if, again, if it took three units of time for every one of diffusion, it'd be like a narrower time cone.

So rapid communication, which is never instant, allows that time cone to access more memory into the presence and then influence more broadly

And so bottleneck is sort of like thinking like a bottleneck is a constraint relative to the width of the bottle.

But in the context of a gap junction, it's actually like a channel or an opening for information transmission.


SPEAKER_00:
So if you think about it in terms of like your inner circle of friends, imagine like you can wait for your friend to call you up and tell you this exciting new event or like you can have a wiretap into their house.

So like the gap junction is like having a wiretap into their house.

So like you always know like what is going on.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, what I'm also searching for another analogy that's just saying to the stuff I've been looking at lately.

Do you think it's fair to analysis to You know, a compression function like, you know, if you take a picture of the classic neural net, you know, a bunch of notes here, just a few in the center of the hidden layer and then expand it out with with it better be a fair analogy for a jet gas junction.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'm not seeing it.

Sorry.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, I would just, to recover it, I would just say the transmission is like a compressed form of, it's like a little sampling of the chemical milieu from one cell being passed to the other.

If there was no bottleneck,

no compression of information, they would be just in one unit.

They'd be in one Markov blanket.

And so there's this trade-off where if you totally isolate, the rate of information propagation is low.

The modularity is very high though.

On the other hand, with total integration, you can't have memory because you don't have modularity.

However, you do have instantaneous or close to that transmission.

And then the gap junction exists at this kind of sweet spot that allows for modularity with narrow channels of communication, which is what Shannon was studying in the first place.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.


SPEAKER_04:
So the figure... Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
So figure three, I think we just popped on the cone.

Is that true?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that's just a...

draw the connection between the figure of two with the time diamonds, time cone, and then just this figure.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

Figure four.

Go ahead.

Figure three, the slide that we just had was as things build out.

That was the point of view of the agent building out, and now it's like things fall apart.

So figure four, we see a sort of rehearsal in B of what we saw previously, which is that that target cell, it's combining sensory information that's enabling it to detect patterns more rapidly, getting a big picture.

That's what it says in B. And therefore missing information can be anticipated by this pattern seeking drive.

But what happens when things go wrong?

That's in C, where this bottom right cell, the green one, has gone rogue.

It has stopped communicating in a way that was participating in this broader sense-making, and it has shrunk its sensory radius down.

And so in doing so, it reduced the cognitive capacity of the other four cells.

it has reduced its own sphere of influence, and it's also introduced this adversarial dynamic potentially over evolutionary or developmental timescales.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Any more thoughts on that one?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it reminds me of a friend I know, but


SPEAKER_04:
no otherwise it also reminds me about how cancer research is starting to think more about the niche and the signaling between cancer and non-cancer cells like cancer cells need to call down healthy blood vessels they need to prevent healthy immune response from taking them out

And so it's like cancer as a dialectic or as a relationship between agents with different goals, again, not the experience of the goal, but acting as if it has a goal, that third person cybernetic teleology.

And so that helps us make sense of all these disparate features of cancer by thinking about internal and external states, information propagation, et cetera.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you think it would be right or off to think about the one possible place where that could go wrong happening at the gap junction?

Like the gap junction would no longer function as a good

sampler compression thing, which I know you don't agree with the analogy, but something like that.

I don't know what's happening in that research area, but does that make any sense?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, we talked about gap junctions earlier and their involvement in neoplasticity and all kinds of other disorders.

So definitely.


SPEAKER_04:
I just found this really nice paper called Gap Junctions in Cancer Communicating for 50 Years.

And the abstract starts with 50 years ago, tumor cells were found to lack electrical coupling, leading to the hypothesis that loss of direct intracellular communication is commonly associated with cancer progression and onset.

So that's pretty interesting.

It's like when you shut down the lines of communication, like between two countries,

Are those two countries having an improving relationship or is that like the last time that they spoke before war?

So closing down the embassy, shutting down the gap junction, it doesn't bode well for sort of amicable resolution to conflict or communication.

That's why it's so important to maintain the avenues of communication.

even when there is an adversarial relationship because things can always get worse you can always shut down the communication which will make the generative models and the incentives and the goals diverge even more cool i don't know just all of a sudden you go into politics and i'm like oh yeah but wait a minute anyway

but we should shut down.

They're bad.

We should shut down.


SPEAKER_01:
No, I wasn't thinking that, but if you keep the channel open, you also stand more chance of injury by way of keeping the channel open.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Keep the channel open until you shouldn't.

This is just a fun discussion for a little bit on the evolutionary anachronism, which means just something that's happening at a different time than it's expected, like a feature from the past that gets brought back, like

an evolutionary reversion.

And so in the paper, it's described that this is a breakdown of multicellularity and highlights the fact that the scale of the structure which cells work to maintain can change rapidly from cooperation towards an entire organ system or body to

that's a healthy organism, to the level of a single cell.

So instead of seeing cancer just mechanistically as a derangement of signaling or a derangement of replication and DNA reproduction of a cell,

We can think about it informationally and cognitively and cybernetically.

Like the cell has changed its cybernetic horizon from the goals of the organism to its own local goals.

And so this concept of an evolutionary anachronism and how even in the current day, we can study anachronism.

An example is with avocados, a tasty fruit.

And as per the Wikipedia, it says avocados are exceptionally fatty fruits with seeds far too large to be successfully dispersed by any wild animal presently alive in the Americas.

And so that is a paper of Janssen and Martin in the 80s.

which was actually talking about the ecology of large animal plant interactions of animals that we've never directly seen.

But it's like if you know that there is a really large seed and you know that there's seed dispersing mammals, then it can lead you to hypothesize that there was a seed disperser that was large enough to eat avocados whole.

And so we can look at anachronism in the current moments

and help us retrace the past.

So just like the avocado is an anachronistic trait with such a large seed given to the current ecology, not the past ecology, we can see cancer as this anachronistic reversion to a previous mode of information integration and goal setting that it's like it's inappropriate in the context of the goals of the body, but

not necessarily within the goals of a single cell that just wakes up one day, it's like, wow, I'm bathed in glucose, I should replicate.

So can't blame that.


SPEAKER_00:
Also, like the cancer, a lot of the markers in cancer cells are really like, it's like a developmental reversion.

So not sure if you guys are aware of that or not.

But it's like they they revert to like a more immature cellular phenotype.

And so that that I mean, it's literally like going back to the past.

So interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep, stemminess.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, stemminess.


SPEAKER_01:
Are there, like, degrees of reversion?

Like, is there something to be learned from the degree of reversion?


SPEAKER_00:
The degree of stem celliness?

I'm not sure.


SPEAKER_04:
One thing that comes to mind there is there's some cancers where the it goes back to like a stem cell of that tissue.

So like it's like a white blood cell cancer that like replicates a lot of white blood cells.

But when there is a cancer in a reproductive organ, sometimes it's like called a teratoma because it can have like hair and nails and stuff like that, because it's actually pulled back so far that it can then differentiate on all the pathways totipotent cell, rather than a reversion up from being like a healthy reproducing white blood cell precursor to just a higher

like a white blood cell stem lineage but it doesn't pull back all the way to including ectoderm whereas if it was in um you know a reproductive cell then it could do that cool biofilms do you want to take this one daniel

Yep.

So I think the key point here is that bacteria have ion channels just like metazoans do.

Dopamine, GPCRs, the proteins that signal between neurons, those are not innovations of mammals.

They're not innovations of vertebrates.

Those kinds of channels and diffusible molecules are cellular.

They're panacellular.

And so what's being shown here is just like in previous figures, we saw one kind of eukaryotic cell, right?

You knew because it had a nucleus.

We had one eukaryote connecting with a few other eukaryotes.

Well, here we have one prokaryote connecting with other prokaryotes to do the exact same thing, which is increase its sensory capacity.

Again, not instantaneously, but think time cone, light cone.

And so in the same way that the eukaryotic cells form a cognitive individual through their associations and affordances, such as the gap junctions bacteria, when they form a biofilm can also form a larger cognitive integrated individual.

And you can still say, well, but from an evolutionary point of view, the unit of selection is the single bacteria.

Okay.

But that's the evolutionary individuality definition.

And when we use the cognitive individuality definition, we see a lot of the similarities between a multicellular organism's tissue and then a multicellular biofilm tissue.


SPEAKER_00:
Even not in a biofilm, I mean, bacteria have an incredible ability to like, I mean, it's like antibiotic resistance, right?

Like they do plasmid exchange, which isn't like their chromosomal DNA, but it's like small little snips of DNA.

Like they just like have a handshake.

Like it's like a bacterial handshake.

Like now I'm going to give you some antibiotic resistance too.

Like we spread germs like COVID and bacteria to one another.

They spread like plasmids to one another.

which which confer different properties you know and then we select for this like antibiotic resistance through the use of all of our like antibacterials and so only bacteria that have these little plasmids are survive it's really interesting so even outside of a biofilm they do some some kind of um you know communication and like cognitive expansion of their self in like the way that we do with our inner circle of friends nice

Cool.

All right.

Key ideas.

I just highlighted a few of these like points, but there's a huge box in the paper.

So we'll just read through the highlighted parts here.

I'll take this one.

So first, a unified integrated cognitive self or individual can be defined with respect to the integrated ability to pursue specific goals via a homeostatic process that resists perturbations.

Second, an agent's cognitive world can be quantified and characterized, enabling comparison with others regardless of their material implementation, by estimating the spatio-temporal boundaries of its area of concern, the volume in space and time over which the agent is able to take measurements, exert influence, and functionally link disparate events, learning, and association.

Three, the borders of the temporal and spatial events of which a given system is capable of measuring and acting map out a cognitive light cone, a boundary in the informational space of a mind.

So estimating the spatio-temporal boundaries of an agent is something I find particularly interesting.

So I just put that in as a question at the bottom.

Do you want to read some of the next ones, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
Yep, so these are some key ideas four, five, six.

So four, cancer is a reversible shrinking of the computational boundary of a biosystem.

Pretty tantalizing there with the reversible.

I'm sure that's something that a lot of people would like to see.

Maybe the idea is you remind the rogue agents about bigger goal.

Like, hey, you know, I know you're hungry, but we wait in line at this restaurant so that everybody gets what

takes care of them.

And maybe that helps remove the cancerous restaurateur.

Five, agents scaled up by evolving from basic homeostatic loops driven by active inference, which is surprise minimization, by the addition of delays, which are memory, anticipation, which is inference, inference has planning as inference, and networks, which is spatially distributed processing, enabling learning and progressive abstraction generalization from data.

That's pretty cool to see active inference and elaborations of active inference at the heart of this future electrical evo, eco-devo.

It's like saying you start with action and perception, and then you can carry that forward in time, planning, anticipation.

have an extended trail of memory.

That's the past.

And then you can also expand spatially.

But again, the spatial isn't instantaneous.

There's a propagation speed in the media.

And so even laterally, similar agents interact through this light cone way.

So nice to see where active inference plays into light cones there.

And then six, infotaxis, the drive for better actionable intelligence about the regularities and patterns in the world and in the agent's own mechanisms, encourages cells to connect in groups via signaling.

This is another area where active inference has a lot to say and is a value add relative to a reward-only framework like reinforcement learning.

Because, again, what drives the bacteria to coalesce and to work together?

Maybe it's reward, but then you have to appeal to this idea that they're maximizing reward with their behavior.

It's a stay or leave and all this kind of stuff.

Infotaxis helps us understand that the way to get good actionable intelligence, which is kind of like active inference, AI right there, is to make your actions exist on the tradeoff frontier, like the Pareto optimal tradeoff.

between getting it done right now and expanding your epistemic boundaries.

Sometimes the right move is to contact somebody who knows better or to go to a website that might inform you better.

And so it's actually a useful action in the moment to arrange to get better information later.

And so active inference helps us think about how these different needs are traded off by organisms.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

All right.

So seven, collecting into, oh, I can't do it.

Syncytium.

Syncytium.

Syncytium?

Did I do it?

Okay.

Collecting into a syncytium enables all of the cells to share the same data and access the same memories.

That's pretty awesome.

You must assimilate.

It's like the Borg.

Sorry, Star Wars nerd.

Okay, also greed, eight.

Greed at the single cell level for information, infotaxis, drives cooperativity as each unit expands its measurement boundary, communication with neighbors, and thus inevitably becomes part of a bigger self with bigger set points serving as homeostatic attractors.

So I think active inference also has a role to play here

in this um cooperativity so like i can reduce my uncertainty about my environment by cooperating with people who have the same goal that i have right like or cooperating becoming part of a group you know and and therefore our efforts make a bigger effort or bigger

Anyway, less surprise when I'm in a bigger group because it expands that light cone, right?

And then nine, there is a fundamental symmetry between anatomical control mechanisms and cognitive mechanisms.

And I think that this was discussed in terms of bioelectricity in the paper.

Do you guys have anything to add?


SPEAKER_04:
One thought on that is cooperation arising at a higher level.

So that just reminds me of like, if you're looking through a microscope and you saw a cell a eat cell B you go, I mean, adversarial relationship, right?

Could there be anything more directly adversarial?

And then you pull back and it's a white blood cell, you know, that's attacking a cancer cell.

So it's cooperative at a higher level, but it can look adversarial at a low level.

And so what does that map onto in different systems?

Can we reimagine conflict and tension as actually playing a stabilizing or cooperative role at a larger scale?

Can interpersonal differences in perspective or disagreements lead to a cooperative or regenerative collective?

This is what we hopefully move towards.


SPEAKER_00:
I saw some pigeons procreating yesterday while I was out walking around in my neighborhood and it definitely looked adversarial.

It looked very, very adversarial, but they're cooperating at a higher level.

Looks can be deceiving.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Definitely.

I was thinking of a case where like if a tiger attacked me, I should just assume that it's like an information transfer that needs to happen.

I don't know.

Come get peace with it.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, it's like in The Selfish Gene by Dawkins.

He says, yeah, why would you go beyond the gene?

It doesn't make any sense.

Would you have mammals doing kind acts for each other?

Just look at the lion eating the gazelle.

How could that possibly be a collaborative relationship?

And then I thought, what if those two populations stabilize each other through deep time?

And they can't coexist.

And then they actually persist better both because of that one act.

So who's to say.


SPEAKER_01:
But just one thing, like if, if that is all the case, you know, if this is all like, whatever, man, the universe becoming like, why would it be that we had such a hard time with it?

Like, shouldn't it, shouldn't there be some mechanism that allows me to just be like, Oh, okay, cool.

You know, like, I don't get that.


SPEAKER_04:
I think the mechanism is narrative, cognitively.

It might play out differently in different systems.

But agree to disagree, it's a narrative that we can both agree on.

We're cooperating at that narrative level.

Doesn't mean that we don't disagree.

In fact, we entrench that we disagree.

But we're agreeing at a higher level.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Do you want to read the next ones?


SPEAKER_04:
So yeah, just a few of the key points from 10, 11, 12.

10, bioelectric integration helped evolve control strategies and cognitive content across the continuum from chemical networks to human minds.

11, the key points here were that there's a scale invariance with how different systems make decisions.

and that we can, across different systems, study how the cybernetic processes of learning and parameter optimization are implemented by a large number of units pursuing infotaxis and homeostatic goals, aka pragmatic value and epistemic value.

And twelve, a conceptual unification is proposed in this paper as scale-free cognition, and

then it's talked about how these boundaries between different subunits are a major control mob between itself and the world like the cell is doing the same stuff whether it's part of an organism or part of a cancer but it's actually this control knob like what are the limits of the cognitive individual that sets the cell up to act a certain way or another

and uh then a reminder at the very end from a utilitarian perspective that the most appropriate level of analysis is to be determined empirically aha but was empiricism determined empirically and that is said to be the level that facilitates prediction control with the least effort by the experimenter or by the system itself what if they disagree

and gives rise to a unified understanding that drives the most novel, robust research programs at the bench.

Nice.

If it doesn't advance your career as a scientist, then it's not the case.


SPEAKER_00:
This was you, Daniel.

Active inference and multiscale communication.


SPEAKER_04:
Just wanted to capture a little bit about multiscale systems and Actim.

So here we have nested systems.

So top left, that's an ant brain.

That's a picture that Sasha took of an ant brain that came from a Pogo ant.

And then there's the colony with a bunch of nest mates driving food around.

And then the colony is embedded within an ecosystem.

So within one nested system, within these time diamonds that are sort of nested inside of each other, we can think about how the internal state of one

is linked to the external state being the next level up.

Like the internal state is the brain and the external niche to the brain is the body.

Okay, now the body and the brain are the internal state for what?

The colony.

And then the colony is like the internal state for the ecological niche.

So that's something that we've seen before with how active inference helps us understand and model and simulate

hierarchically nested systems but also we can think about interactions at the same scale like collective behavior collective intelligence as occurring when at the same type of agents they're interacting like laterally and so that's this teal arrow that's where you have two agents there are they're each other's external state so active inference helps us zoom up and out and down and in and then it also helps us go laterally and then

Not to repeat it too many times, but the lateral transmission isn't instantaneous.

It's dynamic, it happens through time, which means that we don't need to look at all lateral interactions, just the time cone.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Predictions and research program.

There was a big list here, so I just pulled a few of them out.

I'll read some of these off, which are a lot of them questions.

So is there a quantifiable sense in which biological systems model themselves?

Can an in silico evolutionary system be built containing both genetic and physiological components which simulates the scheme described above, homeostasis and infotaxis, and illustrates the emergence of different scales of cognitive horizons over time?

Can we directly observe the evolution of multicellular goals from networking of agents with single-cell homeostatic goals?

Might there be higher level effects on the physiological boundaries of the cognitive subagents within the body from exposure to psychedelics, which have long been claimed to expand transpersonal boundaries or induce ego death?

The analogies between geometric spaces and cognitive ones need to be explored further, as is beginning to be done via geometric information theory.

Time diamond, anyone?

Definitely.

I think that there's a lot of room to go here.

Will complex engineered systems set novel goals?

And if so, how?

It is a prediction of this view that adaptive useful robotics will require components that are themselves competent and goal seeking.

that is super interesting also um because really as an intelligent you know being capable of cognition so are all of my parts so if we're going to really import you know give rise to intelligent life intelligent artificial life we have to start with intelligent artificial components i think that's super cool and also goals we can't we can't just say well let's just build you know


SPEAKER_04:
a bigger car or a bigger computer.

I mean, what do we want this intelligence design system to be intelligence in the service of or in the way of?

And it's a disaster waiting to build capacity without goal.


SPEAKER_00:
For sure.

Do you want to read some more of these?


SPEAKER_04:
Yep, so the second set of predictions.

So this is where Mike is setting out a little bit of his agenda.

The next work in this subfield, just, you know, the subfield, each of the fields, they're modular.

They have their own disciplinary histories, their own disciplinary anticipation.

But this subfield should focus on the discovery of bioelectric communication-inducing technology.

So just like once we had chemical biology, people were really excited about finding drugs that bound to proteins.

Well, now that we're aware of bioelectricity, let's think about manipulations and measurements of bioelectricity.

Two, it's a prediction that it's possible to induce the formation of metazoan-like bodies in an otherwise unicellular organism by forcing the expression of appropriate electrogenic proteins in gap junctions.

So he's trying to get towards some unique predictions and experiments.

prediction that transcriptomic, which means gene expression, analyses of regeneration events from bacterial biofilms, plants, and metazoan models of limb regeneration should show consistent use of electrogenic proteins in the events that enable cooperation towards self-limiting morphogenetic cascades.

So it's kind of like the structure, informational or cognitive structure of

of recovery and repair might have some similarities across systems that wouldn't immediately be seen as similar otherwise.

Scale-free cognition hypothesis suggests that multi-human systems, cough, cough, remote teams, could have their own degree of cognition.

So as we always say, things that the brain knows that the neuron doesn't, things that the colony knows that the ant's nest mate doesn't, there's got to be things that remote teams or any other kind of team know that individual participants don't know.

And then the exobiology question is, given a novel life form or just a novel form,

How does one know when successful communication has taken place?

And that's an interesting question for a lot of you, xeno slash exobiologists.


SPEAKER_00:
SETI, anyone?

Cool, next slide.

So this is in the section, what it feels like to be a pancreas, but I really pulled the point that kind of hit home for me the most out of the section and the final point that Mike makes in the paper.

So I'll just read this off.

It is striking that the process which Zen practice is meant to reverse, attachment to past memories and high valence for future expectations or fears, is precisely the process suggested to be responsible for the creation of complex selves.

with a capital S. It is unclear whether it is beneficial or even possible to truly live in the moment and let go of past memories and future expectations.

But anyone who succeeded in doing this would achieve precisely what Zen promises, the dissolution of the self.

And the final sentence of the paper, which I just loved, recreating the unification into and liberation from larger scale unifying unifying selves with a capital S would be a true pinnacle of synthetic biology and artificial intelligence engineering.

Wow.

It was a good paper.

So just key questions at the end.

What might a good understanding of this work enable?

What are the unique predictions and implications of this work?

What are the next steps for FEP and active inference in relation to this work?

What are the goals of this research, and what are you still curious about?

So we will be thinking of all of these things as we get ready to do 25.1 and 25.2 over the next couple weeks.

So thank you for participating.

There is a feedback form for feedback, and you can get in touch with Active Inference Lab at all of these links on this slide.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice work, Blue.

Great job with your first broadcasting and facilitating on this one.

It was really fun.

So yeah, anyone's welcome to participate or contribute to our lab activities.

asynchronously, synchronously, we'll figure out the right performance for you.

So thanks, Sarah, also for joining.

Thanks again, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

## v0oJvbVuAF0

SPEAKER_03:
Hello everyone, welcome to ActInflab live stream number 25.1.

Today is July 6th, 2021, and we're going to be talking about the paper, The Computational Boundary of a Self, Developmental Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition.

We are a participatory and online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

We will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Here at the short link, you will see all of the live streams and different series that we've done leading up to this in the communications unit of the Active Inference Lab.

And today we're going to be jumping into the first half of a discussion of the paper in July.

And on the 13th, we will have 25.2, which is also on this paper and hopefully with the author joining.

Today in ACT-INF Lab live stream number 25.1, we're going to be learning and discussing this paper.

So I will pass it off.

I'm Blue, and I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico, and I will pass it to Stephen for a quick round of introductions.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Blue.

Hi, so this is Stephen here.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD, and I'm interested in how active inference can help unify lots of threads that have been very confusing to me over the last few years.

And if it's okay, I'm going to throw this over to Dave Douglas.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, hi.

I'm in the Philippines, up in the mountains.

The rainy season has begun, and we just survived the 4th of July, so all is good.

Back to Dan, I guess.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

I'm Daniel.

I'm in Davis.

And yep, looking forward to this point one discussion.

And also, nice job with the broadcasting and facilitating, Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

So we can just start off with just some questions about what you liked about the paper or what was something you remembered or something that you're curious about.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I am embarrassed to say I didn't read it at all.

And I was, you know, I started looking over and I said, oh my goodness, we're going to talk about Wilhelm Reich.

We're going to talk about organs and orgasms and cloudbusters and living flying saucers.

And I guess we're not going to get any of that.

So I don't know.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Well, the aims and claims of the paper, um,

So here, the paper, the author says the aims were to define individuals and selves in a way that facilitates taxonomy, comparison and communication with evolved, created biological, artificial and exobiological agents.

And he proposes a fundamental definition of an individual based on the ability to pursue goals.

at an appropriate level of scale and organization and suggests a formalism for defining and comparing the cognitive capacities of highly diverse types of agents.

What does anybody think about that?


SPEAKER_00:
I think that the multi-scale part of this is very, very interesting, very exciting, because this is one of the big offerings that Active Influence has, and it's been offered in a...

a lot of simulations in silico context, but to have it actually described from a real biological kind of cellular perspective and is, uh, for me really, really useful because I'm kind of looking partly at how the heuristics of all this are as much as the, you know, the mathematics of it.

So, yeah, I think that's really, really interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Daniel.


SPEAKER_06:
I liked the part about taxonomy because that kind of speaks to this evolutionary worldview.

And it always seemed interesting to me studying collective behavior, like in the ants, that there were really precise ways of talking about comparing some physical properties in biosystems, like how hard is the material or its density.

And then there was less of a way to talk about similarities in cognitive processes.

whether on an organism or how they interacted with their niche, especially.

So just the idea that there could be a new sort of tool in the toolbox to help us compare different cognitive systems that might have hybrid aspects like computer and human or agent and niche.

Those are kind of cool areas to explore.

So I think that's a big topic.


SPEAKER_03:
Definitely like the other maybe like comparison of like cognitive capacities isn't really related to cognition, but it's integrated information theory, right?

So, you know, when you can compare like the consciousness of a slime mold versus the consciousness of a human, this kind of stands alongside of that in terms of, you know, being able to, to maybe not quantitatively yet, but hopefully, you know,

people will run with this and to be able to apply some quantitative methods to that.

Uh, cool.

So he, the author also proposes a plausible naturalistic framework for the evolutionary scale up of cognition from the earliest origins of life and hypothesizes about the forces that drove it and the major transitions along the continuum.

Uh, and the goal is to show how complex agency and goal-directedness evolves naturally from ancient mechanisms.

Uh, so some questions, how do multiple nested scales of individuality work?

Uh, that's super interesting to me.

Let's see.

Um, Daniel.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, well, I wrote the question, so maybe I'll ask or bring up why I thought it was interesting.

Is there a total value of cognition in the full stack here, the full cone, and then there's going to be certain levels that are more relevant than others?

Is there a total amount of individuality, or are there just certain ways that the cones, for example, don't overlap?

Like there's certain spaces almost that are implied that are more than the sum of the parts.

And so how are we going to even just first draw it out?

Think about it.


SPEAKER_00:
Actually, one thing that comes to mind when you talk about the sum of the parts, I think what I'm interested by when he talks about a cell,

And then he talks about these groups of cells and how they are sort of joined and there's this kind of bioelectric dynamic that sort of helps them communicate.

I think that's a really, making a bit of a jump here, but I think it's interesting to the difference between people communicating in a community context where there's this kind of resonance going on between people and what it's like when there's just separate entities

sending messages to each other, so to speak.

There's something about this ability to form some sort of bioelectric dynamic, which I think is in itself quite interesting as a heuristic.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, for sure.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
Agreed.

We're going to go to bioelectricity soon because I think with the author visiting next week, it'll be good to get some of these notions that we're having about where bioelectricity plays a role.

Those are some of the...

big theoretical questions like what is individuality across levels is it informational is it evolutionary is it functional all these questions about like holism and reductionism more than the sum of our parts what is collective behavior what is emergence there's that whole body of thinking and then the piece that's tying it all together is the bioelectric

And there's a few reasons why, in the paper, that is being proposed as important, like the primacy or the primitiveness, and also just the signaling dynamics and what it appears to allow cells to be able to do.

But we can explore that later.

So agreed.

How is bioelectricity supporting this broader story about multi-scale systems, which just by drawing it out this way doesn't imply bioelectricity?

So where's bioelectricity coming into the picture?

We'll keep thinking about that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, absolutely.

We'll talk about that later, I think.

And it's something that I don't think...

And correct me if I'm wrong, other papers on active inference have not tended to come at that aspect.

They've tended to come at it from a in silico kind of statistical state-based process.

So this does give something that's a bit more organic, I suppose, potentially.

So I think that maybe there's much more that can be drawn from that going forward.

So thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think the, you know, people have done more organic stuff, but it's always like even related to bioelectricity.

But I think it's always related to neural bioelectricity as opposed to non-neural bioelectricity, which is what kind of drives this paper forward.

And, you know, of course, there's a relationship between bioelectricity and the homeostatic drive.

which, um, the author talks about as driving the major evolutionary transitions and, you know, probably much of what we do, much of how organisms think and behave is driven by, you know, that, that drive for, uh, homeostasis.

So, uh, more questions.

What do we learn or enable when we understand multi-scale individuality?

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
Maybe one way to frame what we could learn or enable here would be like in a read and write with respect to

designing new kinds of multi-scale systems.

That's like the right, and then to look around and discover the kinds of multi-scale systems that we're already interested in with like reading.

So it's kind of, there's an interpretive ability when we can look across multi-scale systems, but then also within a virtual machine or within some sort of physical system, there's ways to just

design systems that have certain kinds of relationships between the parts and the holes, like a governance system where such and such a distribution of, of, uh, influence exists or something like that.


SPEAKER_02:
Steven Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
One area that's been of interest, and I think this can relate to, is an area called mental space psychology.

They've been looking at peripersonal neurons, the mirror neurons, as people talk about them as well, and how they resonate.

And I think that...

this that ability to get that dynamic relationship between people or with objects in our shared model and the ability for these to see that there's some sort of resonance in terms of how things relate to others in space

that that seems to tie into what you were saying about the bioelectrics of um neurons tying into being sort of related to this and ties into that ability for maybe us to re or reconnect some of these um

influence processes um across distance you know because obviously the cells they're touching each other there's a plausible route but how do we maybe get some of these resonances between cells which are not touching each other or even organisms which are not touching each other or maybe they need to touch and that gets us into intimacy and stuff but


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, good point.

So I just pulled up this slide talking about gap junctions, which these are little holes that enable the proximal cells to share information, essentially, about their environment or their intracellular state of existence.

And that's a cool way for

It facilitates the informational spread.

And we see that in the figure also.

Let's see.

Let's come to that figure.

Is it this one?

Yeah.

So that gives you like, you know, if there was a boundary, like a solid boundary, or maybe even a lipid bilayer that didn't have a little hole in it connecting cells, then there would just be the individual spatial perception that's shown here in figure three.

But because of the gap junctions, a cell communicates to all the proximal cells.

And this expands the spatial perception and the memory and the anticipation.

And so it's like this group integration here.

Dave?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, going even farther into field effects, I heard a presentation by some students in China

recently who were tracking down non

tracking down electrical effects in mammalian nervous systems that didn't, that were not confined to local chemical and electrical effects.

So they didn't even need to use the pores.

They said, this is not dominant, but it's there.

And under certain circumstances, it does become pretty important, like in long-term potentiation.

They're saying that's part of what's going on, that you get these standing waves of,

And they're conjecturing that part of the classic brain waves literally are waves in the brain rather than a summation of these local synaptic jumps.

Dunno.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, Daniel?

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just one comment on what Dave just said there about these kind of traveling fields that is really related to Kristen and collaborators work with SPM, which was basically a toolkit for looking at dynamical systems and then integrating imaging based modalities for like neuroimaging and with the field based measurements like EEG.

So kind of.

taking a certain anatomical shape into account when you are integrating these different projections or different modeling ways of kind of two different perspectives on the same underlying system.

So that's kind of an interesting link that you just made there.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it's hard to underestimate

the importance of Professor Friston's enormous amount of hands-on work with interpreting brain, direct physical brain data, and how important that is in just implicitly shaping how he approaches these system activities and system effects.

Yeah, I keep

I keep slapping myself, wait a minute, what does this guy spend the last 40 years doing?

Don't get stuck in the peculiarities of the mathematical descriptions.

He has a real reason for doing this stuff that way.


SPEAKER_04:
Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
You go first, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, okay.

Yeah, sure.

Well, I suppose...

being a bit speculative here, but with the brainwaves in the way that we've got this bioelectrics on the cell, I mean, different scales of, I think this is an open question, but it certainly seems to have plausible

routes to being thought about is how much of these brain waves or this electrical activity across regions of the brain analogous or in some way similar to the descriptions at the cellular and multicellular level.

So I think that's a good point that Dave brings up there.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
Yep, great point, Stephen.

And that's one of the main, I think, arguments or the ways that the field or understanding of biology would sort of shift if bioelectric were given a larger role.

There'd be more of a continuum of

chemical and electrical function between internal nervous systems and the epithelial cells which like we talked about in the dot zero are closely related through development and other cell types and seeing that as more of a unifying framework within an organism's cognition as well as

in an evolutionary sense like all these different affordances that the bioelectric reconfiguration allows for which is some of the work that's cited in the paper and has continued since then is just empirical demonstrations that the bioelectric field can like lead to different morphologies and so

then there's kind of a way to move on that phenotype landscape that doesn't involve like only the sequence based remodeling of gene regulatory networks, like transcription factor binding site evolution could still be important.

And also, there could be certain points where the bioelectricity enables new things to new phenotypes to change as well.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, definitely.

And maybe a little bit in this paper, but a lot of Mike's work is really great talking about or demonstrating the role of bioelectricity in shape.

And when you think about the form and the function are just coupled together.

So the function of a cell and the shape of a cell and all of that is really...

interesting and how bioelectricity is connected to the form and the function.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and I think this also gives reason to look at some other people who presented, such as the work on quantum contextuality that we had and some of the information geometry work.

And there's the new paper on Bayesian mechanics and active inference, this whole idea of the shape of information.

which I mean, that is very cutting edge, but I think they, they don't seem incompatible.

Let's put it like that.

I don't want to put my name to how they're compatible exactly, but there's certainly seems to be an awful lot of things here that would suggest a plausible connection.


SPEAKER_03:
Definitely.

Uh, Daniel.

Oh, Daniel.


SPEAKER_06:
So one other aspect, there's the extended spatial, that's this horizontal representation where whether it's the bacteria that are aggregating in the biofilm or the development of the embryo or whatever extended spatial system, maybe even like networks of computers or something like that, that's extended spatial extent in the snapshot.

And then there's also this blue going down

visualization here like with memory fading off into the past and then also the green like the anticipation so that's the current state anticipating out forward so just kind of

Using a visualization of space going out and time as this axis that goes through the current moment, that turns out to be something that visualizes the past, present, and future really nicely.

But then also, like we saw with the light cones and probably other approaches, it sets up the integration of memory, action in the moment, and anticipation in a way that's almost set up to be addressed

with a commonality rather than a future-oriented framework that has to bolt on this memory module.

It doesn't really make sense, but this is a more integrated way to think about the past, present, and future.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks, Daniel, for bringing that up, actually.

That's really helpful.

And one thing I find curious as well is even though we're talking about cells,

we think about how that diagram puts the future up and the past down, right?

As we think about, could have done it the other way, but that's naturally how we look up and the air, you know, to see things and things go down and a bit more in the earth.

And that's where our history is.

So even though it probably was not conscious, that would have just felt like the right way to design the diagram.

You see how,

you know, the way we make our meaning is embodied as well.

The way we make our diagrams is in ways embodied.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, nice.

Definitely.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
So that Steven, that kind of whether something's pointing up or down, it reminds me of in evolutionary biology where some subfields would have a tree that branched up.

So it looked like a tree, other fields would show it branching down.

And then there was like apparently disciplinary like debates over which rotation of the same information it quote really was.

Is it a tree or is it something else?

But then that,

was related to a question that i just had about the visualization so it's cool that these panels were kind of maybe something we can ask about next week they seem to be made like in collaboration with an artist so that sounded like something kind of interesting to have in a scientific paper it helps it be more discussable sometimes but maybe there's a learning experience for

the people involved and then also just like it's pretty easy to visualize the chemical part like we have these beautiful you know walking protein visualizations kind of like okay proteins kind of look like that and they bump into each other but then how will we visualize the role of the bioelectric reading scott nice to have you how will we visualize that um

in new ways, maybe by integrating the future and the past into it, or I don't know, maybe there's some other way like the diamonds that we saw.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that's a really good question to ask actually, because

Yeah, I work quite a lot in graphic studios where they do different types of diagrams for different things.

And I think there's a lot of stuff that conventions that are out there.

So they must have had to also bring in and sort of make it make sense in the scientific paradigm.

But I do like the way that they've used the term perception there and brought that in for a cell.

And I think that's, again, unusual, but makes sense if we think of perception in a...

a much more deflationary sense than how people traditionally think about perception and active inference as well as just some sort of way of knowing.

So I really, and again, that also starts to bring in like cells when we think about

What is the meaning?

That's not how a cell is.

Cells could have a sense of knowing.

And there could be 100 billion cells knowing, which is pretty much what indigenous knowledge says about knowing.

So it ties in with that regime of knowing, which is often minimalized and excluded.

So I think this is quite useful.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

And just kind of to talk about like different renditions of like the light cone.

I mean, this is a question that I definitely have for the author.

Here, this is like not the traditional way that I'm used to seeing a light cone.

So this in this slide, you can kind of see.

how it's more of like a conical shape as opposed to like a diamond and like in space and time and even like so this is up and down but you know there's also this rendition that I've seen as well that's left and right so like from the from the state of right now to the future and so it's interesting to think about why is the space and time bigger in the present and going to a more narrow

point in the future.

Like, for me, that's kind of not how I'm used to conceptualizing these diagrams.

So I think about the space of right now, like, I can't do anything other than what I'm doing right at this moment.

But, you know, potentially, as time goes on, my state space gets bigger, if that makes sense.

Potential state space.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, I really like that as well because the thing is it's interesting.

That cone is very popular in the strategic foresight field of looking at futures and strategic futures work.

But there is a slight, like when it's done as a cone going into the future, it's very visual.

It's like using the analogy of a beam of light effectively, again, using one modality.

And it assumes it kind of travels in a straight line and it projects and it's,

Whereas when you start to get into this nonlinear swarming type thing, I mean, in some ways, you just see what rises up in the future.

You know what I mean?

It's like what structures emerge into the future.

They don't project into the future in the way that a lot of strategic foresight.

So I think this does...

That question about how those two different models manifest and get used and how this other type of model actually, while it's not as easy to intuit, may actually be more, I don't know if we say accurate, but maybe more accurate is a better way of saying it.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I actually definitely agree because, you know, not to be morbid, but we all are progressing to the same end.

And as we age, our affordances are less and less.

We might not be able to cognate as well or we might be less mobile as we get older.

Daniel, sorry, did I take the words out of your mouth?


SPEAKER_06:
How about Dave first and then Olga?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, Dave?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so is that becoming more focused into the future?

Does that have anything to do with most of us becoming more and more subject matter experts rather than the other kind of expert?


SPEAKER_04:
Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
Nice question, Dave.

So the sort of duality of the time cone and the time diamond, it just suggests that there's certain things that we want to think about as being maximized in the present, maybe, and certain things that are being as if they're minimized in the present.

So it's just two different, and we'll figure out maybe in some ways, there's some things that win off into the future, and there's other things that are maximally constrained in the present.

But then to connect that to the Steven's question about strategy and, you know, ask Scott what he was interested in with, you know, joining us.

It made me think about the width of this cone going out into the future or the length of the one that's more like a diamond.

It's kind of like the horizon, which you need to consider for de-risking or for strategy.

And so that space, just like the butterflies wings, that space expands super rapidly.

Now, you might have a hypothesis about the space that only one region is likely to be explored or that all of your strategy would work across this whole space.

But it just sets up the discussion instead of time points and bifurcating points.

It's like, actually, it's going out really vastly.

So there has to be some more adaptive way of realigning because the time cone is going to be too large to search through in the future, even at a short time step.

So how could we enact a strategy in the current moment, given something what we are maximizing, so that we could actually have an adaptive strategy moving forward?


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

Dave, and then Steven?


SPEAKER_05:
No, I just hit the...

button wrong.

Got it.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I saw Scott's got his ice cream cones there, so I'm going to be curious to hear his point.

But tying with what we're saying is also we have this, because swarming dynamics and nonlinear dynamics basically aren't part of the most systems approaches, really, there's an assumption that it's a volume of information problem.

going from the present to the future and it's just finding ourselves in all of that but um and at times when we've got the like in modern world we've kind of thought the world is much more predictable than it is and maybe it was when it was in a very constrained system but now you know we can see that even in our own social systems that things can once they bifurcate that whole

cone thing breaks down because it suddenly it just so I think that there's there's there's something quite useful here actually in rethinking and using this alternative or maybe something which is a other version of this

This version of this cone, which doesn't rely on ocular light visual, because there's no eyes in a cell, for instance.

They're not seen into the future, right?

That's only something that happens at quite an aggregated organism.

So this is actually probably has some other spinoffs that's quite useful.


SPEAKER_04:
Scott?


SPEAKER_01:
This is a fascinating conversation.

So by the way, this is a cone that I saw in New York that it was an ice cream cone.

It was very impressive.

It had nine scoops on it.

So that was, that's the kind of light cone I like.

The, you know, I was thinking back to that now, the knowing that you were saying before, Blue, and it's so interesting.

So what if we perceived a group as a bunch of cones and

bunch of simultaneous cones and because if they have embodiments or shared meaning physically or mentally then their cones have a overlap or a similarity or shared space and but you can't really experience in other parties cones or can you indirectly and

So that notion of knowing that really hooked me when I just came into the call that you have these cones going on at the same time, these experiences that are through time.

And maybe when we read literature, what we're doing is we're experiencing someone else's cone in the past in order to try to project it onto our experience in the future.

And then maybe you live by that rhetoric.

Maybe the rhetoric actually becomes your future.

Right.

So if your mind can have a certain state that gets acquired by contact with other states, it makes a conformational change, kind of like prionic governance.

We have a conformational change in a protein when it misfolds.

Maybe you have a conformational change in your cone state when it comes in contact with another cone that has a different folding.

So that the narrative, maybe there's a narrative there.

element to the contiguousness of the cones.

And because they have a temporal and a physical element to them, but you can only experience them in the present, then the rest of it is just projection either in the past or the future.

And so maybe the cone is entirely rhetorical.

And maybe it's convincing yourself and others of the state that you have for existential continuity.

And the ways of knowing maybe goes to that in terms of multiple cone generators trying to get together and figure out if their little cones equal a big cone.

It's really just a fascinating way to visualize the space.

There's one other reference I want to make, which is from the Museum of Jurassic Technology in California, Culver City.

They have a display by a guy named Theory by Sonnabend, S-O-N-N-A-B-E-N-D.

And it's called Theories of Memory or Theories of Forgetting, something like that.

And his whole thing was cones.

preceding and approaching light cones.

And the way he divides up space and knowledge is by taking different arcs and sections of these cones.

It's really kind of fascinating stuff.


SPEAKER_03:
Really nice, Scott.

I'm reminded a lot of Shanna Dobson and like the way that she perceives time.

And like also in microscopy, like you can take a projection of an image and

which is where like all of the stacks from the angles that you're using in the light cone come together and you can see it all at the same like point or it's like flattened out.

And it makes me think about visualizing time like that.

Daniel and then Steven.


SPEAKER_06:
So thanks, Scott.

I totally agree.

One of the big questions is about the intersections of time cones and what kind of happens at that intersection.

Do we think about them getting like folded up or having some new shape that arises?

And I think a way that we could have a simple hands-on intuition there is like with the two-dimensional game of life.

where there are certain shapes like gliders that kind of propagate on the landscape.

And then there are certain moving shapes that perfectly annihilate each other.

There are certain ones that leave only rubble.

There are certain ones that replicate.

But then there's other ones that pass through each other depending on...

some feature interaction of the shape in the game and then there's ones that uh do computation like there's of course great videos of the game of life being set up to do an emulation of a of a computer like the ones that were on but slower um so that really maybe connects a few pieces this sort of um

agent-based interaction through time.

We get our intuition in this grid zone, like the game of life.

And then maybe some of those interactions are happening in the natural systems, just like some game theory mechanisms that were in the matrix of mathematics sort of also play out in biological systems.


SPEAKER_03:
Really nice, Daniel.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this question of time also relates to when we say the now, you know, we know from even, say, the participatory sense-making that we're anticipating when something's going to happen.

Often what we sense is that there's a lag.

So in a way, we're always...

a little bit behind what's just happened yet at the same time at certain times we're anticipating things before they happen and maybe before we realize we're doing the anticipating and then we've made the decision before we knew we made the decision and then we've done it so which is where maybe reason partly why sports is so satisfying because we're we're making it have to be the baseball bat has to hit the ball

And you're somehow bringing in that, you know, there's no, you either hit it and it goes out of the baseball diamond or it doesn't.

But at the same time, when you made the cognitive process happened earlier, the realization of what you actually hit it might be later than the now that you think you're in.

So there's this interesting window there of what is now.


SPEAKER_03:
Or can you even find the now, as I think Shanna argued in her math stream.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
So Steven, it's with a sports example, and that kind of relates us back to the skilled performance discussions that we had previously.

So that reminds me of a BF Skinner book, Beyond Freedom and Dignity, where he's like,

If you imagine a situation where somebody is unconscious or they're forced to do something, you don't give them that much agency or autonomy.

But then in the situations that look unprompted, like somebody walking up on stage, then playing a violin performance, which is still a mechanical performance,

We regard that highly and we shower that with the sort of aura of agency.

So he was kind of questioning that from his own behaviorist perspective.

And it's just kind of cool to think about how octave inference and multi-scale systems, those same questions come up.

Like there are cases where things seem really constrained as far as actions are concerned.

And then there's other times where behavior just seems to like come out of nowhere from like a bird song or something like that.

So having a framework for behavior that can connect the dots across those isolated occurrences is really promising.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

And yeah, we've talked about planning as inference and really the author brings up here planning in relation to the homeostatic space, right?

So really this might be the first, like how planning came to be is like planning for some potential state that is not my ideal homeostatic space.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, both a good point.

Yeah, because if it's already my ideal homeostatic space, why use all that energy, valuable energy, to try and predict it when it's already being done quite well?

And like Daniel was saying there about skillful performance, I mean, once you get into this groove and someone's in the zone,

you know more and more the processes have probably been taken care of by morphological computing which is basically the cellular processes and then when it's at these other temporal depths i i'm predicting and just getting right the emphasis on the third note before the crescendo or whatever it is you know it may be that

In some ways, when you're in the flow, which is that term when people are kind of immersed in an experience, are you in some ways less conscious of more rapid dynamics?

And without getting into a debate about consciousness, I think we've got enough on the table.

But just that question about, yes, it is encompassing many more areas of what we've talked about than at first had been apparent.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice, and this touches on memory also, so I flipped over to that slide.

Scott?


SPEAKER_01:
You know, it's interesting that notion just a minute ago about being an optimal or zone space.

I heard somebody, a quote, somebody a few years ago was talking about different personalities where some people like the social equivalent of classical music and some people like the social equivalent of jazz.

And so the people who like the social equivalent of classical music want to hang out with the same people all the time.

And then, oh, Bill, how's Bill's drinking problem going?

Oh, how's Mary's, you know, kids doing?

You know, it's the same story, just incremental changes.

Kind of like if you hear Beethoven's Fifth and it's like... You're like, whoa, that's slightly off because your expectation is different.

Whereas jazz, you don't know what... It's going to be boop, beep, bop, boop, boop.

It's all different things, right?

So...

It's kind of interesting what your expectations are and what that optimization is.

Jazz is a different kind of optimization, right?

And so it made me think about the anterior cingulate nucleus.

My understanding is that's the part of the brain that if you're eating at a ripe berry bush and enjoying ripe berries, the anterior cingulate nucleus, if it fires off, will make you think, huh, I wonder if there's a riper berry on the next bush.

And so it's the, and I call it the commitment area where men can't commit to a relationship.

I believe it's probably the anterior cingulate nucleus.

They're looking for a riper berry, so to speak.

So that, I wonder if there's an interesting, I'll use a notion of random number generation here, but that's probably not that.

But if there's a randomness factor that is in your optimum, so is your state when it's optimized,

what is there something in the model itself that can throw randomness in there besides the externality so that and then you become like a novelty seeking person who has a highly active anterior cingulate nucleus is that an optimization which is superior for instance if you have a changing highly rapidly changing environment things like that just a couple of thoughts on optimization and what the zone might look like in different settings for different embodiments


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that reminds me, like, I mean, it's like a life plan or like an organismal life plan.

Like some organisms like have to be in their niche environment.

Like you can never take them out.

But then like some organisms like prepare for maximum randomness.

Like I think about a tardigrade, you know, like you can do anything to them.

Like you can dehydrate them and send them to the moon and have them come back and all these things.

But they're, you know, built, they're well suited for maximum randomness.

Daniel?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
I liked Scott's point there about the genre of optimization.

I'm personally always surprised listening to both jazz and classical.

It's just that it's a different genre.

And so a musician in either or both of those areas, though, would have a deep enough generative model to know when one thing was off by even a tiny bit, even in a song that might sound discordant to somebody because the improvisation tradition of one genre might be

more, I don't know, nonlinear in some way.

But definitely this idea of having interpretable or experienceable ways of interacting with different optimization processes, different distributed processes.

Are there more jazz-like or more classical-like collective behaviors?

And then also this broader question that is returned to centrally, which is that cognition is related to individuality.

That's really relevant for talking about where is cognition offloaded or how does cognition offload into the environment through development, like through modification of the niche, and then also through evolution, where also the niche can be modified in the long term, but evolution can select for like canalization, so stabilization of things that were accessed plastically in one generation.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Steven, and then Scott.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah i mean following on what you're saying about the environment and and the jazz and classical um i used to live in prague for for a year or so and and what was interesting there so you've got a lot of classical music venues and operas and you've got

lots of jazz as well, but they're very different spaces as well, right?

You've got the basement jazz bar in some cellar and you've got, so there's a question as well about, yeah, once, when you start going to one or the other, you probably will keep going to one or the other for a while, if that makes sense.

You sort of, even though, so beyond the music, once you, yeah, there is a kind of a dynamic because those, those two are fairly clear, relatively extremes, I suppose, even though they're both what you would call high arts, um,

in some ways as well so you've got that interesting thing about how you bring in the environment and that's one thing active influence does which many forms of psychology in that don't is how much is it about changing your generative model and how or how much is it about another model about choosing your environment and letting the environment do a lot of the

motivating for you so that's interesting I was just also on a call about metaphors and Andrew Austin who does that work he talks about if you want to motivate yourself it's actually easier to change your environment

an externality that can be helpful if you want to change your choice making that can be internal so like don't try and choose get others to make better choices make better choices yourself you might not be able to motivate yourself maybe find things out there that help motivate you

So in the same way that, you know, maybe that's good.

If I want to get a more ordered kind of structured view of the world for a while, maybe I'll start going to some classical concerts for a while.

If I want to release and start sort of being more free flowing, maybe I'll go and watch some jazz.

So anyway, kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
I love all of you.

I got to say, this is, I mean, it's been a few weeks since I've been able to be on the calls just for different reasons.

And this is beautiful.

It's such a beautiful thing.

Okay.

So I was just showing you my tardigrade banjo ukulele, which is what I was holding up to the screen.

So that's a tardigrade painted.

A couple of things.

So, you know, it's interesting.

Love the last couple of comments and that notion of access to other things.

Right.

And that kind of recreational and de-risking access to the other.

Right.

You want to know the externality because you want to render it innocuous for survival purposes and then render it delicious for aesthetic purposes.

Right.

And so a couple of books.

This is the past is a foreign country.

by Lowenthal, which is kind of like, OK, temporally, the assertion in the book is the past actually isn't a foreign country.

They're the same.

It's us.

Right.

And so the same thing temporally.

Oh, they're so different.

Oh, that's other.

Right.

Oh, we've come beyond this.

But that's our own aspiration.

Then another book, Introduction to Comparative Study of Private Law.

comparative law you got in law and language i my assertion that the mind exists in language and the brain is just an antenna tuned to it well law is a formalization of language and understanding so you have again comparative study there's another book i have i couldn't put my hands on it's the cambridge handbook of adaptation studies in theater and the articles on how do you adapt german theater for a greek

audience or whatever.

Right.

So all of these things, there's a exotic element to it.

Right.

And which is both threatening and reaffirming and delicious and scary.

Right.

And so these isn't it interesting that those states are

Are we other than novelty perceiving, either by resistance or seeking?

Is that the essence of consciousness?

And so if you had the equivalent of isothermy, where in isothermy you have temperature equivalence in two systems and you can't perform work because there's no temperature differential, heat differentials, well, what if we had no meaning differential between two systems

is that describable vis-a-vis that variable as one system and is that something that starts to get to you sociality

or shared narrative and is that why that becomes so existential because the reinforcements of that become the amplifying wave essentially the amplifying embodiment becomes so powerful that it overtakes the system the system has no other internal state that's as reinforced and as amplified so therefore that one becomes overwhelming and maybe that's a source of why it's hard to crack misinformation by feeding

fact or something like that.

Anyway, just a couple of random thoughts there.


SPEAKER_03:
Really nice, Scott.

I took the Tony Robbins test one time, like what's your driving force in life?

And I'm totally driven by instability, which makes me like a desperate novelty seeking person.

And I'm also reminded in your points about language, I've been thinking a lot about language because of some projects I'm involved in.

And I was listening to Josh Tenenbaum speak yesterday about his program that he developed.

It's like a neural network, like a sleep-wake Helmholtz machine that actually composes language.

I mean, it does some phone numbers, but it writes code, like computer programs.

Um, and you know, draws symbols and it does these cool like things based on a framework that's, um, you know, kind of analogous to active inference where the exploration phase happens in the sleep phase of, of the machine.

So exploration is like this recombination of all of the potential like factors, right?

So like in the training phase, it's, it's trained on, you know, constructs the generative model.

or it constructs the recognition model based on all of the training input.

Like if it's drawings, it's going to be all of like, you know, potential shapes.

And then it recombines these, well, it thinks about recombining them to kind of become a field expert.

It was really an interesting paper.

Sorry to detour there.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
You go for it, Scott, and then I'll give a thought.

uh thanks yeah just that's fantastic and it makes me think one of the things i've been fussing with for a while you've probably heard me say it is that the mind does not exist in the brain it exists in language and culture and the brain is tuned to the mind and the example i give is my niece who was adopted from china at five months old now has graduated from cornell she's looks like a chinese person she doesn't speak chinese she doesn't like chinese food she doesn't like chinese music

She speaks Spanish and English, and she's a central Pennsylvania gal, right?

So her mind was not... There was no feral consciousness, and her mind was developed in central Pennsylvania.

So what it makes me think...

what you were just saying is so interesting.

So maybe the mind we're, maybe our models are just so, so much hubris there.

And we think the mind proceeds communication and maybe it just doesn't.

Maybe it is no mind affordance other than communication and language.

So like Plato, when he said, the reason that authors were the challenge is you couldn't query the consciousness of the author.

Maybe it was an, even a deeper question.

comment about mind that the querying of consciousness is mind itself.

And so maybe active inference is the function of mind.

It's not a mind seeking to refine its state more, but it is the fact of mind is the act of active inference.

It just feels that was a shift that I hadn't thought about before.

And it gets away from

centralizing mind in individual brains that then come in contact to try to fix up their models and rather putting situating mind in the edge itself, not the node from a graph theory perspective.

That's fascinating stuff.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel and then Dave.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.

To kind of bring it to active inference, but really just any kind of dynamical modeling, we shouldn't let this like snapshot happen.

govern the way that the system works because systems change through time.

So they're not just the snapshot picture.

Maybe the prevalence of photography makes it easier sometimes to imagine this sort of snapshotting.

And yes, active inference is hopefully providing a way to just

think about it again whether instrumentally or more in this sort of like philosophical or metaphysical way which everyone is welcome to do but the actual uh core is just going to be leading to many questions for a long time dave one of the yeah one of the uh environments that uh is extraordinarily powerful at


SPEAKER_05:
putting people in altered states of consciousness, and especially distorting their time sense is a device, an entertainment device, which was also a psychological research device called Musicolor.

Stephen may have seen references to that.

This was developed in the 1950s and was in some shows and clubs in London in the late 50s and early 60s.

It's been mentioned a few times.

Andrew Pickering mentions that, a few other people, in passing.

And there was an exhibit that was developed by the same engineer that tried to play in Paris but got COVID out.

If none of you have seen that, I have most of the material that's ever been captured, as far as I can tell, because it was a series of talks, a series of literally chats.

In the 1980s, so I better gather that up and it's all it's all in a single series on YouTube that I have on a playlist.

So let's do that.

Yeah, the guy would literally his musicians would believe that five minutes had passed when it was actually eight hours they had been playing solos.

for 10 hours at night, risking arrest for trespass when they thought, oh no, no, the guard, you know, everybody's still here.

I've only been here 10 minutes playing my flute.

And people would get so spaced out, they would,

drive their cars into the middle of roundabouts up on and and bang into the post because it just didn't occur to them not to do that or they'd they'd look into the the u tracks and watch the train come to them and if people hadn't grabbed them and pulled them off what were you doing what do you mean i was i was looking at the lights and no drugs

And they had fun.

And the bystanders had no idea this was happening.

Oh, these guys are just playing jazz.

But no, they were on cloud nine.


SPEAKER_03:
That's cool.

It reminds me of virtual reality.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
So it's interesting that with frameworks for communication, like active inference, we can think about syntactic repetition, like repeating the same word, semantic repetition and novelty, like somebody saying the same thing differently,

but also narrative novelty and similarity, or at least consistency, coherency.

And so the other piece from what Scott had said earlier was going back to some of our earliest streams on narrative and communication as active inference.

There's a ton of ways to think about that, like is

narrative like a summary statistic of the agent-based generative models like you got 25 at this parameter and 75 at this parameter and then narrative is just like a descriptive state but what happens when narratives or various representations of them can actually through mechanisms feed back

onto sensory and therefore internal states.

So how do we think about narrative and active inference and narrative and communication as like higher order semantic structures that help reduce uncertainty, allow for efficient information transfer, all the imperatives of cell to cell communication, bioelectric, but it's happening at a spatial and a temporal scale that demands auditory transmission, but of course can also be done electrically.


SPEAKER_03:
Really nice.

Scott?


SPEAKER_01:
This is, again, my face hurts from smiling.

So I have this book, Rhetorical Style, it's called, and it has dozens of rhetorical flourishes, like the use of French suggests style, and the use of German words suggests engineering excellence, and then there's different placements.

I mean, it's just all these different ways to construct the sentence, all these differences.

And it's so fascinating, that notion that

Is that what's the cellular equivalent of rhetoric?

Right.

Is that when a cell wants to persuade, let's say there's a growing tip of a mesenchyme tissue or some whatever in a plant or a human, whatever.

And it's and there's a decision to be made based on a Turing wave.

that's coming in, and what finger orientation you have, right?

The Turing wave is responsible for finger growth.

There's a periodicity to the starting and stopping of the chemicals, and that's why you have multiple fingers.

So what's the notion of persuasion in non-human speech?

So a peacock's feathers...

are persuading the female of its fitness because the coloration, one assertion is, with coloration, if it's a healthy-looking color or the dance is healthily performed, it suggests a healthy individual, and that's persuasion for mating, let's say.

I'm just asserting a possible rhetoric.

And is all communication rhetorical in that it's made to persuade...

And the persuasion is not necessarily in the, it may be in the self-interest of both the speaker and the externality, right?

Because I'm talking about situations where you're running an internal model and you're trying to recruit other internal models, which are your externality, but for other people or other things are their internal models, right?

And so if you want to get some externality, that's an organism to do something consistent with your model,

You need to entrain them, harmonically couple with them.

So is rhetoric, what's the equivalent of rhetoric in other non, I guess, non-language systems?

I use the word language in non-human language systems.


SPEAKER_03:
Really nice.

And I'm reminded of, well, it made me think of how does the narrative play across scales, really, like from the cellular to the organ level to the organismal.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that also bringing that into what Daniel was saying with structure and narrative.

So there's, and actually that I just look in that up, that colour, you know, the colour and how that wheel relates to sound and music.

So you've got these questions of when does structure start to be present that gives something...

else another type of geometry and where is that present so it could literally be um there could be a type of geometric space in the way the neurons have arranged themselves and that could be a certain level at which they're getting fed in embodied information about light sources so it would only really happen when you've got an eye that's measuring light data that then starts to structure itself

in that form.

And that could then underneath, and that could also apply to, there may be a sort of a quality to the way sound is based on it being a whole level of, you know, hertz or half levels of hertz and half tones.

So there's something around, I think there's an interesting point around when we have structure,

And this rhetorical piece may happen once we can... Oh, crikey.

Yeah, so you've got that as well.

So then you've got systems that we can see.

Now, the question with rhetorical stuff is, is rhetorical stuff the stuff that we can see as a system that you can then argue your point in some sort of way?

And I suppose at another level, the cells could come to a point where they could argue a case with each other

And so there's some system in place that sits on that structure.

But the thing that always is in the background, which is, again, what I was saying earlier, most people doing systems don't think about when they talk about emergence.

Is there some sort of swarming dynamics happening?

Now, whether this bioelectric stuff

sits and adds a new layer i mean i noticed on one of the slides there it talked about kind of like a new layer of um uh like does this add a new layer to um to to this dynamic and i'm i'm curious about whether that your thoughts on that in in the sense of um

Do you see this as being a new layer that's being added, or is this somehow something which builds a bridge to the way the structures could emerge out of the swarming?

Is it because it talks about memory?

I know you have the slide that talks about memory, and I can't quite find which one it is now, but one of the slides talks about memory.

Is that significant in allowing the structuring to happen?

You know, is it something about forming that memory in that structure?

Or does the structure need to be there first?

I'm sort of putting that out to us.

And I don't know whether that's something we could ask Michael, but maybe just refine that thought.

But it seems to be something which is a question that relates to how this all fits together.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.


SPEAKER_05:
Dave?

Yeah, for Scott, if you want to see how rhetoric is founded in the basic emotions and also get an evolutionary, biological evolutionary perspective on that, read the chapter on play in Jaak Panksepp's Affective Neuroscience.

And once you've gotten through that, look at Piaget's later work on the role of play, when he really got very subtle about the socialization and how kids use play to become very expert in the ideal case in role-taking and the creation of social relations and being able to play without.

anybody's feelings getting hurt and so on.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, the concept of play, I think, is really important in the space of active inference because it really kind of represents that exploratory component.

Scott?


SPEAKER_06:
I'll give a thought while he stepped away.

It was related to his point about persuasion.

So if anything, it's not going to be a binary.

It's going to be, first off, instrumental.

It's about how it's being modeled.

We're not looking for something that we're going to see under a microscope or wouldn't even matter if we could.

We're talking about categorization so that we can reduce our uncertainty about action.

So the models that we set up

could be a binary state model or not.

And that wouldn't be a metaphysical claim, but just thinking about it as far as biological systems are concerned and taking it to that sort of like cellular level.

Like what if one molecule is secreted that sensitizes the cell to a second molecule?

You know, is that type of sequencing?

Would that be considered a minimal viable rhetoric or intracellular narrative?

and just made me think about how there's sort of different types of interactions and that they convey different information, something that my advisor, Professor Gordon, really explored a lot in the ant colony case, how different types of interactions just update how likely an individual is to do different kinds of actions.

And that's seen across systems.

So sometimes that's just a simple enough statement.

Like there's symbols that we see, you know, one or 50 or a thousand times a day.

And then there's things that are more explicitly narrated more rarely.

So then in the case of the human culture, human narratives, it just opens up the design space because there's multiple kinds of interactions.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Scott, did you want to give a thought?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, a couple of things.

That is really nice, Daniel.

That's kind of the notion.

It introduces something like discretion, in a sense.

So if a system is running a, let's call it active inference, running that model, are they bringing their model to bear on the environment environment?

because it embodies the information of their past genetically and epigenetically and behaviorally?

So a three-legged dog, is it running with three legs just because now it has three legs and that's it?

That's the affordance?

Or is there discretion in the active part of active inference?

That may be an interesting dividing point in terms of rhetoric.

Can rhetoric be a persuasion brought by a thing that's intrinsic?

So a tiger jumps in front of me on a path and I'm walking.

The tiger is ferocious because it's an apex predator and has big teeth and I'm not.

Is the tiger exercising discretion on being ferocious or is it just intrinsically ferocious to me?

Right.

So is so that's that to me, that feels like there may be something there on rhetoric.

If there's a choice, maybe the organism has or choices, not maybe maybe the organism is not a single individual.

Maybe it's a hive.

So that's one thing.

Then that gets to the quorum sensing, which is really rhetorical.

Argument seems like it's because there there's a choice.

Shall we swarm or not?

Now, when it's locusts and it's a pheromone for gregariousness, right, that's what switches, the pheromone switches on and off when they're in close contact.

So question is, is that a discretionary thing when there's a pheromone impact?

You know, again, it doesn't have to be an either or.

It's just that maybe there's gradations of discretion that are exercised in different ways.

And so the other, then it gets to me, it gets to synesthesia.

So if I could sense something, I could make a decision, but instead I'm fed a pheromone that makes me make a decision without my conscious awareness.

Is that still rhetoric?

And is that a quorum if it's a non-conscious quorum?

Maybe it's a different state when it's non-conscious.

And also when you have internal synesthesia, one of the things that's fascinating to me, I once heard that the assertion that people with perfect pitch might be synesthetes because they're perceiving sound as color, for instance, and they can discern colors more readily in their mental capacity.

So therefore they can discern the notes better than people who can't discern notes as color.

So again, all those things feel like they work together in terms of is the consciousness that's held, is the mind held in the individual brain of an individual organism and or in the communications among the organisms.

And so maybe that takes the rhetoric question and renders it a nullity because maybe it's degrees of quorum that resemble discretion.

And maybe the internal acts of discretion are merely priors that were learned from an externality anyway.

Anyway, a few thoughts.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'm really reminded, Scott, and this is going to turn you up a lot.

This is going to turn up your volume a lot.

So I just learned about the work of Asifa Majid.

I'm not sure if I'm saying her name right, but she does this amazing work on language, how language shapes thought and how thought shapes language.

And she looks at, like, in cultures, they have, you know, there was one, I think it's the Jahai culture.

They have, like, 17 different kinds of smells.

that they like smell.

And it's like, you know, one of them is like, I mean, we don't have words for smell.

We just have, it smells like a rose or it smells like meat or whatever.

So she, you know, but they have actual in their vernacular, they have different words for different smells.

And, and like in English, we have, you know, a gazillion words for color, but like in some cultures, the color blue and green are the same.

So, so, uh, and you know, it's the words for like one that was super amazing.

Like we have all this word for like fingertip fingernail, uh, finger hand, forearm, bicep, like a shoulder.

I mean, all of this in some cultures is one word, your entire arm, every part of it.

Like, so you don't discern that there's no difference between your thumb and your shoulder.

Like that's wild to me.

Right.

And so how does that, that shape the way that we think about it?

Uh, sorry if I'm rambling, Daniel.


SPEAKER_06:
No fun points.

So as far as how connectivity of communications related to rhetorical outcomes, rhetorical ecosystems, I think they're an analogy to look for would be in the connectivity of brain regions.

And of course, in the SPM toolkit and the dynamic causal modeling that we referenced a bit earlier, because there's brain regions that are anatomically connected.

So whether they're next door cells or whether there's a long range connection,

And then there's also like functional and effective connectivity, which are different ways of looking at the signal of dynamical data and then drawing edges in a network where the nodes are the regions and then the edges reflect like a dynamical correlation or.

Granger causation, which does of course bring it into this whole dynamic causal modeling, the whole question about multi-level cause, cause across different parts of a system that aren't directly touching.

Is it just our physicalism and our assumptions of materialism that like requires something to be touching to have a direct influence?

Is it just some sort of anti, you know, non-locality type stance that's very deep prior?

Is that something that when relaxed

provides useful solutions, or just ones that are a bit less susceptible to one argument, but totally susceptible to other arguments?

Nice questions.


SPEAKER_03:
Very nice.

Steven, and then Dave.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this idea, the question about structure and the relationship between how things

can relate or touch i think it makes uh the way that we bring in date our sensorial information and these cones in a way with a cell you kind of each cell presumably can have this perception that can extend we have these multiple threads of perception that come in you know we've got the visual perception we've got the auditory perception we've got

And then how do we structure our narratives?

Well, if you have a culture which structures the ability to smell, think about smell in that sort of refined way compared to us who maybe gets very involved in the musculature and the nail and the amount of time people spend now on their nails in our culture.

So that will change the structure of the narratives that you're going to tell each other.

And that would be interesting.

And I actually just did a Laban, Laban dance sort of workshop recently.

And they have, they did the verticalities.

One of them, like you've got the base, which is the feet and the floor.

You've got the bowl of the pelvis that you can sort of rock on.

You've got the diaphragm, you've got the base of the mouth and you've got the top of the head as if they're, and they're almost different ways of grounding your, your,

ways of being, right?

And as you go up and down, I think that again speaks to that structuring.

How much would that change the structure of the narrative?

And that would change the structure of the memory.

And how does that structure of memory play into the structure of memory in this paper?

You know, could be interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

Dave?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, the different ways of structuring language are quite striking to me.

Tagalog is just dramatically different in the way it expresses ideas from the European languages.

There's no gender, for instance.

There are three cases, nominative, genitive, and ablative, and almost everything is expressed in all circumstances expressed in the ablative.

So

Where, when, for what purpose, by means of what, for whose benefit, that's all just expressed by putting however many of those clauses there are into the ablative.

And if you need to be specific, you throw particles in, but they're always optional.

So if you challenge somebody, well, how do you know what something means in a sentence?

Well, isn't it obvious if I talk about Monday?

that when you translate it to English, you'd say on, and when I'm saying at New York, of course you would translate that to in, and for, well, of course you translate it for, but before our son had been in the US for a long time, he was constantly using this at for everything, at three o'clock, at Manhattan, at Pittsburgh,

at my girlfriend anything other than who's doing the action but who's doing the action isn't expressed in a straightforward way either so it's it's it's pretty wacky


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.


SPEAKER_05:
Nice thoughts on that.

And pretty wacky is what anybody with a highly precise language like Russian or Chinese would say, you know, when they hear somebody speaking even careful English, this is, wait a minute, you had a not in your sentence.

What is it exactly that you're negating?

There's no way to tell what an English speaker means once he's put not into a sentence.

Or in Russian, it's so strict and so specific, same thing.

How do you know in English?

Well, you just figure it out.

Don't you just say what you mean?

No, we don't.

Let you figure that out.


SPEAKER_03:
Definitely some ambiguity there.

I wonder in cell-to-cell communication, if there's ambiguity in the bioelectric signal, which way should a cell grow or go?

Touching back onto the language of this multi-scale cognition.

Daniel?

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
So I think to connect this language discussion to the goal and the whole sensing point of the paper, these different ways in which human languages are communicating state updates about the world.

People are able to live.

Living people use all these languages.

So that says a lot.

It means they're able to be uptaken and transmitted by our cognitive apparatus.

And then also they're able to persist in a niche.

It doesn't mean that every language is going to be as successful in any niche, but there is a place where it's successful.

So just like ants, it's like that algorithm is working there.

It might be working somewhere else, but it might not be.

So then we can look at this amazing diversity of language and communication structures, including ones that don't even only use audio or ones that use audio dimensions that we're not using certain sounds or something, but then also the syntactic.

And then what is the invariance?

What is actually being communicated?

That's the structure of what is being shared between agents that are like one another in certain dimensions.

And they're sharing state updates so that they can make it happen in their niche.

So it's like, there's the total, the diversity is because there's enough in variance for us to recognize it as part of the same category.

And then there's important things to look at in what it is that's in common.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, definitely.

It's definitely like interesting to think about how the, the

communication shapes, the structure shapes, the, all of that, the structure of society and the structure of a human body.

Uh, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
You know, it's so... You guys, this is so fantastic.

This is like... Everything comes together in these conversations.

So I was thinking, what is this reminding me of?

I just read an article and I was like, is it... Does it remind me of this article, which is about universal chemical synthesis computing?

No.

Was it about this highly multiplex spatial mapping of...

Microbial communities?

Sort of, but no.

What this reminds me of is this.

Space-time from bits.

This guy, I just read this article, it's about quantum gravity, and what he asserts is gravity is what we perceive as, it's actually entanglement of bits of information.

And so if you take out the entanglement, you have no space-time.

And what I'm thinking is the entanglements we just described, that's everything.

We call it mind.

We call it society.

We call it you sociality.

We call it space time.

It's edges.

And we're characterizing these edges and our affordances are so constrained.

that we try to describe it, but we're describing it, it's the shadows in the cave, right?

We're seeing just indirectly what's actually out there.

And one of the things that's enriching about this active inference notion is it provides us with a framing that's sufficiently generic, but also sufficiently robust

that it explains things in the stack, in the time stack, in the space stack.

It's kind of like, wow, this may be how things interact.

Maybe things are entangled.

And we use the word internal model and external reality and yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

But maybe the nature of rhetoric and maybe the nature of entanglement is the seeking of connection

by negentropy systems.

So I, you know, my life definition is that living systems are autocatalytic and entropy secreting.

My son said I just wanted to use the word secreting because it sounded gushy.

But if they're autocatalytic and entropy secreting, then if you're a system that's living, you're going to want to seek out other living systems because you need reproductive and nutritional opportunities.

in order to be auto-catalytic and entropy secreting.

And it goes to the frog nervous system rules, right?

If frog encounters something that's smaller than it and it moves, it eats it.

If it's larger than it and it moves, it runs away.

And if it's the same size as it and it moves, it mates with it.

Very simple rules that let a frog be a frog, right?

So it feels like maybe what we're banging up against is too many words that we're throwing at simple concept

And maybe what we're talking about is harmonic coupling of living systems that are seeking other negentropy states either to consume or mate with.

The last point, I have a poster that I got from a guy in San Francisco and it's in my shop and it says, Futurism, imagining a fake future in the hope that the real future will come along and mate with it.

And that's kind of like what we do in active inference.

We're imagining our way into a, we're perceiving an externality just because our perceptions say, okay, there's something you don't control out there.

And then we try to mate with it or eat it or run away from it.


SPEAKER_03:
I was reminded of the light cone slide here when we're talking about space and time and edges and how Daniel included the slide.

How, like, light is the boundary between space and time.

Like, that's kind of, that trips me out.

Stephen and then Danielle.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think when we be interesting to also, I think this opens up maybe a revisiting or with this, with Chris Fields and some of this work about quantum contextuality as well, because as you start to, because one thing that he did mention in his presentation, you know, there's this question about when it goes from being contextual, which is, or quantum like, which is a highly constrained set of,

options basically once you've got more options for movement things start to move into more classical

even if there's loads of quantum stuff going on at the small scale, they all average out and effectively the gas in my room is behaving similar to the gases in all the rooms that we're in, in a generic sense, only if we went into the sort of, and there's a question that comes up then around this sequencing and because where is that sequencing possibly constrained enough that you might hit some things like that?

And is that part of what happens at these

you could call them meso levels.

I mean, the surface of a cell is small, but it's not small from an atomic point of view.

It's still relatively aggregated.

Yet we're getting these distinct flips in charge.

And is it plausible that anything as big as the brain can also do something like that?

And it may be that the term quantum is not necessary in that sense, but

um it'd be interesting to think about what what importance is there to be a constrained set of sequences a bit like daniel mentioned if a certain molecule is released and then another one's released and then another one's released that could be some sort of type of rhetorical dynamic but that there needs to be a constraint so that it's not just part of the

classical noise you know it's not just swamped by a big flux of randomness right that it actually is a sequence even if it's not as clear as you know so that might be an interesting question I don't know whether it's a fair question to put to Mike if that's is or maybe it's more of a Chris Fields type question but I know they work together so they might have talked about some of this definitely Daniel and then Scott


SPEAKER_06:
Yep, it was a key theme in this paper and in cybernetics in general that goal seeking and planning as inference is a big area.

That's why we're always talking about control theory.

And it is interesting to wonder how does the bioelectricity play a role in goal setting and then in basically

policy selection because you know active inference we don't just specify which trajectory is going to be like the preferred one and then uh condense it down to a single summary statistic it's like there's the preferred states with the c and then the affordances with the e and then there's a equation that is selecting policies based upon you know a combination of different ways of phrasing some of the variables so then it's like how does that framing which is not just one way of going about doing

What is it going to allow us to say about like how systems actually plan?

And I think that's kind of related to the hint in figure two on 32, like possible alien comma AI.

It's saying that this framework wouldn't just help us describe systems, but recognize systems that we didn't have ways of recognizing otherwise, perhaps.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice point.

And if, you know, if another system was communicating with us, how would we know, right?

Like what would that even look like?

Scott?


SPEAKER_01:
Have you guys seen this article?


SPEAKER_06:
Decoding and perturbing decision states in real time.

No.


SPEAKER_01:
It's P-E-I-X-O-T-O, Diogo Pizzotto.

It's about decision states.

It seems like it's very similar to what we're talking about here.

25th of March, 2021, from Nature magazine.

And then Verhein, V-E-R-H-E-I-N, is another author.

One of the things... The reason I was holding that up... One of the things I was just writing down... You know, light cones... Lights... Bosons...

Right.

Photons are both are bosons.

And one of the things I always fuss with a little bit is, OK, is there a difference between fermionic and bosonic physics here that we need to attend to?

So the idea of fermions, I was thinking of them as firm.

So they make up matter and bosons make up energy stuff and information is carried by bosons, but also carried by embodiments in in fermions and stuff.

And so it's so interesting to me that how does the persuasion, the rhetoric, the history get embodied both sonically and fermionically?

Again, you have the peacock and you have the birds and the animals that develop certain physicalities over time as communication, right?

And it's a deep time communication and there's less discretion in it, let's say.

They can exercise it or not, but it's embodied in the physicality.

And then there's the action that they take, which is, again, they have the physicality with which they act.

So what are the instruments given them physically?

But then they convey information by the behaviors they engage in.

And I keep coming back and thinking, well, it's kind of interesting.

If we look at the carrier signal,

again of information um is it in fact bosonic always it's things are carried by light i guess things carried by sound are being carried fermionically by the pressure in the sound wave i'm not sure but

So maybe the medium, I was just wondering whether the medium relates to the notion of rhetoric and if there's a purer form of information transfer when it's bosonic rather than fermionic.

And maybe that's getting way too reductionist on the thing.

But I wondered whether light cones in their purest form, which presumably involve light, right?

The original light traveling out and it can only go this way and you can't be beyond it.

And, Blue, when you said before it was a statement that what is it outside the light cone?

There is no it's like the defines the edge of space time for the observer.

And so what's what's out there is an externality.

It feels like that boundary when that's known to other parties, maybe in communication, we're trying to do is think outside the light cone.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_06:
really nice uh daniel and then steven so the part of the light cone going forward in time is anticipation and if we take anticipation again not to be like a metaphysical claim about what systems are really doing but what the system is anticipating outwards that entails a generative model through time of the states that matter

for this kind of an agent, which is the internal state of the model itself, the blanket states, which are sense and action, expected outcomes and expected actions, and then the state of the niche, the external states.

So kind of operationalizing the light cone as a specific prediction on specific variables might be helpful and kind of give a little bit more insight into how it could be used in a computer.

And then also, just to Scott, your point about the media is the message, essentially.

It's like a multi-scale media is the message.

It's not just bold print type versus cursive.

It's actually like you're bringing up types of subatomic particles.

That media is ether, the ultimate media.

The nature of the media does matter.

And yeah, it's a trade-off space with...

peptides, you have a larger signaling space than the small molecules, like the combinatorics are just different.

But that entails totally new challenges like with specificity or cross activation of neuropeptides or how do you keep them linked through evolutionary time?

And then we see sort of insights into those design tradeoffs when we see like, wow, there are like a lot of neuropeptides that come from one precursor longer protein.

So that suggests that their co-regulation is held together through specific design principles.

So those are really interesting questions about how like the speed and the frequency and the bandwidth of different information channels structure how they end up performing.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Stephen and then Scott.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think, Daniel, you're making a good point.

And it feeds on with this question about time scales and is if we assume that slides up the one that's there with the tick and the dog and human and possible alien.

And so the cones there.

Yes, it's very useful to think of it in terms of I've got my maximum information now.

Maybe my maximum information was even a little bit in the past.

But it depended on what regime of attention I was applying.

I made choices.

So as I make choices into the present, I reduce the possible coned extent I've got available.

And as I bring things only into my conscious awareness, certain things are going to be left out.

bringing that into, okay, this is a particular type of future I might predict based on my regime of attention is actually probably more useful in some ways to this, because the cone going out, it's a nice idea, but it can lead to thinking that we know more and more in the future.

There's more and more futures out there, which is,

there is more and more futures, but not necessarily coming out from us.

So it could be, this is a bit more like, okay, my cone could move around a lot.

And there is actually a lot of analogy with that because now a lot of futures work, they're actually saying you're better off picking a scenario in the future.

building out the scenario in the future as a separate thing, not inheriting your present, because that will always bias you, and then bring it back, bring your present, which is what you know and your assumptions here, and sort of bridging the two in terms of the narrative, rather than this idea of,

I can go, because I could just be going with all my assumptions and all my pre-assumptions from the present and making all these stories about the future.

And it almost starts from a singularity in those other diagrams.

It goes from a singularity and opens up, whereas actually, really,

the widest is now potentially.

This is the most information I have potentially available, or at least within the 10 or 20 seconds of this moment.

So I think that actually there's other ways that this could change the way people think about sense-making in time and space.


SPEAKER_03:
Really super nice point, Stephen.

Scott?


SPEAKER_01:
wow steven wow i mean that's so awesome when it makes me think okay first of all encoding and decoding okay so something i i just wrote down mutations encode new speculative space-time so mutation gives you access it's a random mutation that gives you access to space-time you weren't intending to access

And the same thing with externalities.

If another thing comes in, and this is jazz.

This is jazz genetics.

Right.

Is you get mutations and it's like, whoa, I didn't want to access that that new light cone area, but I guess I'm there now.

OK, let's see what we got here.

And that's pretty awesome, because otherwise you'd be settled in your ways and you'd never see that space.

That light cone area would never open up and you don't know what it's going to be.

You don't know.

It's like I always said to my kids, life is a one act play.

No rehearsals.

That's a light cone.

Right.

You just go through and it's like, OK, here we go.

So that idea of encoding and decoding is kind of interesting.

So you have this the we go out there in the world and we're like, OK, I want to interpret the world.

Now, some things were encoded with intention to communicate.

music, speech, some things who are encoded with intention to obfuscate, right?

Cryptography stuff, whatever.

Some things were encoded with no intention to communicate, but they do communicate like, oh, leaves are green.

So therefore over time, we figure out that they have magnesium in the photosynthetic cycle or whatever, right?

So they're not, the color is encoded in the thing, but the tree is not intending to say I'm doing photosynthesis, right?

It's just, we now take that

perception and can decode something that was never encoded with discretion i guess or intention by the organism or whatever you know where i'm going with that so this notion of this light cones and if from the perceiver's perspective we can decode what's in a light cone we can decide an artist decodes a light cone and somebody else seeing the same perceptions would not have the same light cone

Right.

Somebody with different priors can see things.

A person who knows history will not repeat it because they see the same history now and they go, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.

That looks like an insurrection.

Like their light cone is more trained to the possibility that it's an insurrection.

So.

This last couple of comments are fascinating to me that.

We're moving through space.

We have this active inference model.

We're running a model.

There's myriad other models and non-models out there that we're seeking to decode.

Some subset of them were intended to be coding information.

Some subset are not.

And we're just moving through space, decoding everything.

Some of it will be false signals.

Some of it will be actual signal.

And so the light cones...

The experience we have obviously can never be replicated by another person with different priors, but also in real time, I don't know what the equivalent is of a cacophony of light cones, a babble of light cones.

It's like that ice cream cone again.

There's too much ice cream maybe in the cone.

Anyway, it's fascinating notion of that over decoding in a way.

And maybe the scientific method has something to do with a rigor on the over-decoding that can happen with alchemy or something like that?


SPEAKER_03:
Nice point.

Daniel and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_06:
So to Scott's point about the mutation as accessing spatial temporal zones, like expanding into space time, I thought, OK, maybe there's some quantum 4D, 3 plus 1 interpretation of that.

But how can we think about that with the information that we already empirically know?

And it's actually that mutations in developmental biology, developmental genetics,

facilitate the exploration of new developmental space and time, like by slowing down or speeding up the way that a certain cell type is susceptible to a hormone or something like that.

So what's being played with is actually the level faster.

because that's why there's the intergenerational transmission of those mutations.

But then what they're actually modifying, like the source code, but not exactly in that way, of course, is how the system bootstraps and modifies itself through development and learning.

And then how can we think about active inference in that way?

Well, we can think about the mutations as modifying the initial parameters or some of the state variables for the parameters that are important for an active inference agent, like the structure of its internal generative model, its blanket states, like its sensory and action affordances, and then the niche.

So that's a way where we can have the generality to talk about potentially a system across different scales, but then when we're ready to actually formalize it and then ask how to design communication in that niche.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice point.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's a good point, thinking about those different timescales.

And sort of following on from that, you've got this question of,

So maybe the things are happening at this light speed and there's a lot of electrical activity happening in these cells and groups of cells.

And we've got these structures that we can come together.

And of course, we then have this intermodal integration between different cells, nerves coming in.

And the question then also is,

As it's coming in, say, from my body to my brain, my feet are seeing the world in the past compared to my nose, right?

Because it takes longer for the sort of information to travel up from my foot.

The speed of light traveling, but by the time it does that through all the chemical interactions, you know, it's milliseconds, not seconds.

billionths of a second so it's coming together in this structure of the body which has grown to you know to integrate it but at some point the system has to calibrate it has to calibrate so that it doesn't think that my foot is in a different time to my nose or my ears or my fingers right so that sort of brings that question of of um

some of this multi-scale stuff will come out of these kind of electrical...

light speed dynamics, but then it's going to also come into the, uh, the structures.

I think that Daniel was talking about structures.

We all sort of mentioned structures and then there's going to be a system that sort of at times has to sort of tweak it, you know, and maybe that system's not needed when you've got a small set of cells that are all firing electrically and doing other chemical signals.

They just, the structure's enough in a way, but, uh,

So, yeah, I thought that might be an interesting question to ask Michael as well.

How does that kind of play out with this?


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Daniel and then Scott.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just a quick comment on that.

So the signal processing or the sort of outside in perspective would suggest that there would have to be like a recalibration.

Then the generative model out way of thinking is that the generative model is that like your hands clap and the sound and the visual are the same event.

So there isn't as much of a calibration of inputs as there is a reconciliation of deep temporal models, which are timed based upon the inferred causal structure of the world, which is usually not two separate events, but rather one.

And then that is actually just embodied in the sensory relay, which does take different amounts of time to transfer from different parts of the body.


SPEAKER_00:
nice scott yeah okay i just just one thing on that i'm just before scott that's a good point i think that's interesting yeah thinking about predictive processing and not getting caught up in the in that's where it's tricky because it's it's not directly an input it's a kind of error message so yeah that's cool that's not the part that's experienced yeah and the parsing of that opens up


SPEAKER_01:
right?

If you can parse the different pieces and start to break it down.

It is last couple of pieces.

I thought, you know, the occupy movement, occupy wall street.

It feels like active inference.

We should have t-shirts made up, occupy light cone.

Cause everyone's, every organism is trying to occupy everyone else's light cone.

I think, I mean, and when I, so we worked for Microsoft for, at the law school, we had a program, Microsoft paid,

professors, intellectual property professors, to go to China to teach intellectual property professors in China and in India US IP law concepts.

Now, why was Microsoft doing that?

They were doing that because they were trying to render the externality innocuous.

There was a piracy externality that they were dealing with.

And so they thought if they teach the teachers in those jurisdictions about the value of intellectual property,

and then teach the lawyers at the law schools, the teachers teach the lawyers those notions, then the Microsoft notions of intellectual property, they'll be left software privacy.

So that was, they weren't doing it for beneficence.

They were doing it to render the externality innocuous.

They were trying to occupy the light cone of a culture, right?

With this affordance shifting by mutating the,

teachers' views and the way they taught intellectual property law.

So that to me, there's a, I once heard a quote that trees were bullies because trees suck up the water and the light in an area, right?

You know, they bully other plants.

And I always thought, you know, trees are so nice.

And I always think of trees as bullies now.

And it's kind of interesting when an organism is applying rhetoric or other

vehicles to sweep in

And, you know, like pigeons, when they do pigeon racing, when you try to pigeons try to flock and you try to grab everyone else's pigeons.

Right.

Or I don't know in hive behaviors if hives pick up other bees and that makes them fitter as hives or if there's mixing of bees when they do swarming.

I don't know the answer to that.

I just don't know enough about bee biology.

But it is kind of interesting that light cones maybe are pretty darn aggressive for living things, trying to render externalities innocuous.

And maybe that goes to Gaia theory, that ultimately, what's the light cone for Gaia?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, the biggest light cone of them all.

Just what you were saying made me think of maybe, you know, we think about it as a light cone, but maybe what we're looking at is like an information cone.


SPEAKER_00:
know and so like like a concentration of information within an individual because in the end we dissipate you know there's no more information concentrated there uh stephen yeah it might be a question when we're thinking about this term light cone and i was walking home last night and i could see the clouds and i could see the lightning

but I could only hear the thunder, you know, five seconds later or whatever.

So the information cone on the audio was different to the information.

If it is an information cone and then, I don't know the smell of the, the rain or the change of that.

So, um,

might be interesting how much the the maybe some elements in certain scales where really it's light it's about the speed of light i mean near enough so that's what it is or maybe it's a broader category which could roll out into these other spatial temporal modalities yeah the uh


SPEAKER_03:
So, I mean, you know, when you're in a space, if you wake up in a dark room, what's the first thing you do?

Like, where am I, right?

Turn on the light.

That's a very human way to maximize your information gain.

I mean, not every organism obviously can see light.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_06:
I think my closing thought on this would just be that it really speaks Steven's story about how there actually was a temporal structuring, even though you cognitively knew it was a single event, you actually classified it into a separate kind of event, which is like the exception that proves the rule that suggested long, long ago that the speed of sound and light were different.

How are we gonna make sense of this total continuum of signaling in the niche?

We can think about ostensive cues and helping you plan.

There's something when you smell something and you have eight hours to plan for the storm versus you hear the lightning strike, you have a half second to plan, et cetera.

So we can think about the structuring of different kinds of cues in the niche as giving information that is in light of a generative model

able to be used for anticipation and action.

So that's just speaking to how core Active Inference is to thinking about these different processes coming together.

And it's why it'll be awesome to get the author's perspective on all of this and what Active Inference is going to do.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Scott, you have a final thought for us?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just again that I'm still intrigued by the notion of the entanglement creating space-time and this whole discussion of time cones and the time cones in the relation of space-time relatively theory, etc.

And I feel like this one thing that active inference has done whatever it's and it's powerful in many ways.

One thing it's done is allowed me to open up my mind to processes that feel like they're

replicated across time and scales.

And that's interesting because whether or not they're strictly fall within active inference math and rigor, the model has opened up so many different ways of thinking about things.

And the entanglement notion where we think of two, is it two particles or one, spooky action at a distance?

It feels like everything else we're talking about, active inference is spooky action at a distance for me.

It's just that it's a different spooky action at a distance.

And so it's fascinating, the notion of entanglements.

And it feels like light cones may be describing the things that are amenable to be entangled or coupled.

And so maybe if it's an information cone, that's an interesting notion that we can start to say communities expand out that which is amenable to coupling because they widen the light cones.

So that using that rhetoric may start to be a way that we can illustrate the benefits of coupling.

community-based behaviors and things like that.

So we can start to bring this back and say, look, you can't see around the corner, but that person who's up there, they're standing there and they can see around the corner.

And if they can talk to you, they can tell you what's around the corner.

So maybe that's good, right?

And so maybe that's contact tracing for pandemics.

Maybe that's giving the neighborhood watch for other toxic things in the environment, whatever.

So it feels like this gets simple enough

You know, people may not want to know about light cones or whatever, but they it starts to get the entanglement and that notion of cause and effect.

Feels like there's a story that we can tell here and illustrate pretty simply.

Anyway, it's exciting.

It's an exciting conversation, some wonderful stuff, and it's delightful to be back in the conversation.


SPEAKER_03:
So just to come to the author's final point in this, the dissolution of the self, right?

This is like the practice of Zen.

He says, it is striking that the process which Zen practice is meant to reverse attachment to past memories and high valence for future expectations or fears.

is precisely the process suggested to be responsible for the creation of complex selves.

So I want to know what happens to the informational light cone in this like dissolution of the self.

Does it like, you know, turn into lots of little light cones as is kind of implied in like the one figure, or does it just like poof and like dissipate?

I don't know.

It's interesting to think about

That for me, he says it's unclear whether it's beneficial or even possible to truly live in the moment and let go of past memories and future expectations.

But anyone who succeeded in doing this would achieve precisely what Zen promises, the dissolution of the self.

So thanks, everyone.

This has been a super interesting discussion, and I am looking forward to our conversation, hopefully with the author next week.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

Nice work, Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks very much.

Take care.

Have a great day.


SPEAKER_03:
Bye, everyone.

## XSYxOt8CRDI

SPEAKER_04:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 25.2.

Today is July 13th, 2021, and we're going to be talking about this paper, The Computational Boundary of a Self, Developmental Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition.

We are here with the author, Mike Levin.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Here at the short link, you'll find all the live streams that we've done so far, and we're going to have a new series of live streams coming up in the next semester.

So we're going to be jumping off here with the author discussing this paper, and we will just do a brief round of introductions.

I am Blue Knight, and I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, my name is Sarah Davis.

I'm a master's philosophy student at this point, past engineer and science artist, just generally interested in how the world works.

Michael?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I'm Mike Levin.

I'm a professor in the biology department at Tufts University.

I run the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts, and I'm also an associate faculty at the Institute at Harvard.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So, Sarah, what is something that you're excited to talk about today or something that you liked or remembered about the paper?

Maybe want to give a heads up?


SPEAKER_03:
The most interesting kind of through line for me in all of Michael's work that I've looked at is this connection or this maybe tension, I don't know, the way the morphology plays with electricity.

Just, yeah, which one's in the driver's seat or some kind of like understanding of how those two work together.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Is there any like burning questions that you have that you want to start off with or otherwise I can just start?


SPEAKER_03:
No, I feel like that is going to kind of happen down the road, that particular focus.

So please.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

So here we are on the paper we're going to be discussing today.

How do multiple nested scales of individuality work?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I want to preface this by saying that, and maybe this is obvious, but I just want to say that all of this is very much a work in progress.

So I'm going to tell you what I think about these things, but I certainly am not claiming that this is all worked out, or that I'm not going to change my mind at some point, or that this is not going to develop in some fashion.

This is under constant work.

So I think the fundamentals of all this are simply that

there are multiple interpenetrating systems at different scales that are all present simultaneously, all of which can be profitably looked at as individuals.

And so this diagram here sort of, it looks like all it's saying is the mere sort of fact of physical structure.

If you look, you see organisms and within that you've got organs and cells.

So that's sort of not the whole point of this.

The point isn't merely that they're arranged this way, but that you've got subunits, and those subunits have themselves subunits, all of which are selves.

And what I mean by them being selves, and this is the central claim of the paper, is that

They are to some extent, so not binary, but on a continuum of agency, they are to some extent goal directed agents.

So they're trying to achieve certain things.

And so, when I say that they're nested, all of this simply means that you can have systems where the different parts.

Are all actively trying to achieve various things in their own spaces and we should talk about that.

That's an important part that developed since this paper was written is this idea of different action spaces that these things are working in.

But, but they're nested in the sense that I think just because a higher level system acquires a goal, or is pursuing a goal that doesn't mean the lower systems aren't doing it and.

All of these things are, in fact, simultaneously doing their best to pursue various kinds of goals.

So that's what I meant by multiple nested individuals.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

So is there a total 100% of individuality that gets partitioned?

And something that I've been really interested in is how is information passed forward and backward across levels?

Like is there some kind of core screening or like salience like dominates the information to pass forward?

So how does that kind of information flow work?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah so so the scaling and the relationship between layers is of course one of the most interesting things here so one of the things we are currently trying to do both experimentally and with modeling is to really show some very tight examples because this paper is largely qualitative but we're now trying to show some very specific examples where you where we can we can actually track the scaling so so you have lower level subunits so let's say you have cells

that have only local metabolic goals.

So all they know how to do is pursue some energy level in a kind of homeostasis to stay alive.

And so the question is, how do you connect those in a way that is then going to give rise to a larger agent that has much larger scale goals that can be working towards a state of affairs and to be actually stressed by the failure to reach a state of affairs that is way bigger than any individual cell.

And so I'm not sure that there's any kind of conservation here in the sense that there's only a total amount that you sort of have to partition it among the levels and that's all that there is.

I'm not sure that's, yeah, I would make that claim.

I think that the total amount of individuality can change over time and it can rise and fall.

And in fact, the boundaries between the different agents can grow and shrink.

That was a significant part of the paper talk about that.

um and what there's a couple of there's a couple of interesting things that get passed upwards so to speak um definitely kind of force graining in the sense that if you are a system whose parts are themselves competent in getting various things done despite changing conditions and and so on they're not just the hardwired mechanisms but actually competent to pursue specific outcomes despite perturbations what it means is that the larger system

is now working in a much easier space in the sense that if it doesn't have to micromanage all the microstates that the individual pieces are doing, but it can rely on those components to get their job done, then what you're really working in is a much lower dimensional, simpler space

Problem solving gets easier and just as a simple biological example, we now know that, for example, in the tadpole, if you activate a signal that triggers, it happens to be bioelectric signal that triggers eye formation in another part of the embryo, let's say on the tail.

then all kinds of interesting things will happen it will it will build an eye it will recruit cells that you never directly manipulated so it's a local self-organization process that i will form even though it's sitting in the middle of muscle instead of in the brain where where it belongs all of these things are going to happen anyway if you're if you're the larger and and by the way those tackles can then see out of that eye even though it's on the tail instead of in the head so if you are a system that um

uh needs to solve some problems in terms of uh i've got some eyes and i need to do this behavior that i'm doing and so on if you don't have to micromanage all of those components and saying each cell of that eye where exactly it's going to go what exactly it's going to attach to and so on if if there is an effector that you have access to an affordance maybe that says um build an eye and you as a larger system don't need to know how that's going to happen you can just

that is going to happen under a wide range of conditions.

You have a much simpler space to work in and the problem solving.

That's one of the things we're doing now is trying to map out some of the different spaces in which all these different agents are actually solving problems and trying to define what that means.

So one of the things that gets passed up is this course grading because of the lower level competency.

So that's I think a key thing and maybe we'll get to talking about what that does for evolution because I think it's massively important.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice, so I don't have a unfortunately, they've moved to change the interface.

So I don't know where the hand is anymore in this, but 1 question that keeps coming up for me and all the different.

Realms of discussion about this is like, well, in particular with the bio electricity part, you use the word.

Um, subroutines when you were talking about, you know, we, we think we're starting to understand the, the, the.

Whatever combinatorics of of how this works and and and also related to these nested levels and things like this.

I, I just keep wondering if it's your sense from all of this work that you've done that.

In nature in in in the communication between these levels.

that there's any amount of abstraction or semantic layer that's needed for that to happen between levels.

And also with the electricity, subroutine implies that there's some kind of semantics that something has to rest on.

And that just keeps coming back to me.

Do you have any sense about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so a couple of things.

So one thing about bioelectricity is that

bioelectricity, I think, is interesting not because it's in some sense magical or there's something uniquely better about bioelectricity than biomechanical or biochemical modes of interaction.

What I think is really interesting about bioelectricity is that

that is what is being used.

And perhaps these other modes are too, we don't know.

But bioelectricity for sure is being used as the computational medium by which the lower levels bind together into the higher level cognition.

So the higher systems cognition, whatever level it may have.

So what the bioelectricity allows us to do is to directly peek into

that computation.

And so I think that's why it's interesting, which is no surprise.

I mean, that's exactly when people do neural decoding, that's exactly what they hope, right?

Is that by tracking the bioelectricity, they learn something about the information content of the global system, right?

What is the animal or the human thinking about

So it's exactly the same here.

So that's what's unique about bioelectricity.

And I think that what evolution discovered very early on is that, and then it capitalized on that by pivoting it into neural kinds of systems, and we do it in our computational devices and so on.

is that what evolution found really, really early, around the time of bacterial biofilms actually, is that electricity is a great way to process information, to integrate information across distance, and to do computations.

That shouldn't be a surprise to anybody.

So I don't know if I would claim that it has any kind of a formal syntax at these levels or anything like that.

But what it definitely does do is a kind of, when I say subroutine, what I'm mostly leaning on is this idea of modularity, but not just modularity in form, because that's been discussed a lot in evolutionary developmental biology.

actually modularity of function so so the key that the thing the thing about a good subroutine is that you're going to when you activate the subroutine you can move along and assume that everything that's necessary to get that job done given whatever local conditions or current events or whatever else is happening

that subroutine is going to encapsulate everything that's needed to get it done meaning it's it's it's not just it's it's it's the difference so for people who code it's the difference between sort of macro substitution where all you're doing is just you know it's a shorthand for a bunch of hardwired steps which plopping that in i don't think that's the the magic here at all i think what it is is

it's a degree of competency in that subroutine to get something accomplished.

And that has really important implications for evolvability and so on.

And what the bioelectricity allows you to do is to

Basically, to have to have a language in which the system can call up such circuits with specific behaviors at different points or at different times.

That makes it really, really powerful.

But the question of whether it has any kind of formal syntax or anything like that, I don't have good evidence for that.


SPEAKER_03:
I don't even mean like a formal syntax.

It's almost like a

And this also, you know, holds true between these layers of these nested layers of organism or whatever.

Is if there's if you have a sense that there's any abstraction, there's any abstraction layer needed and I guess you kind of answered it maybe by saying, you know, that electricity is this medium on which.

Things communicate or but yeah, anyway, it's I don't think it's an easy.

It's like.

You know, easy to answer question, but that's the theme that keeps coming back to me.

So.


SPEAKER_01:
I think there's a lot of abstraction in the sense of, and I don't know if this captures what you're asking, but there's a lot of abstraction in the sense of generalization in terms of

Another way to say it is coarse-grained.

Voltage itself, let's just start with that.

Voltage itself is an abstraction for cells because, and in fact, people will often ask if I say there's a bioelectrical signal, they say, well, is it the potassium level?

Is it the sodium level?

Is it the particular ion channel gene?


SPEAKER_03:
Is it the voltage or is it the current?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and in particular, so the cool thing about bioelectrics is that that question has been answered, and we know the answer.

It's neither of those things.

So it's a pattern of voltage that is specific for the downstream effects, and it doesn't matter how, with very rare exceptions, it doesn't matter how you got to that voltage.

So you can use sodium channels, you can use potassium channels, chloride.

What I used all those micro details don't matter at all, because what the collective is heating off of is the spatial temporal distribution of voltage and you can get exactly the same results with sodium or potassium or chloride as long as you're.

You know you're you're driving the right voltage patterns so voltage itself is a really cool abstraction because it means that all the downs, the underlying mechanisms are free to diverge and evolution want to swap out of potassium channel.

for a sodium channel, you can do that as long as you've got the right functional properties so that your overall pattern stays.

And we use that quite often in our regenerative medicine applications with a really convenient property.

So yeah, so the bioelectric code itself is definitely an abstraction over what the micro states in terms of specific ions or the specific channel genes that got you there.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Stephen, did you want to say hello?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, hello.

Hi there.

Hi, Michael.

Thanks for joining us.

Yeah, I was curious.

We had a really interesting... Chris Field gave us a really good insight into the quantum contextuality idea of how things could...

build up from different sort of space states at very small levels and active inference often uses non-equilibrium steady state attractors as kind of a way to look at some sort of statistics between the scales you know there's some sort of flux or flow that's inferred and I find it really useful thinking about it with this cone idea that you you bring to the table because it it there's more

It's more of an idea of a distinct swarming going into a structure and some sort of system that might emerge from that, which is sometimes lost when it's very much in the math.

And I'm curious whether when you think about the bioelectric effects, and the same sort of question came up with quantum contextuality maybe, is there more of a distinct scale at which

there's a coherence, you know, like you've got the cell membrane, then you've got a coherence around which the bioelectrics can operate, so to speak.

And then you might have another distinct level at which the bioelectrics can operate, which is maybe more than the more gradated idea of steady state statistical sort of manifolds.

So I was wondering what your thoughts are about how and where there's sort of

scales at which bioelectrics become particularly coherent, or if that even happens?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, so again, prefacing this by saying that the bioelectrics is not an essential part of the story.

except insofar as I think morphogenesis is a nice example of an unconventional agent within which to play with these kind of ideas.

So what I would like to do, and this is a framework that I've been developing recently, is to get away from the standard sorts of living creatures that we're used to, so the products of that one trace of evolution in the biosphere on Earth,

and to go beyond that and to look at the space of possible agents, the space of possible bodies and the space of possible minds that those bodies will support and think more broadly.

So in doing that,

I think that morphogenesis is a nice example of an unconventional agent that lets us see how the framework is to be practically applied.

So people say, okay, this is all well and good, but what use is it?

And I say, okay, let's apply it to a specific thing that really no one thinks of as a cognitive agent.

And I'm going to show you how all this stuff maps and why it's useful at the bench and it helps do new experiments and so on.

so if we if we accept that morphogenesis is kind of a test case for and there are many others it's certainly not unique but it's a test case for an unconventional place to find um agency and all of that and to test out how well this theory helps us out then what's cool about bioelectricity is that it actually allows us to tell a very specific mechanistic testable empirically useful story about how the information flow happens and how the levels scale but it's just one

you know, it's just, that just happens to be how the morphogenetic self does things, and there are plenty of other interesting, you know, cells that wouldn't have anything to do with bioelectricity.

But I just want to make that clear, right, that bioelectricity is not, you know, some sort of essential element that's always going to be present whenever we apply these things.

It just sort of, it's central to the example case that I've trotted out, which is morphogenesis.

Now, having said that,

Bioelectricity is definitely multi-scale because you have bioelectric dynamics in organelles in a very small scale.

You have the resting potential across the cell membrane, which is mainly what we study.

But those scale into tissues, and you have global electrical fields, which are driven by trans-epithelial potentials on the scale of tissues and organs, which other people like Min Zhao and many other people study.

And then past that, you have whole animal scale, like whole body scale fields as well.

So all of these different levels exist.

Some of them more and some less rely on bioelectricity.

But yeah, it's relevant.

In this particular unconventional agent, it's relevant to all the scales that we know.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, that's really helpful.

Thanks.

And would you say that the cone concept

could it extrapolated to other types of multi-scale piston blanket type ideas?

And I was just wondering what your thoughts on that, or whether that just confuses things to try that.


SPEAKER_01:
No, I don't think it confuses now.

I'll say I'm for sure not.

I mean, I like Karl's ideas very much.

I'm by no means an expert on the map, and I'm not going to pretend that I understand all that.

I think that the thing about these kind of diagrams is they're not meant to be unique or exhaustive.

The goal of this originally, this came about a couple years ago at a Templeton meeting where we were asked to brainstorm ways to define almost a sort of eigen space where you're able to compare directly really diverse intelligences, right?

So things where you can't just measure all their brains and then see how they shake out.

It's really, really diverse intelligence.

So what I tried to come up with is a scale and it's all focused around the spatial temporal scale of the goals that any given agent can work towards and the scale of states of affairs that can stress out that agent when they're not being met and so on.

as a way to pick on something that I think is central to all agents, no matter what they're made of, no matter how they got here, evolved, designed, combinations, chimeras, whatever.

Wherever they came from and whatever they are, what is essential to them?

And I picked this goal of directiveness, but this is compatible with all kinds of other systems.

So you could overlay on top of this almost anything else that you thought was critical about being an agent,

just start adding dimensions, you know, and absolutely, right now, you can just, this is compatible with all sorts of things.

This is not meant to rule out any other, anybody else's, you know, favorite framework.

This thing, it captures one slice of what's essential about being a self.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, that's really useful.

Actually, can I just, one more thing,

I'm actually really interested in this.

I do a lot of work with community psychology.

So there's this challenge of going from the self, there's like the self and then there's society, social, but the intersubjective kind of group dynamics, there's a big problem because it's like a big hole.

And I find this really useful because

a lot of stuff which talks about how groups they often try to project out into the future as if it's a light beam that you could measure whereas here it's much more you know like it's sitting in the swarming i like to think the bottom of the cone is almost the swarming dynamics that go down into the past you've got the kind of structure that the cell that's emerged and then the system that's able to go into temporal depth in the future and the code and i think that

that offers a nice way to think about group dynamics particularly maybe the more ironically the more challenging group dynamics where there isn't a coherent single narrative so there might be applications there


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is super interesting.

And I should say, one of the things about the cone, and we had a discussion about this yesterday, and Pranab Das pointed out that my cone compared to Minkowski's cone is upside down, right?

And the reason I did it this way was because if you think about

Where any given agent, the only thing the given agent is really certain of at the moment is what's going on right now.

So your future obviously is uncertain.

And when you're trying to predict, so let's say you're trying to manage goals and you're trying to predict, you've got some predictive capacity going forward.

That predictive capacity doesn't get better over time.

It gets worse over time, right?

you're sort of exponentially more uncertain about what's going to happen later on.

So your ability to pursue those goals in the future gets smaller and smaller.

Same thing goes back in the past, although you could argue that that's linear and not exponential.

But again, what you're doing at any given moment in time is inferring what your past was from the engrams of memory that are available to you.

They might be a brain, they might be a stigmergic medium that you live in, you know, within if you're an ant colony, whatever it's going to be.

You've got some kind of material in which events leave memories, they leave traces.

At any given moment, you are reading those traces, recalling them, and reconstructing what you think the past was.

That's your only evidence for what the past was.

You have no idea what actually happened.

And so even going backwards, my cone comes down because your ability to go backwards in time and be certain of what went on and what are the facts on which you can now build your goal-directed strategy going forward become more and more uncertain going back.

So that's why my cones are upside down in this, so to speak, also because there's no particular reason this has to map exactly onto Minkowski's

Informalism, but I think it's close that just because that your level of certainty is highest right now, right?

Both in space and time.

And when you step away from that rapidly, at least for all of us rapidly get smaller.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, we were really actually talking about this last week in our discussion, and we were kind of thinking about this as like an information cone, because you have the most information about your environment at this point in space and less information as you go forward and backward in time.

So do you think that that might be the correct way to think about it?


SPEAKER_01:
So that's true.

That's absolutely true.

It's definitely also an information cone.

But I want to be clear about this because this diagram is not a diagram of what you can sense or how far your effectors range.

What you just said about the information certainty is the consequences of that are that you also have a limited cone in what the diagram really is supposed to show, which is the scale of the goals towards which you can work.

So, because the information is smaller, your ability to pursue goals towards, you know, how far into the future am I actively, you know, doing, it just becomes limited, right?

Your ability to do so.

So, it's sort of a secondary thing.

consequence of that, but I just want to be clear that this is not meant to be fundamentally a picture of the information certainty of sensory capacity of effector range or anything like that.

This is a diagram in gold space.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So one of the other ways I've been thinking about it is kind of like a possibility cone.

So like, as you progress forward into the future, we all are left with one possibility and that's like death, right?

So your goal at that moment is death.

And similarly in the past, like we all come from a single celled, like, you know, fertilization event.

And so like we all started an event and ended an event and like the maximum possibility is now.

So what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, so that's a really interesting point, right?

And people talk about, you know, great transitions in cognition along the continuum and so on.

And so I think one great cognition, a great transition is the following.

If you are a creature with a horizon, with a cognitive horizon of, you know, a half an hour, you're a goldfish or something.

I don't know if this is factually true, but, you know, you're some sort of form that has a cognitive horizon of a half an hour, right?

What that means is that all of your major goals, survival and these other things, they're totally achievable, right?

Because it is completely plausible that you are going to make it for that half hour that you can project forward.

If you are a human and your goals are, I don't know, world peace or your buildings, the larger things, you are for the first time, perhaps along the Earth's lineage anyway, you are able to comprehend goals that you have no chance whatsoever of achieving because you have a limited lifespan.

So now that's a really sharp transition, kind of an emergent transition, because for the first time, you are able to undertake goals that you know you are not going to complete, guaranteed.

Whereas the fish essence, maybe you'll get eaten and maybe you won't, but it's totally plausible that you live for the half hour that you can see forward.

And so I suspect that this is, and this is sort of way above my pay grade to know details about this, but I suspect this drives a lot of the weird facts about human psychology because you now have this fundamental stressor.

that other creatures don't have because you're able to foresee all these goals that you are definitely not going to meet.

And that's a novel sort of conflict between the different modules that doesn't exist for most other creatures.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that's really interesting.

Something that might be uniquely human is this possibility to see

past like the cone of our own existence like into the future with these like future possibilities or future goal states and also like backwards into the past in like a historical sense so we all like look at history um so i don't know i like thinking about like you know i've been reading your recent paper this integrating evolutionary developmental thinking into scale free biology this paper with chris fields

And I know like when we spoke yesterday, you mentioned you were integrating these ideas maybe into your next paper.

But in that paper, you guys were kind of blurring the boundary really between the processes of evolution and development.

And phylogenetic memory that's contained in DNA and results from evolution transforms into this ontogenetic memory.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, definitely.

So there's a couple of really interesting things related to evolution that we can talk about.

And that's something I'm working on now.

And this thing should be done in a couple of weeks.

We'll see.

Two things.

Number one.

One of the things, one of the amazing things about biological hardware that's given to us by evolution is that it is, there's a default way, by that I mean cells with their genomically determined proteins, whatever they have.

There's a default and a pretty robust, consistent default outcome, right?

And so embryo, you know, fish embryos make fish and frog embryos make frogs and so on.

but there's an incredible amount of plasticity there so that those exact same cells, genetically wild types, so the hardware is all the same, are in fact in other types of environments, are able to make completely novel creatures, right?

And then so some of this, so synthetic biology and synthetic morphology is already showing this, you know, as our xenobots and things like this, and there'll be tons more going forward.

One thing that's interesting about those novel creatures is that,

you don't have a long history of specific selection and frozen accidents and all this phylogenetics to lean on when you ask, why do they do certain things?

So for every normal animal in the biosphere, you say, why is this thing green and why does it fly and how come it has these antennae?

The answer is always the same.

Well, because for millions of years, the ancestors were selected for this and that.

The fact that we can take those embryos

those cells rather, cells from those kind of animals, and put them together into a new creature that has goals and behaviors, morphological goals, behavioral goals, physiological goals, that basically appear overnight, you know, within 24, 48 hours, they sort of

Show up, and then the, then the question is, where did these things come from?

Because what they didn't do was to be honed over millions of years by specific selection pressure.

So so that that's a very interesting to me to me.

aspect of the plasticity here that it is not, you know, the history doesn't necessarily determine them other than the default, you know, sort of variant and where does that come from?

And then there's the whole thing, which, you know, I don't know, you can tell me if you want to dive deeper into this or not, but the whole

the fact that you have multiple layers and that you have competency going down you know sort of all the way down has massive implications for why evolution works so fast right why why actually anything is able to evolve on the on the time scale that that we see so i think you know if you're interested we could get into that yeah that's great why don't we uh unpack that okay um yeah let's let's let's let's talk about that a little bit um imagine imagine two kinds of creatures and uh

you've got one kind of creature where the genome has a pretty direct influence over what the anatomy is going to be.

Everything is hardwired in some sense.

And so let's say, let's visualize, let's say it's a frog of some kind and there's the genome and it makes a frog and that's what it does.

And so now imagine evolution is sort of searching the space and now there's a mutation.

And the mutation does two things, because most mutations do multiple things.

Let's say we got a mutation that does two things.

It moves the eyes off kilter, right?

And it also has some really beneficial effects somewhere else.

You know, it helps with some other things.

Most mutations are pleiotropic, so it's a reasonable conjecture.

If your animal is the hardwired kind, the eyes are in the wrong place, nothing works,

evolution never gets to explore the positive benefits of this other mutation because the thing's going to be dead.

It's just not a workable animal anymore.

The fitness is very low.

It's gone.

And so most, if you think about these kind of hardwired things,

It's the same when I first, you know, 100 years ago when I first heard about how evolutionary algorithms are supposed to work, this idea that I've got a system that does something, I'm going to start throwing random changes in.

Anybody that's written any code, are you crazy?

Of course everything's going to get worse, not better.

That's never going to work.

Imagine a different... Now, of course, it works, but it takes massive amounts of time, and there's all these difficulties about evolving complex things.

Now imagine what we actually have.

The actual... And I'll explain the biological example.

You have a tadpole, and the tadpole has to move all of its organs, craniofacial organs around to become a frog.

So the jaws have to come out, the nostrils move, the eyes move forward, like everything, all this stuff moves around.

And you could have a hardwired animal in which every...

Every organ moves in the right direction, a particular distance, and that's it, right?

And that's your hardwired thing.

That actually is not how animals work.

So if we, and so what we did a few years ago is we made what we call these Picasso tadpoles.

The idea is you make these tadpoles, everything's in the wrong place.

The eyes are on the back of the head, the mouth is off to the side, the nostrils are up here, like it just scrams, like Mr. Potato, everything's scrambling.

So if it was a hardwired system, then all of these things would move the traditional amount in the traditional direction and everything would be way off because you're starting in the wrong spot.

Instead what happens is that all of these organs move in novel paths and they keep moving and sometimes they overshoot and have to come back, but they keep moving until they build a correct frog face and then they stop moving.

So now that system, so what the genetics actually gives you, it doesn't somehow give you a hardwired set of movements, what it does do

is give you an error minimization scheme that can progressively deform the system until the error from some sort of set point, and we've been studying what the set point is, we can talk about that, until the error from that set point gets to an acceptably low level.

So what you have here is a competent set of craniofacial organs that are going to move around and get to where they need to go, even if they start off in the wrong position.

So now look at what happens with evolution, right?

You got your mutation.

The eyes and the jaws now are off in the wrong place.

But now you've got this benefit somewhere else.

The thing is, the eyes and the jaws are going to get fixed.

You don't need to worry about that because they're going to they know where they belong.

They're going to get there even though they start out in the wrong position.

So that negative aspect of that mutation gets hidden from selection, for a while anyway, because eventually it'll catalyze into

Into the genome itself, but for a while, it gets hidden from selection, allowing evolution to explore the benefits of the other benefits of that mutation.

So, so here's all in summary.

Here's, here's what this means.

The fact that you have competent some units and they're competent morphologically, they're competent physiologically.

We can talk about what that means.

The fact that they're all competent means that.

the fitness landscape is much less rugged.

It's much smoother.

It means that the effects of mutations are much more linear, meaning that you can examine each consequence independently

because the other consequences can be masked by the local environment being off, it doesn't matter.

Things still get where they need to go and connect and so on.

So it makes the search process way more easier by

by allowing you to, and it gives you patience.

It means that evolution doesn't have to solve every problem at once.

You don't have to wait until you find a mutation that gives you a positive impact and leaves the eyes where they need to be.

You don't need to wait for that.

You can grab the first mutation you find that gives you the positive impact because the eye thing will get taken care of because those subunits are confident.

So it raises the IQ of the whole system.

The search becomes a much

A much smarter search, it has some patients, it's able to see linearly instead of sort of highly mixed up all of the consequences of these mutations, and it smooths the fitness landscape.

So I think when you can count on your components to do some of the heavy lifting, you don't have to micromanage all of it.

the evolutionary search gets massively more efficient.

And now it starts to become a little more plausible that we actually see this, you know, this amazing biosphere actually evolved by a process of random mutation.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So in that same paper, you talk about random mutation, but then you also describe this kind of modularity of gene groups and the possibility of entire gene families

like the Hox cluster duplicating and driving the major evolutionary transitions.

Is this a sort of non-random process, sort of ergodicity breaking with perhaps like non-linear effects when these entire clusters?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I hesitate to say too much because I don't think much is known there that I can say definitively.

I think that this whole issue of random and non-random mutations is very controversial, obviously.

I suspect that there is a notion of

of evolutionary search that's not quite blind.

So people often will argue, you know, either they, most people nowadays say evolution is completely blind.

You know, it just, it makes these mutations, whatever happens is not because of any directionality in the search space.

And then, you know, you've had people who think that it's directed towards a specific outcome.

I think there's a sort of in-between scenario where it's definitely not directed in the sense that

can see far forward in the search space but it doesn't have to be completely blind in that maybe what it has and this this comes out of some discussions i've had with both chris fields and richard watson that that maybe instead of a point in fitness space what you really have is a little bit of a vector you have almost like a comet trail right and then it gives you a little bit of um

a little bit of information about direction and about, you know, and you can imagine, I mean, I can sort of design in my head an epigenetic system of marking things on the DNA that give you a little bit of information.

Well, what was this allele last time?

So that you can sort of say, well, I've been turning this knob in this direction and things are going well, so maybe I want to turn it some more.

That kind of thing.

And this is totally made up.

I'm not saying that we know that biology actually does this.

Maybe it doesn't, and maybe synthetic biology, maybe we implement this for the first time, we engineer it.

But I think it's possible to make a system that does that.

And maybe collections of genes and some of the complex chromatin interactions

Epigenetics that go on, maybe they're part of that process, but this is this is total conjecture at this point.


SPEAKER_04:
So, Sarah, I may have a question, but I'm going to use my moderators privilege here and just ask, do you think that this vector driven mutation could be perhaps driven by active inference?

Some kind of vector between exploration and exploitation happening.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and so one of the things that we have talked about and that I'm going to write after this next thing is really on this idea that maybe the whole evolutionary lineage of a particular species

the animal or plant or whatever it is, maybe that's an agent as well, just stretched out massively over space such that each at any given point in time, all of the existing examples of that species are in fact hypotheses about the space, right?

And that what you're doing is you're constantly generating genomes

as hypotheses.

And some of those genomes are proven to be some of those hypotheses are proven good and some are not.

And then the next sort of the next set of genomes is not completely random, but it's in some way part of this part of the active inference of this giant sort of virtual age.

Right.

So I think there's a story to be told like that, but it's way more hand waving than details at this point.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, sir.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, my comment is now maybe a little bit stale, but I think I'll put it out there anyway, just for the sake of saying something concrete, because a lot of this feels a bit abstract.

And I'm hoping I'm even remembering this anecdote right.

But I remember learning that some gene, once upon a time, that gave us an extra rod or cone in our eye, allowed us better color reception, also was the same gene that shut off our ability to make our own vitamin C.

And if that's correct, if I'm remembering that correct, that's such an interesting example of.

Yeah, of course, it's an example of the of the fact that genes do multiple things, but but it was kind of like, isn't that coincidental?

You know that that this.

that that gene is doing, you know, both something for the eye, but then also making it so that you can get your own vitamin C, you know, by looking at fruit.

And I just thought that was, that kept coming to me as an example of what you guys are talking about.

But it's stale, sort of.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Sarah.

And sorry for making your comments stale.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah sort of following on it's this you have this idea of like um a goal space or a teleological space in a way that's really interesting and then with that exploit or explore you i wonder if there's a time when there's there's there's um a thought about when things are very directed and of course our western thinking we we tend to think about a nice pointed cone

um where we go into the future we because we sculpt the world around us we maybe have like a distinctive trajectory because we're kind of we're constructing our world more and more which is probably part of our problem to make it the way we want it to be um whereas particularly if you look at indigenous cultures they would have you know a cyclical the more cyclical approach which would go through seven generations or different levels of generations and would be a tune-in

the environment and i'm kind of curious whether and again this might be where we don't really know but is there a point at which there's a generally trying to come back uh or maintain in the allostasis the kind of the cyclical sort of pattern that is where we want to go to and is there a time when it's like okay we're we're branching out now like we've made a jump and we're going to try and

inscribe our environment at different scales from the body out to sort of now maintain some new kind of steady state attractor and how that might fit with this.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah i mean i think i i think you're absolutely right and that some future version of this is going to have to uh be able to deal with goals that are not only not static meaning they're cyclical but also um goals that are themselves you know let's say second order goals like like my goal is is it's a derivative my goal is to get better at something it's not a particular level that i'm looking for but i want a particular slope of

some variable being you know a particular right so something like that so so you're absolutely right i i started out with the simplest you know this is sort of the hydrogen atom of this thing so i started out with something very simple that it's homeostatic as in your your goal is a is to achieve a particular region in whatever space you're solving problems in

be that morphous space or physiological space your goal is to find that region and sit there and and that of course is not all there is to life obviously that's just the first you know kind of step i just did that for simplicity because i want to tackle everything at once and and there needs to be a lot done here before we get to that point um but yeah you're absolutely right your your goal state in that space may not be a point it may be some interesting you know bigger bigger bigger shape you know and this thing and and i just want to i'm going to say something about

These goal spaces, because I think it's, it's, it's interesting to point this out.

So, um.

1 of the in this in this, this all came out of a meeting on diverse intelligences and so it was the 1 thing I've been thinking about is what.

What is intelligence and what are these agents actually trying to do?

And.

Okay, so so we have lots of examples of.

problem-solving in three-dimensional space, right?

So you've got crows and monkeys and everything else, and they're running around and trying to solve problems by moving around in three-dimensional space.

But all the different subunits of bodies are solving problems in other kinds of spaces.

So we talked about morphospace.

So if you are an eye in the head of a frog, you are working in a space of possible configurations of where you are relative to everything else.

and you are trying to move and act in a way that is going to acquire, to a particular region of morphous space that describes the correct frog head, that's where you're trying to land.

There's also a physiological space, so I'll just give you a simple example that we found recently.

So these flatworms, these planaria,

you you take these planaria and you throw them in barium okay so a solution of barium now uh what happens is the barium is a non-selective potassium channel blocker it it blocks all the potassium channels all the cells freak out their head their heads literally explode right over overnight you know their heads just degenerate they're gone if you take those planaria and you leave them in fresh barium over the next you know 10 20 days what they will do is they will build new heads

that are completely barium insensitive.

Couldn't care less.

No problem at all.

They live in barium, which is fine.

So we asked the simple question, and not because the answer has to be this, but just because that's the tool that was available.

We asked the simple question, what is transcriptionally different about barium-adapted heads from normal heads?

So what genes are differently expressed in these heads?

And so what you find out is that out of tens of thousands of genes that these planaria have,

they managed to regulate a very small number on the order of a couple dozen that allow them now to do their business despite the fact that potassium is no longer usable for them.

So now this is incredible because think about the problem that they're solving.

In my head, I always visualize like one of those nuclear reactor control rooms with buttons everywhere.

So each button is a different gene.

What are you going to do?

You have a physiological stressor.

You can't pass potassium.

Everything's going to happen.

you have some tens of thousands of genes that you could turn on and off.

The combinatorics are astronomical.

You don't have time to try them all.

You don't even have time for gradient descent.

You don't reproduce fast enough.

It's not like bacteria where you could say, well, they're all random, and then somebody will survive and repopulate ahead.

They don't divide that fast.

So you don't have time for any kind of evolutionary explanation.

Within some small number of days, you have to hone in on a small number of genes

knowing that if you just start randomly flipping them up and down, you're going to make things worse long before you make them better.

You're going to kill everything off.

You just randomly start.

So now the other important fact about this is that planarian never see barium in the wild.

So planarian, there's no evolutionary history of being good at surviving in barium because they don't see barium.

So now to me, this is an amazing example of problem solving in a high dimensional virtual space.

You've got this, you've got this, um,

physiological space and your problem is, your problem is physiological, your effectors are transcriptional largely, although of course you have physiological effectors too, but you're trying to walk in this space and you have to somehow map, it's unbelievable how they do this, you somehow have to map your effectors in transcriptional space

to what's happening to you in physiological space and then rapidly get to a workable region.

So that gives you an idea of what we're talking about, right?

These spaces can be transcriptional, physiological, all kinds.

And these things, and they solve their problems.

And like you pointed out, the correct, the thing you're trying to achieve may not be a point, it's certainly not a point in that space, but it may not even be a static area.

It may be some sort of, I would like to sort of wander in this, you know, kind of weird loop.

That's my goal, right?

Is to, you know, is to wander in some sort of weirdly shaped attractor.

Yeah, we'll get to that.

This is the just, you know, first step.


SPEAKER_00:
Just one question following up from that, just before Sarah.

So if I'm right, what you're saying is gradient descent, because that would have to come from where you are and slowly keep incrementing, there's somehow some goal states.

I mean, maybe there's some evolutionary history, even if it's not barium, something like barium, but somehow it's not only going from...

adjacent possibilities, it's somehow jumping ahead.

Is that what you're saying?


SPEAKER_01:
So the first thing I'm saying is that I don't have any idea how it works, right?

So I am not claiming I have a good model for what's going on here.

But I think you're onto something, which is that I think, and I think we talked about this a few minutes ago, which was abstraction and generalization.

I think you're exactly right.

I think what the system is able to do is to say,

Okay, I don't know what this barium is, but I've been terribly depolarized before.

It was an epileptic, you know, kind of a thing.

And this is an awful lot like that.

So I'm going to generalize what just happened to this other thing that I do know how to deal with, right?

And I'm going to move in that direction.

So that's my gut feeling.

I don't have a solid model for this.

That's not been proven in any way.

But I have a feeling that that's where the answer is going to be.

It's going to be that it's able to do this because it is able to recognize this physiological problem as an instance of a larger class of things for which it does know how to do.

And I think that when we talk about intelligence for all of these agents, what we're really saying is it's your ability to navigate these various spaces efficiently and without getting trapped in local minima that kill you.

Right.

Being being able to step temporarily.

You know, it's that patience.

It's that it's that being able to step away from the direct line to your goal to then come around and.

And again, I have, sometimes when I talk about this, I have a picture of this, there's a fence, and there's a couple of dogs on either side of the fence, and they're just like, you know, trying to get at each other, right?

There's a hole in the fence four feet away.

So they could do it.

The problem is it temporarily requires you to get away from, get further from your goal, right?

So that ability, you're trapped in this local maximum, and your intelligence is directly sort of proportional to your ability to temporarily

get further from their goal in order to actually get into a better position later on as part of the IQ.

But I think the other part of the IQ is this kind of generalization, right?

And I think you're right.

I think that's probably what this is going to end up explaining.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Sarah?


SPEAKER_03:
Man, this is great.

This question is probably out of bounds, but if you have any thoughts on it, then great, if not, pass.

I mean, the cone-type diagram and the

the agential teleos that it assumes, I'm just wondering if you feel like there's any applicability to non-agential type phenomena, like complex systems or hurricanes or whatever, because when we're talking about abstraction, yeah, I'm just wondering if you have any thoughts about where that could go, if anywhere.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so the thing I'll say about that, and this is the kind of thing that probably not a lot of people will agree with this, but this is my view.

To say non-agential presupposes that you can draw a binary sharp line between things that are agents and things that are not.

i don't really believe in that i think that's a view that gets us into a lot of trouble by looking at these looking for these sharp lines i think that all there is is a degree of agency and i'm not sure we are we talked about yesterday whether there's such a thing as zero i i don't actually i'm not even sure there's a zero but certainly there are there are things that are very

very sort of non, you know, very, very low levels of agency and, and things that are very high and everything is a smooth continuum.

So now then, so, so then, then, then the question is, okay, so what do you do with hurricanes and things like this?

So I drew, and this will be this, you know, in the next, in the next paper, there's a thing, there's a thing that I call, it's an axis of persuadability.

And it's, it's, it's sort of related to Dennett's intentional scenes in the following way.

There's a continuum, and for any given system, so my claim is that it's an empirical problem.

You can't say whether something is or is not an agent.

Lots of people do.

They'll say, well, that's not an agent.

I think you can't say that until you've done the empirical work, and the empirical work looks like this.

The question is this.

As an engineer, this is very much an engineering perspective, as an engineer, how much work do you have to do

What do you need to know about the system and what kind of work do you have to do to be able to control and predict its outcome?

So I'll just give you a couple of examples.

All the way on the left, you have things that are like mechanical clocks.

So if you're dealing with a system that's like a mechanical clock,

you know you can put it on the left of this diagram because you are not going to reason with it, you are not going to train it, you're not going to be able to punish it, you're not going to be able to rewrite its goal states.

You have to know how it works, and you have to micromanage the hardware, and you have to rewire the physics of it to get it to do something else.

Then moving on from that, you have something like a thermostat.

And with a thermostat, you're also not going to reason with it or punish it, but there is a separate set point.

And if you want the room to be kept in a different temperature range, you don't have to rewire the thermostat.

You can change the set point.

So as in, this has massive implications for regenerative medicine that we can talk about.

The way you relate to the system is quite a bit different.

Now, after that, you might get to systems that have

preferences in the sense that you can actually train them, meaning you can provide rewards and punishments.

They will change their behavior because what you're doing is you're relying on them to be a kind of learning system.

They're able to do associative learning.

So they associate certain things you've done to them with things that they did and they will change their behavior.

So now this means that we can now think of what this means.

You know, humanity has been

training animals for, I don't know, 10,000 years, whatever, with knowing nothing about neuroscience.

It means that you don't actually have to know what's going on inside your system.

You don't need that micro-level hardware information.

All you need is to know that that system has that level of agency that it's

susceptible to this kind of interaction.

And how do you know?

You don't know until you've tried.

So we have no idea.

So one of the things we're doing now with Charles Abramson, who's a

behaviorist scientists, we're actually writing a how-to manual, a how-to paper on if you are given some sort of weird new synthetic system, how do you know where along the, and it actually has a bunch of experiments that you do to figure out where you are along this path.

So you can go further, and there are other systems where you know nothing about

What's inside and in fact, the amount of energy that it takes to manipulate them as tiny, because you can, you can give them reasons as opposed to causes and you can, you can give them information and they will act on this information and do various things.

Of course, sophisticated patients.

So, all that is to say.

the question of where something like a hurricane lands on the spectrum, I think we need to really resist the urge to just make pronouncements, sort of armchair pronouncements about that.

And we need to ask a simple question, which type of manipulation is that system amenable to?

And when you find out, then you know how much agency it has.

Now, I'll give you a simple example of how this works.

And other people have done something similar.

If you think about gene regulatory networks, so gene regulatory networks are a quintessential example of a dynamical system.

It's deterministic and all that.

And one of the things we asked is we simply said, how do we know where on this spectrum it lands?

Let's just try to train it and see what happens.

And it turns out, and this is, so we did this computationally, and now we're sort of starting to do this at the bench.

We simply ask the question, could gene regulatory networks have associative learning capacity?

And that means that you could do interesting things.

You can do Pavlov-Dogg's experiment.

So you have a gene regulatory network.

You have some stimulus that causes it to do something.

So you have your unconditioned stimulus that causes a response.

You have this other thing that's a neutral stimulus that normally doesn't do anything.

you pair presentations of the UCS and the neutral stimulus together.

And after a while, what you might find is that now take away the original unconditioned stimulus and use the neutral stimulus.

And that's now enough to trigger the response because there's an associative memory that formed

in the network right so now we actually tried this in the sense that we we took a bunch of um known gene regulatory networks from literature we made an algorithm that basically checks for associative learning and lo and behold we found two things we found that there are six different kinds of memories that these things can do including associative memories for many of them

And that the biological networks have way more memories than you find in random networks that you would just randomly concoct.

So apparently, either directly or indirectly, selection likes that.

So that's just an example of what you would do under this view with dynamical systems, right?

That you would think, oh, you know, these are trouble cases.

Are they agency or aren't they?

I think that's where we get in trouble because we try to draw a sharp line.

I think the answer is they're somewhere on the line.

They could be way over on the left or not.

And you find out when you figure out what kind of intervention and strategy avails you of the most predictive power with the least amount of effort.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So we talked yesterday kind of about, you know, cells that are contiguous and

There's like connections.

And so this concept of like a shared information making up an individual or like what constitutes the boundary.

You know, if cells are connected via gap junctions, and like you talked about how if there's a calcium molecule inside my cell, I don't know if it's from me or from my neighbor because we share this kind of hole between us.

And so I just wonder if there's some degree of information sharing or some kind of like proximal level, does it have to be immediately contiguous to have that same

like cognitive capacity or or like over a longer distance can this also function like for example if i get some kind of like necrotizing flesh in my leg is my toe necessarily going to know like what's going on with my leg it's going to take a while

for that signal to diffuse over such a long distance.

So where is the boundary or container space for this kind of information sharing that has to occur to make this cognitive individual a whole thing by itself?

So I don't know if you can say a little bit more about that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah.

So I think one thing that I really need to improve in this whole thing for next time is a better visualization, and I frankly don't yet know how to do it because

This way of visualizing it looks very physical.

It looks like what the cone is, that the cone is at the edge of the cells that are connected, right?

It sort of gives this idea that what you're measuring is the actual physical boundary of the system.

And that's not quite what I'm trying to get across because what, and this is actually, let's just think about the cells in the cancer versus multicellularity, right?

Which is a nice example of how this works.

When you have a bunch of cells and they get together and they're going to build a kidney, the size of the, at least the spatial size of that particular agent is going to be roughly the size of the thing they're working towards.

It's going to be the size of that kidney, right?

That's the project they're all working on.

Each individual cell has no idea what a kidney is, but the collective intelligence of that group of cells, it has a

a goal that's trying to build that kidney.

If you try to deviate it from that goal, it will do its best to get back and do it anyway.

So what you would be measuring there is the size of the state that it's trying to achieve, not necessarily where the edges

Now, there's certainly some relationship there, because in this particular example, as you said, what enables the cells to work together is the fact that they're electrically coupled into one and chemically coupled into one giant network.

So there's some relationship, but it's not quite always the edge, right?

You know what I mean?

And the same thing with the individual cells.

It's related, but it's not exactly the same thing.

When one cell defects, so let's say an oncogene turns on, the cell closes all the gap junctions, disconnects from its neighbors, and now that computational boundary is literally just that one cell.

Again, it's not quite at the edge of the cell because if you look at the scale of things the cell is trying to manage, it's a little bit bigger than that because it also really cares about some of the

you know, the nutrients, the wastes, the conspecifics, the prey, whatever else is going on right at that edge, right?

So it's not quite at the cell boundary.

So I just want to make that clear that this diagram isn't meant to be an anatomical, the cone isn't meant to be a map exactly on the anatomy.

It's a cone of the states that the thing is trying to actively manage.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think that the cones were inflicted by us, though.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

But you're absolutely right.

And as soon as you did that, I realized that what, because that has to be right, that those two diagrams eventually have to meet, right?

And so there has to be, there has to be a way to, so I think, I don't know, my visual imagination isn't great.

I have to think a little more about a better way to kind of represent it.

But of course, you're right, those two things have to come together.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I was just sort of following on from what you were saying is,

often as well as useful when we think of entities and processes, I'm maybe scaling up to more psychological scales, but you know, we often think about this is this person, this is what this entity is diagnosed as, and this entity, and it's all kind of, and there's a lot more now moved towards what's the process, but then what kind of processes do we have on that continuum?

Just like we're talking about with the hurricane, you know, you maybe got a static entity, like a rock or,

And then you've got your kind of systems, some of which could be mechanical, like a clock.

But then you sort of hit structures, there's some sort of structure, like a, I don't know, like a skeleton or a network of processes coming together.

Then you get into them, which is what I find really interesting with the work you do is you the sort of nonlinear swarming dynamics, you know, and it's sort of, and I was wondering how,

When you think of, you know, you've got a body and I'm a body and I'm trying to work in my space around me.

So I see things in my environment out there and I can interact to some extent, depending on what my available processes afford me in my structures.

And then there's other stuff inside, which to some extent, I kind of have to let take care of themselves unless I want to tattoo myself or do some sort of

internal mutilation or something.

So I'm curious about how this entity process dynamic going in and out can be thought of.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Well, I want to say a couple of things.

And again, this is sort of going kind of far stream, but I think it might be relevant.

When you say you are this body,

sort of in the sense that we are talking to the verbal entity there, but there are all sorts of other entities there that we're not hearing from that.

And so, so we know that from split brain patients, right?

We know that after a commissurotomy, the right side of the brain, you can communicate with, and it'll give you opinions that the verbal patient, part of the patient doesn't agree with, doesn't know anything about, right?

So really interesting.

I also think about multiple personality, you know, they call it multiple personality disorder, but the reality is, you know, a single brain body system apparently can host any number of distinct behaviors.

and how in how i am i'm not i'm not an expert in this area so i don't know how psychologically deep so some of these other personalities go but enough that you can have a conversation certainly enough that you can have a conversation with them which means they're doing better than all of the ai that we've ever produced right and and they uh and in fact i i read once i forget where it was but there was an interesting comment from a

a therapist who was asked to he was he was he was asked to deal with a multiple personality patient and he was talking about integration and he was you know that the the goal of the therapy was going to integrate because the person's very disruptive for the for the individual and we're going to we're going to integrate all of these into one and one of the personalities said to that patient

integration, you're going to kill me, right?

That's what you're talking about.

I thought you were a doctor.

What are we talking about here?

And so, you know, it was outraged that there was going to be this integration of, you know, of what, at least ostensibly, you've got this entity that certainly passes the Turing test and is not happy about the fact that you're about to integrate it in a way, basically, right?

So,

I think that goes back to this idea that we're an interpenetrating set of selves, and we tend to only hear from the verbal one.

So there's all kinds of other ones in there that are competing and cooperating and everything else.

And the other thing I can say about this, so that's more questions than answers, I guess, but the other thing I think that's interesting is that

You're right in the sense that the one kind of entity that we have direct experience with, which is the verbal sort of one that presumably we share, is completely ignorant of most of the things that are going on there.

And so the space that you're working with nicely coarse grains over all kinds of stuff, your liver function and everything else, you don't need to micromanage all this.

However, there are techniques that will add

axes to your option space so if you would like to learn to uh also consciously control your heart rate or your you know skin temperature or whatever you can do biofeedback there are tools that will enable you to cross that that that boundary and you will now have a new axis in your option space that you never did had before do you want it i don't know there's a good reason why most of these you don't you don't use it's a good to sort of simplify your space

But there was a cool experiment where they measured the temperature between a rat's ears, and they gave it a reward proportional to the difference in temperature.

And so rats readily learned to get their ears to, I think, like five degrees Celsius or something different between their ears to get the reward, right?

That's amazing for a number of reasons.

One is that now you've added an effector in your space that is kind of this physiological blood flow, I don't know how they do it, that you didn't have before.

The other thing, of course, is the credit assignment.

Here you are, you're a rat, and you just got some reward.

And so, well, let me see, why did I get this?

So while my tail is pointing up and my left fingers are clenched and my whiskers are going, which of those things actually were...

this is, we still haven't cracked this in machine learning, is how living things are so good at figuring out what exactly they're being rewarded for, for a small number of trials, actually.

So, but you can, I think, I think you can break through, at least to some extent, and, you know, break through, and actually even further, right?

So there are claims that certain types of, you know, mental practices will have effects on your immune system, for example, right?

So you can, I think you can go pretty far down, right, from

if you wanted to add these kinds of things to your options space.


SPEAKER_00:
Ah, interesting.

Actually, just bouncing on that, going, that's really helpful, actually.

I've not even thought about that.

But that different parts of us ties in with, there's this big push all the time, if you say, about integrate, integrate, integrate.

And actually, when you scale out, because I do a lot of work with multi-service service providers, say, in Africa or other countries where they're, and you tend to find that

any type of transdisciplinary project has the problem about whichever regime of attention or field of practice the voice is in at that time.

And then when we talk about integrating, it normally means they dominate.

What about configuring?

So think about this idea of configuring different fields of practice, i.e.

different ways or different

ways of knowing and also ways the other voices is strategic conversations with communities who don't normally get a voice who know something in the state space beyond what the the actors who've got the job in the agency know and it's this sort of ties in a little bit with what you're talking about here so i think it's quite interesting in the sense of can we con because in a way the biology isn't trying to integrate

is actually configuring and allowing things to be but it has a way to still know their different teleological spaces and either just let it get on with it or yeah knows where and when to get involved i suppose is is the thing yeah i mean so so so i think i think the the


SPEAKER_01:
One way of looking at that is to ask, what are the optimal policies for this binding?

So I'll give you an example.

So in the case of the multicellularity, we say, OK,

Individual cells are pretty cool, but when they connect via gap junctions into a multicellular collective, they can do these marvelous things and they resist cancer and turning off the connection and becoming a cancer cell and going metastatic is bad.

And so what you would really like to do is to reconnect these cells back in.

So the thing is that, right,

tightly coupling individual units into a global entity avails you of all kinds of interesting things, right?

So it raises the IQ of the whole and gives you all kinds of capabilities, fine.

But one of the things that gets lost when you do that is that the larger system now can dominate the goals of the lower system.

And in fact, the larger system may have

very little uh care for the goals of the welfare of the subunit you know when was the last time you worried about all the skin cells you're shedding right you just you know you're going to do what you're going to do and if you lose some skin cells you know no no no problem um so what that suggests is that block you know maximum maximizing out this connectivity into some giant board like uh you know thing is is and and obviously it's been you know it's kind of been attempted on you know on the on the social scale we know how that turns out so

you want to, somewhere in between there, there's an optimal policy, right?

Where I hope that there may not, you know, there may be maybe there's some no-go theorem somewhere that says there is no good policy, but I hope that somewhere in there, there's a good policy that allows us to reap the rewards of appropriate kinds of large-scale organization without a sort of

blanket collectivism that completely sort of, you know, wipes out the needs of the lower level subunits.

So that, I hope, is an empirical question that we should be looking for what kind of policies give us, that optimize the various things we want to optimize.

Josh Vanguard and I planned a grant at one point for this human flood, this human flourishing program somewhere, and I think it's actually an empirical question.

Can we identify the optimal policies that preserve the needs of the subunits and reap the rewards of becoming a greater whole?


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So I learned this word yesterday, egregore.

It's the occult concept representing a distinct non-physical entity that arises from a collective group of people.

And I thought it was really cool.

And I think of this concept of emergence.

So like at what level does this collective kind of body form?

And I don't know if you've read the information theory of individuality paper, uh, by David Krakauer, but we really think about, you know, emergence, you know, like the emergence causing the formation of the collective entity, but then there also has to be like some kind of downward causation at some, some point in there.

Like, so is there, is this some kind of like critical point, like a phase transition that starts to occur or when does that kind of start to happen?

That, that bi-directional information flow.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

For sure.

I mean, this in particular is interesting because I thought about this a little while ago that, you know, especially people who are interested in this kind of stuff, you know, and you can think about the really old concept of group karma, right?

This idea that not only you have your own individual cause and effect that you're causing, but in a strong sense, the group of which you are a part has its own

right, cause and effect that is as real as, so that idea, and I don't know how many thousands of years old that idea is, I think it is an amazingly prescient because in Western science, the science of collective intelligence and this idea that, right, the group can be a swarm of whatever can be an agent on its own is relatively recent, right, that people have started taking that seriously in science.

but i think i think that kind of thinking must have been extremely old because there are these traditions that take it very seriously that the group is not just a heap of stuff but it actually has its own agency in the sense that it can even be the subject of blame and reward in the sense of you know the sense of like rewarded punishment or karma or whatever that that's a very strong view of group agency that i think we've only said you know scientifically we've only um really appreciated recently

I think that's pretty cool actually.


SPEAKER_03:
Random linguistic thing here that egregore, I was thinking about egregious and egregious in my mind is like out of bounds, but yet egregore is not that.

It's the opposite.

It's almost like a group thing.

Maybe somebody else can think about that differently, but I thought that was an interesting conflict.

Yeah, very interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
So I think about this concept of collective karma a lot and really kind of whether or not like I have free will in the in the present, like in terms of am I just some kind of computation like my like, you know, just because I've been doing active inference and so

Am I just my generative model that effectively I can't make any decision because of my model?

Whatever input I'm getting at that moment, I have to decide based on the condition of my model at that time.

I think about collective karma much in the same way and whether or not there exists some agency in the present or not.

If all the things that just made me who I am right now,

have just led ultimately to be where I am.

And in collective karma too, it's like a hurricane.

That group of people caused that hurricane to happen.

Like they created the causes for the collective karma for the hurricane to come.

So I don't know.

It's something that is really intriguing to me.

And, you know, I don't know if you want to maybe elaborate a little bit more on that.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah yeah and and and so and so two two thoughts about that uh one one is that this goes back to this idea of of spaces and the different spaces that each of your um each of the subunits is working in one way that and and after after i drew this cone and i realized that it kind of looked like the the special relativity cone and all that uh some other some other pieces of relativity sort of started started popping into my head and this idea of

deforming the space around you, right?

So if you're a mass, you deform the space around you, which in turn alters your next possible movements and the possible movements of the other masses around you, right?

So by deforming that by your actions, you are deforming the possibility space for yourself, for things next to you, for your components, and so on.

And so one thing that I think happens is that these larger systems

deform the action space for their lower systems so that all they have to do is roll downhill in effect.

And so if you zoom in, so this gets back, and I'm going to connect this back to your point about karma and action and choices and so on.

When you zoom in, all you see is physics, and you say, oh, well, of course that's what it's doing.

That's all it could do.

All the gradients are pointing this way.

That's what it had to do.

But the reason it can do that and still get to some global goal is because the higher-level system has already deformed that space.

So I see this, and I don't know how I'm going to ever draw this.

That's a different story.

But I see all these different levels as deforming their simpler space that they're working in

which then changes the option space for their subunits so that they don't have to be as smart.

This is sort of Dennett's idea of progressively dumber robots all the way down.

That works if each system

makes it so that so that the the lower level systems don't have to do quite as much of the work and there's a stupid example i always go to from from you know from like common everyday life if if if you ever had a friend who tried to stop smoking and they like to smoke at night one of the things they might do is put their car keys somewhere that's really hard to get to why because they know that when they you know at midnight when they want to smoke

they're not going to feel like going hunting for the keys and then they could find, and then that's that.

What they're doing is, who are you doing this to?

You're doing this to your future self.

You're deforming the space for your future self, in that case, consciously.

Of course, we all do things unconsciously too.

But in that case, you're consciously deforming the action space

for your future self in order to uh so that you can be on autopilot at that point right you don't have to have the willpower at midnight that i'm gonna you know not do this it's you've already somebody's already sort of twisted the space for you so that you're just going to get your keys it's just too high of a barrier and forget it so uh right so so i think i think that that that that deformation of these action spaces is a really important way in which um lower and higher level systems relate

The lower level systems simplify the action space for the higher level system because they're competent.

So the higher level system doesn't need all the dimensions.

And the higher system bends the space of the lower system to make things easier to get to.

And that goes back to your other point that you just made about

in the moment of taking actions in the moment that are the consequence of all the pressures that you have set up and other things have set up for you, where, yeah, I see this as, so if we think about will in the sense of, you know, free will or decision making or whatever, I see this, again, this like, four dimensional block where each one of us at any point in time is a slice of it.

And

If you zoom in on that one, that selflet that exists at that one time slice, your free will, so to speak, is limited to none because at that moment on the local scale, you are going to do whatever the local forces have arranged that you're going to do, right?

And this is one, like a simple example is, can you control what your next thought is going to be?

You really can't.

Your next thought is going to be whatever it is.

So at the local level, when you zoom in,

there's no useful sense of freedom there.

However, if you zoom out on the long scale, what is true, I think, is that you can take repeated actions, whether they be practice or whatever they're going to be, you can take repeated actions that alter your cognitive causal structure so that over time,

you have made changes.

And so no, you can't control the next thought you're going to have now, but you can control what percentage of your thoughts are negative or whatever it is,

down the line, right?

So to me, that question of choice and freedom is very much relative to what scale you're asking about.

If you zoom in to the low, you know, to the physics and the sort of short time scale, no, I don't think there's any useful sense of that.

But over the long term, absolutely, because you can make changes both in your environment, your own structure, that will get you to a different place.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is really helpful, actually, to hear it thought about this way.

And just as we were saying there about this sort of almost transcendental or the way we often think of things being excluded, egregious, as Sarah was saying, we need to move beyond

The inner outer, you know, there's an inner thought process and there's an outer world, but the two are linked.

Like we say, so with active inference, the idea is that I don't necessarily purely have a model of those cones in my head.

I buy, I've got an action model for how to draw them.

I haven't got the whole thing that can be dumped down like a data source, but I have a way to do that, which sort of ties in.

And when you mentioned there about looking at the future,

One thing that adds that Active Influence hasn't really done is it talks about, say, the car keys example is the sequence at which something might have to happen to get to the future being disrupted, which is kind of that quantum contextuality idea, whereas normally in Active Influence, they talk about the niche

construction or the niche modification, but not just about modifying itself is modifying the trajectories you might take through that niche, which that, that gives you more near time possibilities for like sculpting what can happen when it can happen.

So that, I think that's quite useful.

I was wondering how,

how you see that relationship to niche construction and models being sort of embedded in the world.

So if systems are really models in the world that we then read or interact with using our structures, how do we link up that kind of cone with the kind of niche construction that's maybe being used in other areas of active inference?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, so that's that's a very difficult question.

I can sort of address a small part of it.

I think at this point and I can, you know, I think I think one of the key.

questions of all of this is to what extent what when we look at systems and we see the dimensions with let's just do the third person case first and then we'll talk about that I think the first person case that you're talking about so when we look at a system and we make a map of its its problem solving in some space and its goal directed activity in some space the question is uh is that in any sense objective in the meaning meaning could we um

Could we make a case that that model of that space is better or the best?

Or is there an infinity of ways to look at it?

And in particular, how does that relate to now the first person perspective of that system itself?

what does the space look like?

It's a little bit like, you know, the whole Umbel thing, right, where you're sort of in some space.

What does it look like to you?

And Chris Fields made a really nice example in our computational meeting a couple weeks ago where he said, imagine a bacterium.

and there's some sugar gradient that the bacterium is in and it wants to have more energy.

So now one thing we are tempted to do is to draw a space whereby rotating its flagella or whatever else, this thing is going to move up the gradient.

But there's something else it can do, which is that it can turn on a gene for an enzyme that lets it use a completely different sugar or let it use that sugar better or something else that solves that same problem with an effector that to us is an entirely different space.

So we look at this and we say, ah, that solution has a problem in physical space and it has a solution in transcriptional space.

If you're a bacterium, is there any sense in which those are not part of the same space?

I mean, I have no idea what it's like to be that bacterium.

One could make an argument that our dissection of these things as two different spaces is totally biased because we're scientists and we like to look at things.

That to the bacterium, both of those are effectors that live together.

That's kind of a mix.

It's almost like, you know, it's almost like you can ask about some sort of PCA, right?

If you have principle component analysis where you're learning about your world and you're going to end up with a picture of what the axes are.

that don't necessarily make any sense to us looking at the system, right?

You find, you get these components that, you know, these control knobs, and we look at it and say, what the hell is, you know, what is it doing?

But to the system, those are efficient ways to build an axis.

And people like, you know, Robert Printner and Don Hoffman have these models of these cognitive systems from scratch sort of building these worlds, these virtual spaces for themselves, right?

That you don't actually know what spaces you're in.

So I think there's a research agenda there, which is, can we build some sort of appliance, meaning some sort of, I don't know, machine learning thing or something that will try to extract these in a, I'm not going to say unbiased, but at least unsupervised manner that can we build an agency detector?

Can we build something that looks at a system and says,

I tell you what, if you assume this axis, this axis, and this axis, then I can paint you a really efficient search strategy that will allow you to predict what the system is going to do next.

Because we could view this as problem solving in this space, right?

And maybe it generates a palette of

solutions like that.

And there's one that's head and shoulders above the others.

And you say, fine, that's my scientific theory of what's going on here.

And maybe that works.

I don't know.

So that's a research kind of agenda for the future.

And the other cool thing about that is if you do that, of course, one thing you might want to do is then build a more sophisticated

synthetic intelligence by basically closing the loop and sticking that module inside the agent itself.

And here's why I'm saying that.

All animals, I think, at least past a certain point,

certainly have agency detectors.

This is why we love our visual systems, love symmetry and so on, because you really want to know, looking out into the world, you really want to know what are the passive elements and what are the other agents that might eat you, that you might communicate with, that you might convince them to do something else.

So we are constantly estimating

you know, theory of mind, right, and agency for all the things we're looking at, because that helps you get around.

You need to know if it's a rock or if it's something that's just going to come eat you no matter what, or if it's a conspecific that you might actually lie to or, you know, have a relationship, or whatever you're going to do, some sort of complicated interaction, right?

So we're all trying to gauge that.

And probably what one of the things that kind of module also does

is turn inwards to tell you stories about yourself and the reason we know that exists is because of confabulation so just as a simple example as this is a modern they're older examples from the brain split brain studies but the modern example there's um there's somebody who's got an electrode and this was this is an actual experiment that was done he had epilepsy or something and they put an electrode in their brain in his brain and it happened to land in an area that when you stimulate it it stimulates laughter the person just starts laughing right

So you're sitting there, so this person is sitting there talking to, you know, having a serious conversation with the doctor, somebody off-scene pushes the button, person starts laughing, the doctor says to him, why are you laughing?

Zero percent of the time, the answer is, geez, I don't know, that was super weird, I was all serious, and suddenly my mouth starts laughing.

That never happens.

What happens is the person says, oh, I came up with a funny story, and I was just thinking of a funny thing that happened, right?

What happens is, and this has been, you know, I'm not the first person to point this out, that we are massively unaware of lots of stuff that goes on in there.

And we have a module, apparently, whose job it is to tell coherent stories about what that all adds up to.

So not just turning outwards to see what kind of agents we see out there, but actually to look inwards and come up with plausible explanations that no, you're not an automaton because somebody pushed a button.

That's not a preferred explanation.

The preferred explanation is you're an agent, you come up with funny stories, and sometimes they made you laugh.

That's a better explanation.

So if we had such a thing, we could imagine already piece by piece starting to put this together into what might be a fairly sophisticated cognitive system that has a bit of metacognition and a bit of, much like all of us, sort of faulty access to what it is that we're doing and all these kinds of interesting things.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So I'm going to kind of take it back to this time-space cube because I just really can't wrap my mind around the fact that if you slice up the cube, I think about it like a confocal Z-stack.

So if you have a slice, that's the present.

If I can't change this slice, you can take a projection of the confocal image and look at the whole picture.

If I can't change this one slice, how is it that I'm going to change the future?

All the slices up until this point lead me to make this current existing slice.

And then do I can I change any point in the future?

I don't see how that's possible if I can't change the point in the present.

So are we just like I think about we had Shanna Dobson and Chris Fields on and we were talking about expressing, you know, compressing and expanding time and space and just

time in all kinds of contexts.

Like, is it even a construct or how does it work?

And like non-Archimedean time and all that stuff.

So I don't know what, if you want to maybe unpack that a little bit for me, because I'm just not kind of seeing the possibility of this changing the future without being able to change the present.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, totally possible.

And so, for sure, I'm not going to try to make the argument that we have a mature theory of free will of that kind.

I don't think we do.

And I think you're absolutely right in that that is, in fact, a really critical point.

If your freedom in each slice is zero,

then many times zero it's still zero right so totally totally true i i think we can make two moves and again this is this is super early i you know i'm not claiming this is in any way gonna survive uh you know careful careful thought into the future um i think we can make two shifts one shift is that i think it's uh again uh and then that you know i'm like a broken record with this stuff but but i think i think that binary um

This binary distinction between you have freedom or you do not.

I think that's wrong.

So I think what you have, it goes by amounts.

So you may have very little, you know, if you're a mechanical clock, you have very little.

And if you're some other type of living thing, you may have more and then you may have more than that.

So then what you have is, and this is super, super amateurish, but just to kind of visualize, what I see is the kind of addition that you get in calculus, where you start with extremely tiny things that are kind of zero, but not really, and eventually they add up to something, right?

That's how I see it.

I think that what you have at each point is a teeny tiny amount, and if you look close, basically it's an epsilon that's not worth talking about.

It's basically you don't have any.

But it isn't quite zero.

And over time, that mental effort, whatever that is that you put into, you know, working on your free will or on your kindness or whatever you're working on, over time, it integrates into an area, even though you're integrating infinitely thin strips.

Like, that's the vision that I have in my head, that if we just do away with the fact that it's actually zero, that I don't think it's actually zero.

then you can build up something over time and you can and you can magnify and if you know i'll say one more thing which if we're gonna if we're gonna abuse physics like this right which is i mean i realize this is all like completely informal and whatever if we're gonna abuse it um i'll make i'll make one more one more analogy if you think about what is the

What is a minimal level of agency?

So, so, so sometimes people ask me, like, well, is there a 0 on your on your continue?

Right?

Is there an actual 0?

And like, what's the minimum?

What is the smallest?

Okay.

If you're going to pick, if you're going to design the absolute minimal.

Piece that still has some non 0 agency.

What does it need?

I feel like it needs 2 things.

It needs some minimal amount of decision making that isn't obviously caused by local causes, right?

It needs at least something that reaches outward in terms of space or time or complexity or something that isn't obviously a locally determined necessity.

That's one.

And the second thing it needs is some amount of goal-directed activity, something that looks like

A goal directed activity.

So so once you've said that, it seems to me that that individual particles already have this right?

Because because quantum indeterminacy gives you the 1st, 1 and least action principles give you the 2nd.

So you've already got that.

And so now, when you so, so I think and again, this is amateurish as far as the physics goes, but my gut feeling is that.

there isn't a zero, that you already start with some minimal amount, and now you can do one of two things.

So you've got these particles.

You can do one of two things.

You can make a rock out of them, so you aggregate them in one way, which basically gets rid of all those nice properties, and it ends up having very low agency.

It just aggregates all of it in a way that doesn't do anything useful.

Or if you're alive, you can amplify those properties and end up further down on the continuum.

So that's kind of my fuzzy story at the moment is that I think we start off at non-zero, and then you can either stay there if you don't have the right organization, or you can amplify the hell out of it and get to be more agential.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Thanks.

I definitely think that non-zero is the right answer.

So we've got maybe like 15 minutes left and, you know, I just, there's some closing thoughts, some room for some last minute questions.

Sarah or Steven, do you have any last minute things you want to ask?


SPEAKER_03:
No, my head is sufficiently exploded.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, no, I think that was a nice... I mean, I think there's a lot to think about because we've covered an awful lot of territory.

But I think it's... I was interested to see that you're bringing the thingness and I know Carl Friston talks about that.

So I suppose one last bit would be, would you call yourself...

a non-dual monist in the way that Carl sort of talks about that idea or is that something a bit different or maybe not even relevant in this context?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's a good question.

So I hesitate to put a name on it for two reasons.

Number one,

everything that we've talked about so far has been very much from a functional third person perspective so so we haven't really touched the the so-called hard problem of consciousness or what so in order and the thing is nothing that i've said touches this question of why is it like to be something that's one of these systems right so from that perspective

assuming that we believe, I mean, some people, you know, we'll say that that's a non-problem and that there is no such thing and then whatever, but I, I'm not a hundred percent convinced of that actually.

And from, so, so, so there are that, that I do think there's a hard problem and I don't have anything that addresses it.

And so, uh, I don't know, you know, what camp that puts me in.

The other, the other thing is that, um, I have a lot of, um, sort of, uh,

panpsychist sympathies in the following way.

So I think that if you scale down... So one reason people don't like panpsychism is it means that you think that rocks have hopes and dreams like the rest of us.

So that's obviously not what I'm saying.

The reason people go to that extreme is because they've scaled down the structures that are needed for agency, but they haven't scaled down the expectations.

So yes, it's silly to think that rocks have the same hopes and dreams that we do.

However, if you scale both sides of the equation, I'm not at all sure why.

Again, if you're not into binary classifications, it is conscious or it's not.

That I think is definitely wrong.

So if phenomenal consciousness is a kind of...

continuum two i don't see any reason why there couldn't be a tiny bit of something that's super hard for us to imagine because we're used to a much a much bigger level of perception and consciousness that that isn't associated with a lot of other systems they'll be normally that you know that the people who normally work in cognitive science would never buy as as as as having consciousness so so so i have a lot of you know kind of sympathies on that front mainly because i don't buy this binary distinction um and we could talk about this actually interesting

i don't even i and i'll tell you why a lot basically um bioengineering and the kinds of things that are possible now are they they are really dissolving a lot of things that seem to be uh sharp categories before and i'm not even sure at this point that um the distinction between first person and third person knowledge is even sharp and and i'll just i'll just draw you a simple picture and i preface this by saying i'm i i made a picture of this and i sent it to a um

a well-known philosopher, and he said it was horrible and not useful, but we'll see what you think.

Imagine that you're looking at, there's a brain and there's some electrophysiology being done, some electrodes stuck in there, and it's being processed, and you're on the outside, you're the scientist, you're on the outside, you're looking at that data.

Uncontroversially third person, right?

You have no idea what it's like to be that subject.

You are studying some signals that come off of that.

Now, what we do is we change the scenario a little bit, and what we do is we take some of those interfaces that, you know, they have these interfaces for the blind that either go on your tongue or they go sometimes in your retina, but basically they turn camera signals into something that's directly plugged into your brain with electrodes, okay?

So now we take that setup, and instead of the camera, we plug it directly into the electrophysiology apparatus.

So now what you're receiving is you're receiving a heavily processed signal, but it's coming directly from that brain into your brain.

And what's interesting is that people who use these kind of sensory augmentation devices, they will eventually report that it's just like seeing.

They learn to get around like the electric lollipop.

It's this thing you stick on your tongue, and it shocks your tongue in a way that maps onto the pixels of a camera, right?

And they say, oh, it's just like seeing.

So, okay, so now you've moved.

So, you know, it's like...

It's sort of, you know, third person, but, you know, it's maybe like 2.5 person or something.

And then you can do another experiment.

You can say, well, what we're going to do is instead of using all this, like, heavily, you know, all this electronics and processing in between, we're just going to connect the brains.

And we can do this.

And the reason we know we can do this is that there are conjoint twins whose brains are in fact connected.

so that there's no sort of clumsy electronic interface in the middle.

The brains are directly connected.

And so now, he said, OK, so if my brain is now connected to this other person having the experience,

It's sort of, is that still third person?

And then you ask the question, yeah, but in your own brain, so some people say, ah, that's an aberrant, you know, that's an aberrant case.

But in your own brain, you've got pieces of the brain that have to talk to each other.

You're not an indivisible monad of some type, right?

You are a bunch of pieces that also have to talk to each other.

So the left side has to talk to the right side.

In fact, the front talks to the brain.

You are anyway pieces of the brain having to talk to each other.

And somehow that ends up being first person.

So now what we've just done is built a continuum where you can smoothly, and we can fill in anywhere between these two systems.

I can fill in as, you know, sort of finally as you want.

And you can smoothly move from first-person experience to third-person science because the bioengineering tells you that you can do it.

So I'm not even sure that's a, you know, I'm not even sure that's a distinction.

So I, you know, it's hard to say.

Anyway, that's a long-winded answer to your question.


SPEAKER_03:
Wow.

I was going to ask one question, now I'm going to ask another one.

This makes me think, you know, like related to core screening, related to layers and levels of different organisms, like it just, what you, the kind of example you just laid out, you know, makes me question whether you can even stratify in that way or whether it makes sense to stratify in that way.

but let me go back to um something we didn't cover and and i i heard it on your podcast and um you ended with a question related to moral philosophy um or ethics i guess not even i don't know the distinction there but yeah um i mean when you know if you're coming from the perspective of not believing in a binary uh between

You said it better than I did living, non-living, whatever, like agent versus not.

And then you're making things like xenobots.

It's like that kind of if that's if you held those two views of not believing in the binary, then there it seems like there really wouldn't be an ethical question.

And so I'm wondering where you're where you're thinking is along that.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah no no i think i think there's definitely an ethical question uh and and i think it's not quite what we think it is but and i'll tell you what it is but let's just let's just take a step back so so long before anybody made xenobots

We made humans, right?

The old fashioned way.

And so this is like, you know, then it's a competence without comprehension, right?

So we have no idea how it worked.

But for, you know, hundreds of thousands of years, we made other humans.

And so we take care of them as best we can, most of the time, sometimes not really very well, you know, so we already did that.

Then we make all sorts of animals in terms of food production and other things.

We make hybrids, so we make mules that are animals that never existed before.

We've made new plants.

So the first thing that's really critical and often the reason I'm sort of sensitized to all this is that people always say,

oh my god, you're making Xenobots, it's a new, like, let's not forget what we've already been doing, right?

And let's be super clear that this is a massive problem with the food industry, right?

Long before we get to worrying about Xenobots, there's all kinds of things that we need to fix.

So I just want to be, you know, I kind of want to be clear that we've already been making animals and, in fact, other humans for which we sometimes take good responsibility and sometimes we don't.

I think this absolutely raises an ethical problem, and the ethical problem is the following.

When we go to synthetic biology and bioengineering kinds of seminars, there's usually now a session that's about ethics, and the session goes like this.

Somebody will show a brain organoid made of human cells,

And someone will say, oh, my God, that you shouldn't be doing that.

And somebody else will say, well, let's just see how much like a human brain it is.

And then people spend a couple hours arguing about whether it is or is not enough like a human brain that they need to worry about it.

And maybe they end up saying it's fine or maybe they end up saying it's not fine.

I think the much bigger issue is that whether or not something looks anything like a human brain is a very poor guide to how much you need to worry about it.

And in the past, the way that we would figure out whether or not how much moral responsibility we have for a particular system went roughly like this.

You would sort of look at it and if it was squishy and warm

you would say, yeah.

And if it was metallic and, you know, and it came from an assembly line, you'd say, do what you want.

No problem.

Right.

So, so two, two things used to be a guide.

And even that we didn't do so well, we can obviously with those principles, but, but, but two things that used to be a guide were, where did it come from?

Did it evolve or was it designed?

And what is it, what is it made of?

And, and it was a, and that was pretty good, right?

You could,

Because if it was evolved, you could look on the tree of life and you could say, it's a worm.

We don't need to fill out any forms when we do these experiments.

Or you could say, it's a frog.

I need to fill out a lot of forms before we can do experiments.

Then that's, in fact, how it works.

Because you know something about that lineage and you make some sort of guesses about where things are.

And then if it's an octopus, people really don't know what to do and so on.

all of that is going completely out the window, right?

So in the next, I don't know, couple of decades, we are going to be surrounded by, and this is another thing that I'm writing on,

the option space of possible creatures.

We're talking about hybrids, cyborgs, hybrids.

There's a million different ways to recombine evolved, designed, living, non-living, and software agents into new forms that have never existed before.

So what something looks like is no guide to what the cognition is.

Where it came from, meaning evolved or designed, is going to be a bad question because half of the stuff we're building with is now evolved and so on.

All of the things, you know, it's just a machine versus, oh, but you know, it's a nice mammal.

All of that stuff is gonna go out the window.

So to me, the ethical problem is much bigger than just asking about whether something's like a human brain.

What we really are going to need

is a new ethical system for learning how to deal with agents that look nothing like us and that don't look like anything we've ever seen before and yet are going to have all sorts of cognitive capacities.

And we have to let go of categories like machine, like robot, like all these other things that really don't mean anything.

They never did before, but it was fine in the past.

It's no longer going to be useful.

And that's the ethical problem.


SPEAKER_04:
wow uh so great so i'm gonna go stare at a wall and try to integrate this information uh it was a lot um thank you so much for coming on thank you so much yeah this was really fun yeah great great great discussion thank you so much thanks bye
