SPEAKER_00:
hello everyone welcome to act in flab guest stream number 19.1 it's march 25th 2022 and we are here with marco fakin and we are going to be discussing the recent paper extended predictive minds do markov blankets matter so if you're watching live please feel free to put

comments or questions in the live chat, and hopefully we can address them.

And Marco, really appreciate you joining.

Looking forward to hearing about this paper and your lines of research.

So it would be awesome to hear an introduction and take it away.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, hi everyone, so I'm Marco Facchin, I actually am a PhD candidate in Italy, and the paper basically is an attempt to understand what was going on in the active inference literature with the externalism-internalism debate from a philosophical perspective.

So I studied philosophy for the most part, I'm not super mathematically savvy, and I have basically a background in embodied extended cognition, and I stumbled upon the papers by Hoey, Armstead and others, and I wanted to understand what was going on with them.

Markov Blanket talk.

And so I wrote a paper about it to understand what was going on and to try to suggest that maybe that much emphasis on Markov Blanket is a bit misplaced.

And yes, that's it for a general introduction for the paper, I think.

And then I'm here for any question or any doubt or


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, cool.

So maybe I'll just ask some questions and we'll just see where it goes.

For somebody who was unfamiliar with extended cognitive processes or the state of the art, maybe outside of active inference, just what is this area?

How are people looking at it outside of the active inference FEP angle?

And like, what is the contemporary state of that area?


SPEAKER_02:
So, okay, so the extended cognition stuff officially is something that was born out of paper by Clark and Chalmers in the early 2000s, basically.

And their original idea was, as I understand it, at least this, that sometimes at least

you interact with the environment in a way such that part of cognition happens in the environment itself.

So my go-to example is using pen and paper to do math.

When you use pen and paper to do math, you write down partial results, and that scrap of paper is working as a piece of your walking memory.

It's just that it's not inside your brain, it's around you, on your desk, or whenever you're doing math.

And so that was basically the original idea.

And from that, there has been a rich collaboration with people like Richard Minari, suggesting that actually we should think of extended cognitive processes as processes that transform our cognitive capacities.

It's not just

more stuff, more memory, more symbols, but new stuff, new capacities, new symbols, new cognitive processes that take place in the interaction in between the subject and the environment.

So we have that line of research, and then you have a more, say, an active line of research that tends to stress the idea that basically all cognition takes place in the world, interacting with affordances or interacting with your surrounding environments.

But I'm not super expert on that line of research, and the extended mine are a bit more conservative.

So the punchline would be this, that sometimes stuff in the external world really is, in the most literal sense possible, a cog of the machinery that does your thinking.

That is the clearest and most forceful way in which I'm able to put the idea of the extended mind.

And of course, sorry, once you have this idea on the table, the question is, okay, but where does it stop?

Is pen and paper is in, but I don't know, are our cell phones in?

Are all books in here at my left?

You might not be able to see it, but there is a big library with a lot of books I read.

Are all those books part of my memory?

Probably not.

But you need some sort of boundary.

And that's you for Mark of Black, of course.

So I'll leave it like this.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I like this, how you said it was like a cog and it's kind of like cognition.

So it's right there in the word, even though that's a little bit of a wordplay.

And also very interesting about the more is different.

Like we're not just augmenting the computer with a bigger hard drive or more RAM, it truly can be different.

And so I think maybe we could return to this idea of like, what is the space of the adjacent possible for cognitive systems, especially if they compose in these nonlinear ways.

but could you maybe walk us through some of the pieces of the paper?

Like what brought you to the introduction?

What brought you to writing this paper on Markov blankets?

And then what did you sort of weave together in the introduction?

How did you clash them in the middle?

And then where did you leave us at the end?


SPEAKER_02:
So the walkthrough to the paper is something not super sure I'll be able to do, satisfactory at least.

So the first step was to, what motivated me was to try and figure out what was going on between Andy Clark, Jakob Hoey, Ramstad, and Mark of Blankets, of course.

And what I wanted to argue basically was something like this, that even if you set aside the DDD works by Jelle Brunneberg and others, or Menari and Mendeleev,

tend to give you this sort of message like, we have a perfectly fine mathematical concept of Markov blankets, and then a strange concept of Riesling blankets that is a bit mathematical and a bit ontological, and we are not really sure what it is.

Even if you leave this sort of worries aside, what I wanted to say is that the way in which Markov blankets are used for when it comes to discussing the extended mind stuff,

is very limited to a specific application.

But for the extended mind, the usage of markup blankets is not really useful, does nothing of particular value, and tends to give a big headache to the people that are not into active inference.

So I would recommend not using them.

The main argument

I think there is no main argument.

I think I have three arguments that are, well, first, in order to find a Markov blanket, it seems that you must already know what is inside.

If you think about a graph,

There is no way in which I can give you a graph and just ask you, OK, please show me where is the Markov blanket in there.

I need to tell you about which node I'm interested in, right?

So you must already know what is inside.

And when it comes to the mind, the cognitive machinery, knowing what is inside is knowing which are the codes, which will presumably include the brain plus maybe stuff in the environment, pen and paper and whatever.

And if you already know that, which you must already know in order to find the relevant Markov blanket, then intuitively you already know whether the mind extends or not.

And if you already know whether the mind extends or not, you know whether the mind extends or not.

There is no new piece of information to be gained by thinking about whether the mind extends or not in terms of Marco Blanca.

That is the first argument.


SPEAKER_00:
The second one, which is a bit messy... Could I just pause there and make a comment on the first one?

Okay, awesome.

So...

Though the Markov blanket, if only it were like the blankets on our bed and you could pick it up and it was a blanket, whether it was inside the box or around the box or whatever, that's not really how they are defined.

It's really like a co-partitioning of internal and external states with respect to a blanket or a blanket with respect to some other internal and external states.

So the blanket states are the ones that make two other sets of states, internal and external, conditionally independent.

And so it's not that a node can be, even in a purely statistical sense, so without getting into the whole what do they physically map onto, a given node is not like a blanket state or an internal state.

It's a blanket state with respect to some other states because it's part of this partitioning that's co-instantiated at the same moment.

So it's an excellent point where if you know what your system of interests internal states are,

then you can talk about what states blanket them with respect to some other states.

But if the question is about the extended mind and what are the internal states of mind, then there's kind of this catch 22 cat in the hat scenario where if you knew where to even focus, you would have already sort of addressed the question upfront just to sort of unpack that and connect it to some of the other ways we've talked about it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's a great unpacking.

The key word you said, and that I forgot to set, is the system you're interested in.

Why I wanted to focus on this right now, because the extended mind stuff is supposed to be hyper-realistic.

The idea is not that

I mean, we can't read pen and paper as if they were a form of external memory.

That is something you can do, but it's not the claim that interests me, Clark, Menari.

The claim is that, that interests me, Clark, and Menari, is that pen and paper really are, with the capital A of R, really are a piece of memory in the external world.

They are memory in the same sense in which parts of your neural activation or memory system are memory.

That is the irrelevant claim.

So there is nothing observer-dependent or interest-dependent.

It's really a hardcore metaphysics about how the world actually is independently about what you know about.

So that's a point that I should probably have made sooner.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, you made it in the paper with the direction of identification runs from target variables to Markov blankets, not the other way around.

Yeah, great.


SPEAKER_02:
So that's the first argument.

The second one is very muddied and also very dependent on how the detours were on the extended mind and Markov blanket developed.

But the point is basically this, that from the very beginning, that would be probably Huawei's 2016 paper, The Self-Evidencing Brain, the message, look, there are many possible blankets, and we have somehow to choose one, that sort of message got through the literature.

And the way in which Yahweh and others tried to single out the super special blanket among the many possible was to look at self-evidencing in the long run, about keeping yourself close to your set point in the long run.

And their idea, as I understood it,

was to say that, well, the machinery of the mind is identical to the machinery that keeps yourself near your set point in the long run.

And that sounds persuasive from a free energy principle perspective, but it's not super persuasive if you are not very into the free energy principle, because there is a lot of stuff that

keep us alive and kicking in the long run.

Our liver, our guts, our kidneys, and pretty much none of those organs does thinking in an intelligible sense.

And so the worry here that probably is never actually stated in the paper is that we are confusing cognizing in some broad and fuzzy sense with staying alive.

I mean, I have nothing against the claim that living things tend to cognize or tend to behave intelligently.

Plants do behave intelligently, even if very slowly.

Cells behave intelligently.

But I'm not super sure about equating the two.

And that would be probably my second point.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, let's stay on this because that's also a great point.

So if not one in the same as staying alive, what other perspectives on cognition might there be?

Like what is thinking other than staying alive?

Or what is it that, for example, the neurons and the glia are doing that the cartilage in the knee is not doing?


SPEAKER_02:
Prima facie processing information would be a decent answer if you take DNA.

Or at least sensory information.

So that's the question I'm struggling with right now.

And my two cents would be this.

That we have a big problem because...

Not because we don't have a definition of cognition, but because we have too many definitions of cognition.

We have too many research programs telling us what cognition is.

So you have DDD Classic, Cognitive Science.

What is cognition?

Well, symbol manipulation.

Then you go with Deconnexionist.

What is cognition?

vector transformation, sub-symbolic computation.

Then you have the inactivists.

What is cognition?

Sense-making slash autonomy.

The geological psychologists.

What is cognition?

Well, interacting skillfully with affordances and so on and so forth.

And my big problem is that no one here is clearly wrong.

No one is obviously dead wrong, and that thing clearly cannot be conditioned.

And so what I think I would suggest is a sort of pluralism.

about cognition.

Cognition is not a single thing.

It's not like dancing.

What is dancing?

Well, moving your arms.

Yes, sometimes, but sometimes dancing might even be staying still in a certain piece of art.

There might be some regimented staying still as a part of dance.

And that would be the analogy.

So something that gets done in a variety of ways

none of which in a fashion seems to apply to kidneys, livers, cloves, and that sort of things.


SPEAKER_00:
If I can layer...

One more sort of and or.

There's the experience and the phenomenology of us as ourselves and as people.

And then there's sort of the behaviorism or at the very least animal behavioral sciences or just behavioral studies in general, which is like from the outside looking at a system.

And so there's this...

gap between like us doing the thinking about cognition

and the experience of that thinking about cognition.

And then the question about recognizing cognition in other people, in children, in non-humans, et cetera.

And so like, I really liked how you laid out, like there's the symbol, the sub-symbolic, inactive, and then no one disagrees.

No one is saying that bacteria make bad decisions on the whole.

They're here, aren't they?

And no one's saying like a tree doesn't have a metabolic coupling with a fungus.

And no one's saying that the fungus doesn't diffuse signals.

But then the aspects of these systems that people focus their regime of attention on and where they choose to start their talks and what they decide to talk about and what experiments they design, that frames the discussion about cognition.


SPEAKER_02:
That's a wonderful way to put it.

And I'm a bit sad because the paper about cognition has already been submitted.

If I hadn't submitted it already, I would have stolen the framing part because it's wonderful, they said.

That said, so there are two things I'd like to say about that.

So the first one is no one really disagrees.

I'm not sure.

I think that there is some genuine disagreement.

So the hardcore ecological psychologists, I believe, and feel free to correct me if there are any ecological psychologists, really think that cognition is interacting with affordances

stop, and that there is no symbol manipulation going on in the background.

And the classic cognitiveists, I think, really think that cognizing justice manipulating symbols in the background.

So there are genuine disagreements.

What I'm not super sure about is whether those disagreements

are solvable in the sense that you can provide a master argument or even master experiments from which you can just read off, oh, the ecological psychologist was wrong.

Oh, la, la, la.

The classic cognitivist was right.

I think that the best we can do is accept some form of plurality about what cognition is.

And perhaps, but I'm not super sure, we might have to accept that

There may be things that are neither determinately cognitive, neither determinately not cognitive.

I mean, plants do behave, do cope with their environment well.

I'm not entirely comfortable about saying that they are cognizers in the exact same sense in which I am a cognizer.

Maybe it's just because their behavior is very slow compared to mine.

Maybe it's because I have certain cultural prejudices, which, I mean, they exist.

And calling something a cognizer is influenced by your prejudices.

To go back to the early analytic philosopher, pretty much no one thought animals think, and now it's unbelievable.

for someone to have that position.

So there is that, but it's not super thought out.

But the big message would probably be this, put simply.

There might be something of a gray area between thinking with symbols, truly cognitive, and being a rock.

clearly not cognitive, a sort of big gray area in which you have intelligence coping with the environment, coping with the environment well, adaptability, flexibility, but still not be really sure about whether there is some cognition with the capital C going on in there.

And that's the first thing.

Then you also mentioned probably about consciousness,

I'm very scared about that stuff.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so another interesting piece as evidenced by the...

Think about what to say carefully.

Don't want to say that it's a lane we could veer off into, but right.

That is a more purely philosophical discussion, whereas neurobehavioral studies and cognitive science frames itself as science.

And in science, usually we think about like unique explanations, predictions, the ability to design and control and perturb systems.

Is this science?

What kind of science?

What are we looking for here in a cognitive model?

And how do we resolve or accommodate this tension between like unique explanations and predictions, which is the bedrock of one type of science with the call for pluralism that you just made?


SPEAKER_02:
Hmm.

I think that the answer here is do nothing.

In the sense that the call for pluralism is not a very, not a call.

Cognitive science is splintered.

You have everyone doing its own thing in its own lab.

There is cooperation in the sense that, I mean,

the various research groups are not entirely isolated.

It is not the case that people working on mirror neurons know nothing about connectionism or classical computationalism or whatever.

There is some communication.

But on the face of it, what I see as a philosopher looking at science is a splintering of the cognitive science enterprise in a variety of groups.

each with its own peculiar research tradition.

And I think that that is basically fine.

If no one has a strong call or a strong argument or a strong model that does what Newton did for physics and unifies everything under a single banner, plurality is fine.

So there is no goal.

It's more something like, well, that's reality.

Let's try to like it.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm on board with that.

But with this banner, what shape would it be?

Or how would we know it when we saw it?


SPEAKER_02:
have no clue.

We probably would just know it when we saw it, in the sense that we would see a research tradition starting to absorb all others.

We would probably see people trying to demonstrate to us that there is a real and significant equivalence between our

powerful research tradition, uniform research tradition, and all the others.

And probably the winning research tradition, the one that really got cognition, really got thinking, would be able to make some novel prediction that no one else was able to make.

And that would be probably a strong marker that that's the way to go.

If the implicit question is, do I think that the free energy principle is that sort of research tradition?

I'm not sure.

And my answer would probably be a qualified no.

because we do not have right now the proof that is unifying as it wants to be.

It makes big unifying claims, and it might be good in the sense that they may foster cooperation at the very least, so you have at least that pragmatic advantage.

Whether it succeeds in unifying as it wants to unify is still an open question.

And so the appropriate thing to do is to, for me at least, to wait and see.

For others, perhaps, is to pick up your tools and try to unify and show that it really is the right thing or just argue against.

Even negative arguments are useful, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Non-action is an action.

That's true in world knowledge traditions and also in Bayesian statistics.

It can be useful to wait to gather more information.

I wanted to return to what you said earlier about you need some boundaries.

And a lot of this discussion, of course, it's like extended.

How extended?

What is extending and how

what are we looking for with a boundary model in the FEP and ACT-INF world?

Certainly we talk a lot about different kinds of blankets and Bayesian graphs and things like that, but those are not the only ways to think about boundaries.

So just wanted to learn about what are some other ways of thinking about boundaries, cognitive boundaries of different kinds, and what are you looking for in a boundary model?


SPEAKER_02:
not super sure about how to answer.

So my understanding is that Markov Blankets enter into debate as a sort of tool to finally understand what the boundaries of the mind are.

But there are no other big alternative, if not for something said by Chalmers about action and perception being the intuitive boundaries of the mind.

But what I think he had in mind when he said that was something like, look, our intuitive image of the mind is that of something that is squeezed between perception and action.

Something like, we are intuitively predisposed to say that something like the classical cognitive sandwich is true.

We encounter reward through perception and action.

And I'm not really sure whether that sort of boundary would be a boundary in the sense in which Mark of Blanc goes.

would like to be boundaries or are used to play the role of a boundary in the sense of something that individuates a single system and tells it apart from anything else.

The problem, I think, for the extended mind and the need for a boundary is a need fueled by the strong desire not to say that everything counts as a cog in the cognitive machinery.

Why?

Well, because if everything counts as a cognitive-cognitive machinery, then the claim that pen and paper used to do math counts is not a big claim.

It doesn't add much, right?

In order to proclaim, well, X is part of the cognitive system to be meaningful, to be impactful,

there must be things that are not part of the cognitive system.

Otherwise, I mean, you are just claiming, well, there is this thing, which is exactly identical to any other thing.

Not super informative.


SPEAKER_00:
In the paper, you were threading together this question of short and long-term features of cognition, like in the instantaneous action perception, cognitive behavioral timescale, and then the quote, in the long run, where a lot of the arguments rest, like it reduces surprise in the long run or on average in the long run.

And then you talked about like...

jumping into uh it it would force one to count inordinate amount of stuff as a cog in someone's thinking machinery jumping into ponds of water while on fire or shooting at a tiger to avoid becoming the tiger's dinner both contribute to one's prolonged occupation of one's phenotypic states

but neither pawns of water nor guns and bullets can be properly counted as cogs in the thinking machinery.

And I can totally see how one type of extended mind perspective would say like, yes, the boundaries of the cognitive system are just so, and they're so flexible that whatever it is in the situation that enables the cognition to happen is the cognitive system.

at which point the lines are extremely blurred with just the system as it is.

It's like a pan-cognitivist perspective, and that ends up, at least from a Bayesian perspective, not being informative because we no longer reduce our surprise by learning about anything, and we've sort of deflated cognition away.

So...

does that sit with you is that a goal like what are we looking for in delineating cognitive systems from each other do we prefer pancognitivism do we prefer anti-pancognitivism or do we want something in between where like humans are special or linguistic entities are special so i think


SPEAKER_02:
that pancognitivism should be avoided.

In general, if you have pan-somethingism, you are on a bad road, traveling down a bad road, because if everything counts as X, there is nothing gained from calling things Xs.

No one is puzzled by things in general, I think.

So that's the first point.

Pancognitivism should be avoided.

What...

I think is a desideratum many would buy is to have something balanced in between individualism and the, I think, appealing intuition that sometimes interacting with stuff at least aids cognition in a very substantial way.

I think that the DDD go-to desideratum would be to have a bubble around DDD, individual, pre-theoretically understood.

Many would disagree.

Many would be comfortable with group vote, with group minds.

I think that is a minority view, but maybe they're right.

I mean,

being right or wrong is not a question, it's not a matter of numbers.

But still, to frame the debate, I wouldn't follow the minority view.

So I would keep that option in the theoretical horizon, but not use it to orient research right now.

So what I would do is to have sort of a bubble around the biological individual.

And for the time scale, I think that

The right thing to do, again, just to frame things and get them started, is to focus on short timescales.

The hyperlong evolutionary timescale is not something that captures our go-to intuitive sense of cognition.

And when you start framing a debate, you start from your go-to intuitive native standpoint.

So my sympathy is for the short timescale, for the here and now.


SPEAKER_00:
It's very funny, like you mentioned, it's not a vote.

A small group of people could be correct and a larger group could be incorrect.

Yet people often think about voting as group cognition.

yet cognition isn't a vote so that's kind of an interesting tension there um let me ask about section five so it's is vehicle externalism conditioned over markov blankets possible and you said i want to argue that resorting to markov blankets to settle the debate over vehicle externalism leads us to sidestep

whole debate in a very real sense making vehicle internalism vacuously true so just for like a little context what is vehicle externalism and internalism like what is the distinguishing features of these uh concepts why are people interested in this debate like what does it matter for talking about cognitive systems


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so, externalism and internalism are things that pop up everywhere in philosophy.

Here we go with the vehicle variety, which is internalism or externalism about the cost in the thinking machinery, about the material stuff that does the thinking, say.

You need to have a boundary in mind to say internal and external.

And the go-to boundary is the skin, basically.

The skin of the biological individual folks he understood.

Internalism would be inside the skin.

So cognition internalism or vehicle internalism is the idea that the machinery of thought is inside your skin and more precisely inside your cranium.

Externalism is that at least some pieces of that machinery are outside, in pen and paper, cell phones, whatever you want.

But notice, here we have an intuitive boundary, which is this game.

If you go with Markov blankets, I think you end up caught in a dilemma because

You either start with some intuitive markup blanket, say at the skin, use it to define internal and external, and then you might discover something external to that blanket counts as part of the system.

Or you can do what, again, Jakob Heuer did, which is, well, first, I find the Markov blanket of that thing, the real one, the Markov blanket with the capital M, and then use that blanket to define what is internal and what is external.

And if you do that, clearly, everything that matters is internal by how you have defined internal.

which is the one horn.

On the other horn, you start with the standard intuitive distinction between internal and external, and then try to find a Markov blanket, which is fine, but then the Markov blanket does no longer distinguish between internal and external, or

There is a tension.

There are two senses of internal, and you need to disentangle the two, the intuitive one and the marco blanket relative to the real marco blanket one.

And that is not what seems to be going on in the literature, right?

So basically, that is my problem, which is a purely philosophical problem, I think.

It's a purely philosophical problem.

Still, my concerns were philosophical, so it counts.


SPEAKER_00:
Fair enough.

Is that what you were referring to when you said, I doubt such a redefinition of internalism would buy the internalist something more than a purely verbal victory?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, that's exactly the point.

I mean, the legal internalist want, at the end of the day, to say something like this.

Thinking happens in the brain, or close to it.

If you go on the Markov blanket path, define internal in terms of a Markov blanket, and then discover that the Markov blanket contains the brain, but also the spinal cord, but also my hands, but also pen and paper, but also my cell phone, and so on and so forth, you can say, well, all that stuff is internal, so internalism is true.

I mean, that's a verbal victory!

That is not what you wanted to say at the beginning, right?

That is a form of externalism that gets passed as internalism because of how you have defined your terms.

And notice that even if you go with that definition of internal

then there would be still, say, super internalists that say, no, no, no, the real internal thing that does the thinking is just the brain, and externalists and internalists or lax internalists that say, no, no, no, no, it's the brain plus other internal stuff within that marker block.

So the problem wouldn't be closed.

You would still have a clash about

cerebralists and non-cerebralists, if you prefer.

People that think that it's just the brain or the brain plus the spinal cord.

People that like external stuff doing part of the thinking.


SPEAKER_00:
It makes me think of like a thought experiment, kind of like a tracer.

So like a radioactive tracer might be injected in a blood vessel and then you can see where it flows or like a metabolic label might be given to a cell and then you can see how it gets metabolized.

So the tracer, let's just say we're following, like we're going to pluck one of the strings and trace the impact of like shining light on the retina.

Initially, it follows like nervous system paths, but then let's say that light pattern induces the system to pick up that phone and reload a website.

So now that tracer is spreading everywhere.

It's calling servers in different parts of the world, and it's like communicating through satellites.

And it's like that perturbation on the retina

space and time sort of zoom out.

It's like more and more gets wrapped into that.

And so like what I'm hearing you say is if we just say, well, wherever the tracer goes, that's internalism.

Internalism is the total cognitive apparatus, including the satellite and the server in the other country.

Or one could like retreat back to the epithelial boundary and just say like it is extended once they

are everything outside of the skin is external.

So it's sort of like, again, no one denies that somebody could see something on their retina that causes a server far away to do something, but where is our implicit or explicit boundary?

And will we just stay with the epithelium, which gives us a boundary,

but then over different time scales, clearly different parts of that total apparatus matter.

Like over one second, maybe the oculomotor cicading and some brain region is involved with processing meaning, but then over hundreds of years,

there might be a more valid discussion about how it's actually interactions amongst people and slower reading and writing of like books or of other resources that actually contribute to like the semantic discussion and evolution.

So it's like infuriating sometimes because again, no one's saying that what's on the table

isn't that way.

It's just like, what are we really looking for in a cognitive theory?

And what are we gaining?

Or what kind of value are we adding with these different framings?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So again, to kick things off, I would stay close to the basic individual.

I would put the go-to boundary at the skin.

and then wait and see how things evolve from there.

There is an important sense, however, in which the DDDC privilege of the scan, putting the boundaries there at the scan, is inadequate.

In the sense that, really, if you look at us from a longer perspective,

perhaps as a species, you notice that much of the things we do are extremely dependent on how our environment is, our tools, and our niche, broadly understood.

It's just that due to perhaps evolutionary reasons, perhaps cultural reasons,

we tend to attach minds to single bodies, say.

And we have an expectation, one body, one mind.

Once that expectation is in place, you can discover that the mind extends and that pen and paper and your cell phone and so on and so forth really help you think and really should be considered part of the machinery that does your thinking.

If you don't have that expectation in place,

It's very hard to understand what the extended mind could be for you, because there is no boundary relative to which there is an extension.


SPEAKER_00:
Right?

You can't go farther.

Farther than what?

Exactly.


SPEAKER_02:
You just would have the mind, cognition, as it is in the real world,

And once you have that, it makes little sense to say, oh, it's extended.

It might be extended relative to the individual, to the biological body.

But if you don't have expectation that the two things go hand in hand, you don't have the violation of expectation when you discover that they don't go hand in hand.

You don't have the sense of discovery.

It's just nothing strange happening then, nothing.

to be amazed about, nothing requiring inquiry.

So that's a nice point.

But as a matter of fact, we have the expectation that minds are attached to individuals.

So there is a sense of wondering, talking about the extended mind, something that strikes us.


SPEAKER_00:
of course, a lot to say there and connect back to like what you mentioned about the cultural priors, but sort of to hinge on the cultural priors and go in a slightly different way.

How does this relate to computationalism or cognition and computers?

Not just us using computers to have like a human to human combo, but

What does computationalism add into this discussion?

Or how would you relate what you discussed in the paper to computational theories of cognition?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm not super sure.

So I think I think I think that cognition is computational, but I'm not super sure.

But if asked without any reflection, I would say yes, of course, cognition is computation.

So I think I count as a computation.

I see no big problem in extended computations in the sense that if you think about computation as symbol manipulation or manipulation

rule-based or rule-sensitive manipulation of certain primitives that might be symbols or sub-symbols or whatever.

Clearly, you can have rule-based manipulation of stuff outside your body.

There is an historical point which everyone I think knows that is, well, originally computers were people doing the math with pen and paper before the Second World War, before digital computers came about.

So there is nothing intrinsically strange about extended computation and computation taking place outside your body.

That being said,

It is true that most, I would say, computational models focus on the brain, and that most of cognitive scientists think that the really interesting computation happens in between the two ears.

Then you have, I mean, Rodney Brooks, which surely is one of the inspirator of, I mean,

prime movers of embodied cognition, anti-representational cognitive science, and that really has inspired extended cognition, or at least trying to have extended cognition.

His mobots were entirely computational, were finite states automaton for the most part.

So what I'd like to say is that you don't necessarily have a clash in between computation and extended embodied cognitive science.

As for computational models of wider agent environment systems, I know there are.

On the top of my head, I don't have any examples, but

I can gather them if I were to remember by my artist.

But there are such models.

And I think that there should be no, in principle, problems of making a free energy model about agent environment system or even extended cognition.

Indeed, I think that Friston, Clark, Kirchhoff, and someone else wrote a paper about that.

with a quick, minimal model.

Not sure about the title, but I think it's published on Mind and Language, if someone wants to check.


SPEAKER_00:
This kind of cracked me up with the Freudian slip, with the pluralist slip.

You said, at the top of my fingers, the top of my head.

And it's like...

aren't those the different worlds though and so it's it's just like very interesting and and it again comes back to the um the water we swim in the cultural priors and biases that help us like shape whether an idea is kind of outside of the overton window like rocks can't think versus like you're a heretic if you don't think that rocks think um

As we sort of move towards a little fractal resolution, of course,

This will probably be a discussion for many years to come.

So you provided a quote from Kirchhoff and Kiverstein 2019.

I'm not gonna read the whole quote, but it's visible on the stream.

And basically they just mentioned that the Markov blanket formalism as applied to systems that approximate Bayesian inference, or we could even take it one more instrumental level to systems that we approximate with Bayesian inference serves as an attractive statistical framework

in their case, for demarcating the boundaries of the mind, but other situations as well.

And then you mentioned like, perhaps this is the correct way to think about the role Markov blanket should play in the debate over vehicle externalism.

Maybe asking where can we draw a Markov blanket around the thinking machinery yields more satisfactory results than trying to find the mark of the cognitive.

So, yeah.

This is a really nice point.

And what kinds of questions help us move forward as we do seek productive but also useful and accessible ways to think about these topics?


SPEAKER_02:
What sort of questions move us forward?

Yeah.

I have no idea.

Probably the only sensible answer is ask questions and try to solve them.

some will.

And in retrospective, you will be able to identify the ones that really pushed you forward from the ones that were not well posed.

So probably the only sensible question to which the only sensible answer is wait and see.

As for the Kirchhoff and Kieferstein quotes, I'm not super...

A big problem I had with Markov blankets and extended mine is this.

It's, to me at least, not super clear whether when Markov blankets are used, the Markov blanket is something out there in the world, like some mathematical entity instantiated somehow in the world.

or whether they are some sort of accurate representation of what is going on, or whether they are just a mathematical tool to make sense of what is going on.

It seems to me that those three things are used together when it comes to discussing the boundaries of the mind.

But there are three different things.

three different ideas about what Markov blankets are, and by adhering to one coherently, you have a very different outlook and a very different metaphysics, say, of the free energy principle.

If Markov blankets are things out there in the real world, then it seems that you must take the free energy story at face value.

You must be

and hardcore realist about the free energy principle.

If they are just a tool, you can take the free energy principle to be just perhaps a sort of mathematical machinery you can deploy to build interesting models

of phenomena you want to study.

You can try, just as you can use standard computational theory to build models of things, you can use the free energy principle, or you can use dynamical system theory.

You have various tools you can deploy.

But the point is that if you go super instrumentalist, oh, that's just a model,

and I do what I want with it, my only guide is not truth, but pragmatic discoveries and making science grow.

If you take that stance on the free energy principle, you're forced not to make strong metaphysical claims about the boundaries of the mind and how things are.

You can make strong and interesting claims about how things are modeled, but not about how things are.

On the other hand, if you go super realist,

You can make strong claims about how things are, but you also have a very strange outlook on reality, I think, with these sort of fractal boundaries within boundaries that are reciprocal and so on and so forth.

My two cents would be to follow the pragmatic, non-realist usage of the free energy principle, to take it as a model building tool.

But don't trust me.

They are my two cents, and I'm not super savvy about

instrumentalism and model building.


SPEAKER_00:
Definitely this

question or tension of instrumentalism and realism kind of map and territory in Mel Andrews 21 paper and several other times we've seen this discussion arise of course is active inference just a statistical model that we can apply to action cognition perception just like we can apply a linear model to height and weight but that doesn't make height and weight a linear regression so does applying the active inference structure

to neurobehavioral data, that cannot be taken as positive evidence that that system, for example, is doing active inference.

So that's definitely a point well taken.

And the pragmatic turn, which is associated in cognitive science with a movement towards action orientation,

And then there's like this meta pragmatic turn in cognitive science, which is like better theories are more useful.

And that actually is in contrast with what we were speaking about earlier with science as providing explanations, predictions, because the pragmatism actually highlights the ability to design and control.

It's like, well, if I used the epicycles to explain, predict, design, control, it's useful enough.

And

that in a pragmatic world would be sufficient, but then somebody is always coming out of left field or right field or whatever with the questions about how things actually are and saying, well, but they're not actually moving in that way.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I perhaps do not see, Didi, any strong clash between pragmatism and irrealism.

What you definitely have here are two tendencies, one to be hyperplotonic and say, look, reality is this way.

There is nothing in your data that can prove me wrong.

Which is even respectable sometimes for a certain class of entities like mathematical entities.

And the opposite tendency to say,

I don't really care about how things are, I just care about prediction and control and making good science and predicting stuff and making discoveries.

I think that a sensible observation is that typically theories and models that tend to make discoveries and give you good predictions have a degree of

accuracy tend to capture something about how things are.

I mean, you cannot proceed arbitrarily in model building and do whatever you like.

You have some sort of resistance and intuitively I'd say that resistance is reality.

And so even going fully pragmatism, prediction and control only, you get something about reality.

Maybe what is lacking is the sort of platonic ideal reality that is super independent about what you know.

But I mean, that is something you encounter rarely and only when you do philosophy.

So if it gets left behind, it might not be the biggest tragedy of the human intellectual history.

Let's put it in this way.


SPEAKER_00:
um so one thought um is that in active inference the way that we think about action selection policy selection is as related to providing pragmatic value which like brings you into alignment with your preferences and then epistemic value which reduces your uncertainty and it's almost like

the utility is loaded on the pragmatic side but of course just narrowly pursuing the pragmatic value ends up leading into a blind corner and so it's good to um balance both and to have like diversity of thought within a person within a scientific community um we don't need to be a hundred percent convinced um or only on one side of the line as individuals or in a collaboration and then um to connect that to one other

point that you made in the paper so it's on um not sure if there's page numbers but it's um there should be page numbers but there are but there aren't


SPEAKER_02:
I think it's the online version and so without the page number.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

So you were talking about benchmarks that adjudicate whether something counts as a constituent of the thinking machinery.

And so that's like something we've been talking about.

So then...

You wrote, traditionally, this benchmark is provided by the mark of the cognitive that one endorses.

Again, relate to what we've been discussing.

That is by what one implicitly or explicitly takes to be necessary or sufficient to make something a genuine contributor to thinking in the broadest sense.

So then I'm thinking about this paper.

So it's a single author paper.

However, you mentioned like in a footnote, like,

this observation and the example are due to chris delega you mentioned in the acknowledgements some people's names their citations which is of course in science how we communicate like attribution of ideas and then there's even like a little discussion with a reviewer and so it's like there's all these different

contributions actually to this cognitive artifact this epistemic artifact and so um it's like the like you're you're supporting the biological individual epithelial boundary single author paper all these external contributors like they can get mentioned but they're not authors and then um like if it were going to be written by the radical pancognitivist like why not make everyone an author

just let's have everybody as a contributor.

It's just sort of like a funny little microcosm there.


SPEAKER_02:
No one, not even the hyper-radical, would put everyone as an author because no one likes the academic suicide.

Now, I tend to privilege the individual boundary, but I mean, I am pro-extinction at the end of the day.

I think I mentioned it in the paper that...

I am in favor of cognitive extension, and perhaps because I want cognitive extension to be real, I favor some conservative boundary, which is easily transvest.

This is perhaps more psychoanalysis territory about my choices and my preferences.

But yes, I mean, I'm on board with the idea that you can have

cognitive processes that run through multiple brains.

I'm not super sure how common they are, because even unless you do some real extreme brainstorm, typically the input coming from others is very limited or not very sizable.

But I'm in.

there are, I would say generally, multi-brain cognitive processes.


SPEAKER_00:
Like a conversation?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, like very deep conversations in which at the end of the day you agree.

You do bring about some well-defined artifact or output.

Just free floating conversation, I wouldn't say that is a genuinely extended cognitive process.

But if you want to know, there is a paper by Jelle Bruineberg and Regina Fabri in which they take all the extended mind stuff with mind wandering.

And that is fascinating because mind wandering

clearly a cognitive process, it's clearly thought with the capital T, I would even say, but it's not something that has a definite output.

There is no set endpoint, you might wonder, right?

And yet they claim it might extend.

And if you take this sort of no set

output, no set endpoint perspective, then maybe even causal conversation may qualify as intrapersonal cognitive processes.

But I'm not super sure about how one could develop that idea precisely.


SPEAKER_00:
It kind of makes me think about, in a very transposed, analogical way, like to integrated information theory.

Like if two people are speaking at each other, but they're both having the conversation that they would have with a wall...

then it's like they're speaking past each other.

It's not like an emergent conversation.

Whereas if people are engaged in like active listening and like actually integrating some novel stimuli, then coming up with something they wouldn't have said to a wall, then that is like where that third space arises, where things can be productive, but then also that's very interesting that they might not be.

And one other note on the mind wandering is,

is as our technology in the niche changes with some neural recording opportunity, say, just let your mind wander.

And all of a sudden through biofeedback or the enabling of new cognitive linkages, that mind wandering actually could leave a trace on the environment in a way where if it's

just brain bound, it wouldn't.

Which I think returns us to that earlier question, just like that one thing I wanted to address about like composition of cognitive systems.

So whether we're internalist or externalist or whatever, how do we think about this space of the adjacent possible for cognitive systems?

Like what can we think of next?

What can we think of next?

Or how could we think differently if there were some structural changes to our environment?

Like the pen until it existed or the writing implement until it existed wasn't there.

And there was pre-adaptations and the evolutionary basis for utilizing it, et cetera.

But when it was there, it changed the game in a quantum way.

So how do we think about those kinds of transformations of cognition?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm super not an expert about this topic.

And I'm a bit ashamed by this, frankly.

And I need to catch up.

But I think that the probably strongest case study you could make for transformation is with reading and doing math.

We have, of course, basic visual capacities.

But reading seems to be a purely cultural thing, something that you need culture to learn and something that deeply transforms your cognitive abilities.

So just the ability to target your own thought crystallized in a written form

gives you a level of meta-reflection that would be hard to maintain with your brain alone.

Or the ability to crystallize your thoughts in a scrap of paper, leave it there to ferment, and then go back at it one week later, two weeks later, three weeks later, with a fresh mind.

This sort of thing is not something you can do without externalizing your thoughts.

You can just remember your passports and objectively look at them as you objectively look at your passport written paper.

And the other thing, of course, is math.

We have some basic familiarity with numbers that is biologically endowed.

But pretty much from arithmetic on, it is all bootstrapped by culture.

And of course, here you have the biggest transformation possible with mathematical objects, modeling, and all sorts of things.

So those would probably be the case studies to try and have a sense of what the space of a decent possible mind might be.

And this is pretty backward-looking.

I'm trying really hard right now to think something more forward-looking, something more propositive, something more hands-on, let's build a new mind.

But I don't have any idea right now about that.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll look back to look forward.

It's an interesting idea and theme.

I, of course, wish you luck on the forward looking, but when you talked about asking questions, it made me write down and subsequently remind myself later, either the question will have been asked already, doesn't mean that it's been satisfactorily answered to anyone or to you, but either the question has been asked in its rhetorical structure or

And then it'd be awesome to point people towards a knowledge resource, or it's a novel question and novel questions are awesome.

And then looking back, it may be possible to know which of those novel questions led to a useful line of discussion or application, but to wait before the question and say, well, I only want to ask the best question.

It's like,

in a way we don't know since it's so many steps down the road from the question, at least one or two, till we can evaluate the impact of the question.

And so like as a hack or a heuristic, having rigorous scholarship so that when the questions have been asked, we're not doing truly redundant work, but then also like recognizing and raising up new questions

helps expand the frontier and the fringe.

And some fraction of those may develop into useful avenues.

And then later on, people might say, well, it was obvious somebody should have connected the sequential database with the encryption and with an economic system.

But those things existed long ago.

And it's like looking back that some of the syntheses conceptually or technologically

post hoc make more sense, but again, waiting and not acting for it to make sense a priori, it doesn't seem like just a 2022 thing that that's not going to work.

That seems to be, in principle, a very challenging way to expect effective action.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I'm not super sure I got the point.

DDR would be this, that you don't have any sort of precognition about where a question will lead you.

You cannot evaluate questions beforehand before asking them to see, oh, this question right here, a long way to go.

It's a good one.

And this other is a waste of time.

Right.

Is that the point?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Even if there was no.

Yeah, we shouldn't prejudge questions.

We could easily sort questions into those that have already been asked and those that have not been asked.

And so to those that have been asked, we can use scholarship to those that have been asked.

We can like recognize novelty questions.

So even we don't need to finesse that too much and just to kind of connect that however vaguely to your idea of like looking back, but then the challenge of looking forward in cognitive science is sometimes


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's surely a challenge, but I think it's a big challenge for me because I'm illiquid to look forward in cognitive science.

If you probably ask people that do build cognitive architectures and cognitive models for living, I think they would be much more forward-looking than me.

I mean...

You have something you'd like to try, some twist on the architecture you'd like to put, and that is, I think, forward-looking, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, what is your forward-looking like?

Over whatever time horizon or capacity set that makes sense, what kinds of questions or experiments or research areas are you excited to build on from this paper?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm not super sure where this paper is headed.

I mean, I'll continue probably to work on extended mind.

I still think I'll be working on predictive processing in a sort of very vapid fashion.

Probably I'll try to merge the two in a more positive way, probably in

but I'm not super sure, probably in computational terms, but this is super what I want to do with my postdoc, if I had one.

Nice.

It's not a concrete proposal right now.


SPEAKER_00:
Hypothetical postdocs are the best postdocs.

Exactly.


SPEAKER_02:
It's a list of wishes.

What I wish to do?

Well, I wish to do

Yeah, probably that.

That would be one thing.

And another thing I'd like to do is to try and, say, open up and specify the GRIP metaphor.

You have Andy Clark and those other people telling you what predictive processing, actually, free energy principle gives you is a GRIP on the affordances that matter.

It's not super clear what the grip is, apart from not stumbling into things and moving around appropriately.

The epistemic sort of contact with the war is left, I think, unanalyzed.

But I have no big idea on how to analyze it.


SPEAKER_00:
it makes me think about how words related to our physical cognition and describing our interior landscape, like get a grip, you know, can you see what I'm thinking about?

Or let me sketch it out for you.

Comprehension means to grasp with a hand.

So like there's so many, and of course the whole optimal grip

active inference as getting grip on things from a physical perspective like as the hand goes for the cup of coffee but then okay now we transpose that into the cognitive space and we in a conversational way do talk about grip

And then here's all of these formalisms that it can be hard to get a grip on.

But are they about grip?

Or what would that actually mean?

That's a very interesting question.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, there is a way to impact the grip idea in terms of Bayesian inference.

But that is a bit too internalistic for my likings.

The idea that perception is a form of inference, that you are inferring every time, everything.

It works in the model domain.

The model is inferential.

Whether the thing itself is inferential, I'm not super sure and I'm

I'm not sold on the idea that the inferential talk really captures what goes on in most instances of cognition.

I mean, most of our thought is not described inferentially.

When I let my mind go and start mind wandering, not inferring things at random, I mind wandering.

When I draw an inference, I draw an inference typically

high concentration to one specific topic, and usually the aid of pen and paper.

So the inferential talk might not be optimal.

But still, I feel the need to give some sort of epistemic connotation to the grip.

It's not just not stumbling into things and moving around quickly and swiftly.

There is some sort of comprehension and intelligence and mindfulness into that.

That going with a pure good behavior, good behavioral patterns vocabulary,

might not just miss, but it might even let you open to the charge of being a behaviorist, of being a philosophical zombie without any inner life, and that sort of thing.

We need some mentalistic lexicon, some epistemically charged lexicon, which is not full-blown Descartes.

And a major challenge would be to develop it.


SPEAKER_00:
It makes me think about like an ocean and the river and then where they meet and it's brackish.

You got cognition and pure cognitive, the rest cognitive.

And then there's the physicalism and...

we have the ability to like be uncertain actually, and to evaluate and to oscillate between different perspectives or different regimes of attention on these different ideas, like more highlighting the physical boundaries of a system, more highlighting the cognitive, more highlighting the statistical causal, which is where the Markov blanket concept comes from, from Perl and Bayesian causal graphs.

And those causal graphs, the nodes and the edges

may or may not link to anything that is a physical thing or a cognitive thing so it's a very um open and interesting area um is there anything else that you like wanted to just bring up talk about ask no I don't think


SPEAKER_02:
So I think it's now time to thank you for the space, the opportunity, and the wonderful talk.

To thank the audience, which I have not seen because I can only see you apparently from my screen.

But hi, audience.

I hope you enjoyed it.

I hope you didn't find me too rambly.


SPEAKER_00:
If they're listening this far, then I don't think either of us are too rambly for them.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe they are just.

doing exercise, driving around, and once I'm stated background, we back it in France.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Well, yeah, Marco, thanks for the paper and the contribution and for joining for a guest stream.

You're always welcome to continue the discussion.

And also thank you for all of those who listened and paid attention for this conversation.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

See you later.


SPEAKER_02:
See you later.

Bye, everyone.